- BUILDING BACK BETTER: THE URGENT NEED FOR INVESTMENT IN AMERICA'S WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING BACK BETTER: THE URGENT NEED FOR INVESTMENT IN AMERICA'S
WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

(117-3)

REMOTE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 23, 2021

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: https://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-
transportation?path=/browsecommittee/chamber/house/committee/
transportation

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-953 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon, Chair
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON,
DON YOUNG, Alaska                      District of Columbia
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      RICK LARSEN, Washington
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
JOHN KATKO, New York                 HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   Georgia
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         DINA TITUS, Nevada
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           JARED HUFFMAN, California
DOUG LaMALFA, California             JULIA BROWNLEY, California
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida               DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania   MARK DeSAULNIER, California
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON,            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
Puerto Rico                        SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota              TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              GREG STANTON, Arizona
DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota          COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
JEFFERSON VAN DREW, New Jersey       SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas, Vice Chair
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi           JESUS G. ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
TROY E. NEHLS, Texas                 ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York         CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts
MICHELLE STEEL, California           CAROLYN BOURDEAUX, Georgia
KAIALI`I KAHELE, Hawaii
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
MARIE NEWMAN, Illinois
Vacancy

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California,
Chair
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JARED HUFFMAN, California
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
JOHN KATKO, New York                 JOHN GARAMENDI, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
DOUG LaMALFA, California             CAROLYN BOURDEAUX, Georgia
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida               SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON,            GREG STANTON, Arizona
Puerto Rico                        ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON,
NANCY MACE, South Carolina             District of Columbia
SAM GRAVES, Missouri (Ex Officio)    STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE

Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, and Chair, Subcommittee on Water Resources
and Environment:

Opening statement............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. David Rouzer, a Representative in Congress from the State of
North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment:

Opening statement............................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Peter A. DeFazio, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon, and Chair, Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure:

Opening statement............................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Sam Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Missouri, and Ranking Member, Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, prepared statement.............................    77
Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, prepared statement.............................    77

WITNESSES

Hon. David J. Berger, Mayor of the City of Lima, Ohio, on behalf
of the United States Conference of Mayors:

Oral statement...............................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Bill Sterud, Chairman, Puyallup Tribe of Indians:

Oral statement...............................................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Oluwole McFoy, General Manager, Buffalo Sewer Authority, on
behalf of the National Association of Clean Water Agencies:

Oral statement...............................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Tom Teske, Vice President and General Manager, EJ Americas:

Oral statement...............................................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Brenda Coley, Co-Executive Director, Milwaukee Water Commons:

Oral statement...............................................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
David Mallino, Legislative Director, Laborers' International
Union of North America:

Oral statement...............................................    47
Prepared statement...........................................    49

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Submissions for the Record by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano:

Statement of Hon. Marilyn Strickland, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Washington, in Support of the
Testimony of Puyallup Tribe Chairman Bill Sterud...........    10
Letter of February 19, 2021, from Lisa Cylar Barrett,
Director of Policy, and Coty Montag, Senior Counsel and TMI
Researcher, NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc..    11
Statement of the National Utility Contractors Association....    12
Letter of February 19, 2021, from the Clean Water for All
Coalition..................................................    13
Letter of February 22, 2021, from Pete Bucher, Managing
Director of Water Policy, Ohio Environmental Council.......    16
Statement of Patricia Sinicropi, Executive Director,
WateReuse Association......................................    18
Statement of the American Society of Civil Engineers.........    19
Letter of February 24, 2021, from Adam D. Link, Executive
Director, California Association of Sanitation Agencies....    78
Letter of February 22, 2021, from Noah Valenstein, Secretary,
Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Submitted for
the Record by Hon. Brian J. Mast...............................    60
Report, ``City of Pleasantville Sanitary Sewer System
Evaluation,'' April 22, 2019, Prepared by CME Associates,
Submitted for the Record by Hon. David Rouzer on behalf of Hon.
Jefferson Van Drew.............................................    66

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

February 18, 2021

SUMMARY OF SUBJECT MATTER

TO:      LMembers, Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment
FROM:  LStaff, Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment
RE:      LSubcommittee Hearing on ``Building Back Better:
The Urgent Need for Investment in America's Wastewater
Infrastructure''
_______________________________________________________________________

PURPOSE

The Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment will
meet in open session on Tuesday, February 23, 2021, at 11:00
a.m. in the Rayburn House Office Building, Room 2167, and by
video conferencing via Cisco Webex, to receive testimony on
``Building Back Better: The Urgent Need for Investment in
America's Wastewater Infrastructure.'' The purpose of this
hearing is to examine the current state of our clean water
systems and receive testimony on the backlog of clean water
infrastructure needs, current and future challenges, and the
infrastructure affordability challenges facing communities and
American households. The Subcommittee will hear from
representatives of utilities, rural and tribal communities
impacted by inadequate clean water infrastructure and
affordability challenges, and the manufacturing and labor
sectors who may offer recommendations for the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to address water infrastructure needs.

BACKGROUND

CLEAN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS

America's water infrastructure is in need of further
financial investment. According to the American Society of
Civil Engineers (ASCE) Failure to Act Report, America's
wastewater treatment infrastructure receives a grade of D+,
which was included in ASCE's 2017 Infrastructure Report
Card.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ American Society of Civil Engineers. 2017 Infrastructure Report
Card. https://www.infrastructurereportcard.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to EPA's most recent (2012) needs survey,
communities have documented at least $271 billion of investment
over the next 20 years to bring their systems to a state of
good repair.\2\ As this assessment is almost a decade old, the
current need may be higher. Given the current level of Federal
investment to address these needs, States and local governments
are covering more than 95 percent of the cost of clean water
projects.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-
2012-report-and-data.
\3\ Congressional Budget Office. Public Spending on Transportation
and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2017. October 2018. https://
www.cbo.gov/publication/54539.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These statistics indicate a need for increased investment
in our Nation's water infrastructure, and the benefits are
numerous. Investing in clean water creates thousands of
domestic jobs in the construction industry and reduces the
overall costs of operating and maintaining that infrastructure.
According to the National Utility Contractors Association,
every $1 billion invested in our Nation's water infrastructure
creates or sustains nearly 28,000 jobs in communities across
America, while improving public health and the environment at
the same time.\4\ In addition, clean water infrastructure helps
prevent contamination of our Nation's waters that are relied
upon by the recreational industry. People spend approximately
$70 billion per year on recreational boating and fishing; that
industry employs more than 150,000 people.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Statement of Doug Carlson, CEO, National Utility Contractors
Association, before the Senate Committee on Environment and Public
Works hearing, entitled ``Information Gathering-Process on Draft
Legislation'' (April 27, 2020) (https://www.nuca.com/files/
Gov%20Relations/
EPW%20Water%20Infrastructure%20Legislation_NUCA%20Statement_April%2027%2
02020_
FINAL.pdf)
\5\ EPA 2012. The importance of Water to the US Economy, Part 1:
Background Report. Office of Water, US Environmental Protection Agency.
September 2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

IMPACTS OF COVID-19 ON WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE INDUSTRY

As a result of the pandemic, many households and
communities across the nation are under financial strain.
Accordingly, wastewater utilities are facing a decrease in
revenue. The National Association of Clean Water Agencies
(NACWA) estimates that the resulting financial impact on
wastewater utilities will be around $16.8 billion, including a
20 percent drop in sewer revenues.\6\ These challenges are on
top of existing long-term insufficient investment in the
Nation's water infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ National Association of Clean Water Agencies (NACWA),
Recovering from Coronavirus (NACWA), https://www.nacwa.org/docs/
default-source/resources---public/water-sector-covid-19-
financial-impacts.pdf?sfvrsn=98f9ff61_2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To help address these challenges, Congress included $638
million in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (P. L.
116-260) for the Department of Health and Human Services
(Administration for Children and Families--Children and
Families Services Programs) to prevent, prepare for, and
respond to coronavirus, and for necessary expenses for grants
to carry out a low-income household drinking water and
wastewater emergency assistance program.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ The appropriation for this low-income household grants
provision in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 went to the
Department of Health and Human Services, and therefore is not under the
jurisdiction of the House Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure. However, the provision is expected to benefit municipal
wastewater utilities, which are under the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee's jurisdiction, by helping utilities make up
some of the sewer revenues they have lost.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS OF TRIBAL COMMUNITIES

While the majority of people living in the United States
have access to high-quality drinking water and wastewater
services, more than two million do not have access to adequate
drinking water and sanitation.\8\ A report from the U.S. Water
Alliance and Dig Deep found that Native Americans are 19 times
more likely than white households to lack indoor plumbing.\9\
According to the Indian Health Service, in fiscal year (FY)
2018, the agency-identified sanitation deficiencies included
1,837 projects with a total estimated cost of $2.78
billion.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ US Water Alliance and DigDeep, Closing the Water Access Gap: A
National Briefing Paper (DigDeep Right to Water Project and US Water
Alliance, 2019), http://uswateralliance.org/sites/
uswateralliance.org/files/publications/
Closing%20the%20Water%20Access%20Gap%20in%20the
%20United%20States_DIGITAL.pdf.
\9\ Id.
\10\ Annual Report to Congress of the United States on Sanitation
Deficiency Levels for Indian Homes and Communities. Fiscal Year 2018.
Indian Health Service Office of Environmental Health and Engineering
Division of Sanitation Facilities Construction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Clean Water Indian Set-Aside (CWISA) program was
established by the 1987 Amendments to the Clean Water Act (P.L.
100-4) to provide funding for wastewater infrastructure to
American Indian Tribes and Alaska Native Villages. CWISA funds
may be used for planning, design, and construction of
wastewater collection and treatment systems. The EPA
administers CWISA in cooperation with the Indian Health Service
Sanitation Facilities Construction program.
Section 518(c)(2) of the Clean Water Act authorizes between
0.5 and 2 percent of the overall appropriations for the Clean
Water State Revolving Fund (Clean Water SRF) for the CWISA
program. Since FY 2016, Congress has appropriated either two
percent of the Clean Water SRF or $30 million, whichever is
greater, for the CWISA program.

CLEAN WATER ACT AFFORDABILITY

Communities and governments at all levels face growing
challenges in effectively managing the water resources
necessary to support growing and shifting populations, thriving
residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural sectors,
and healthy and productive natural environments. Many local
governments also face complex affordability challenges--with
some communities addressing shrinking rate bases, while others
with growing populations facing increasing segments of their
rate base that are unable to afford the rising costs of clean
water. In short, local infrastructure needs can
disproportionately impact those communities across the country
least able to afford necessary repairs, replacements, and
upgrades. Nationwide, water utilities and communities of all
sizes seek to ensure clean, safe, accessible, and affordable
water, all the while dealing with the challenges of extreme
weather events and mounting concerns regarding water quality
and quantity.
In 2017, the National Academy of Public Administration
issued a report that examined the challenges local communities
face in providing clean, safe, and affordable water and
wastewater services.\11\ This report concluded that the
governmental responsibility to assure clean water that is also
affordable to both communities and individuals has become an
increasing challenge.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ National Academy of Public Administration. Developing a New
Framework for Community Affordability of Clean Water Services. October
2017. https://www.napawash.org/studies/academy-
studies/developing-a-new-framework-for-community-affordability-of-
clean-water-servi.
\12\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, the report recognized that water infrastructure in
the United States is aging, imposing additional costs on
communities to both upgrade and maintain deteriorating
infrastructure from deferred maintenance.\13\ Second, the
report recognized the costs to communities to come into
compliance with the Clean Water Act as an additional factor,
and highlighted the importance of more cost-effective and
innovative solutions, such as increased use of green-
infrastructure approaches, stormwater recapture and reuse, and
integrated planning, to address these challenges.\14\ Finally,
the report highlighted how affordability is an especially
critical issue for low-income customers throughout the United
States, noting that, while average annual expenditures for
water are generally low relative to other utilities, they
represent a higher share of income for those with the lowest 20
percent of income.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Id.
\14\ Id.
\15\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the 115th Congress, Congress approved two bills to
address some of the challenges highlighted in the NAPA report.
First, Congress approved the America's Water Infrastructure Act
of 2018 (P. L. 115-270), which, among other things, expanded
the eligibility for Clean Water Act grants to address sewer
overflows and to capture, treat, and reuse wastewater and
stormwater runoff. In addition, Congress passed the Water
Infrastructure Improvement Act (P. L. 115-436), which codified
the ``integrated planning'' concept that helps communities by
providing them greater flexibility in meeting their
requirements under the Clean Water Act while maintaining their
obligation to achieve improvements in local water quality, as
well as incorporating the use of green infrastructure
approaches into the permitting and enforcement provisions of
the Clean Water Act.
In addition, several bills to address wastewater
affordability concerns have been proposed and debated in the
115th and 116th Congresses. One approach would amend the Clean
Water Act to address the issue of water affordability at the
household level by providing Federal assistance directly to
utilities who would then apply those resources to cover the
individual household costs for water and wastewater service
rates.\16\ This is similar to the approach taken in the
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (P. L. 116-260) to
address water and wastewater rate assistance in response to the
COVID-19 outbreak. A second approach, such as that included in
H.R. 1497 (as reported) and H.R. 2 (as passed the House) from
the 116th Congress, would utilize existing Clean Water Act
infrastructure investment authorities, such as the Clean Water
SRF (title VI of the Clean Water Act), the Sewer Overflow and
Stormwater Reuse Municipal Grants program (section 221 of the
Clean Water Act), and other grant programs to provide
communities with a greater share of Federal financial
assistance in the form of a grant rather than a traditional
Clean Water SRF loan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ H.R. 2328, the Low-Income Sewer and Water Assistance Program
Act of 2017 (115th Congress); H.R. 4832, the Low-Income Sewer and Water
Customer Assistance Program Act of 2019 (116th Congress).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL CLEAN WATER INVESTMENT: CLEAN WATER STATE REVOLVING FUND

For close to 80 years, Congress has provided Federal funds
to municipalities to address local water quality challenges,
including sewage treatment needs. Initially, this assistance
was provided as direct grants to municipalities (covering 55 to
75 percent of the total costs of the projects). However, in
1987, Congress converted the direct grant program to a Clean
Water SRF authority that provides funding directly to States
which, in-turn, provide below-market rate loans to communities
to finance local wastewater infrastructure needs (required to
be fully repaid over a 30-year term).
The authorization of appropriations for the Clean Water SRF
expired after 1994. Yet, Congress continues to fund this
critical investment in our Nation's wastewater infrastructure
through annual appropriations bills--providing more than $46
billion in Federal capitalization assistance to States since
1987--including an appropriation of $1.638 billion for the
Clean Water SRF in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021.
In turn, according to the EPA this infusion of Federal capital
to State revolving funds has leveraged over $138 billion in
direct assistance to communities over this period.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-highlights-increased-
investment-water-infrastructure-
through-state-revolving-funds
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2014, Congress enacted amendments to the Clean Water Act
which authorized States that provide assistance to communities
under the Clean Water SRF program, to provide additional
subsidization, including forgiveness of principal and negative
interest loans to benefit a municipality that meets the
affordability criteria of the State; or that seeks additional
subsidization to benefit individual ratepayers in the
municipality's residential user rate class that will experience
a significant hardship from the increase in rates necessary to
finance the project or activity for which assistance is
sought.\18\ In addition, in recent years, the annual
appropriations bill for the EPA has included additional
provisions to require States to use a portion of Clean Water
SRF funding to provide communities with ``additional subsidy to
eligible recipients in the form of forgiveness of principal,
negative interest loans, or grants'' as well as to reserve an
additional portion of Clean Water SRF funding for ``projects to
address green infrastructure, water or energy efficiency
improvements, or other environmentally innovative activities.''
\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Section 5003 of Pub. L. 113-121.
\19\ The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 requires States to
utilize 10 percent of their Clean Water SRF capitalization grant for
this subsidy/grant component, and 10 percent of their capitalization
grant for green infrastructure and water and energy efficiency
projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the 116th Congress, the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure approved H.R. 1497, the Water Quality Protection
and Job Creation Act of 2019, by voice vote, and similar
legislation was approved by the House as part of H.R. 2, the
Moving Forward Act. This legislation would have reauthorized
and increased the authorized level of Federal appropriations
for the Clean Water SRF program at levels more commensurate
with local water infrastructure needs, as well as reauthorized
several existing Clean Water Act grant authorities. In
addition, this legislation would have extended the existing
green infrastructure reserve,\20\ established set-asides of
Federal resources for rural and small communities, codified
set-asides for Indian Tribes and U.S. Territories, and included
several provisions to address the cost of wastewater service to
low-income customers and households. H.R. 1497 would also have
made changes to the Clean Water Act regulatory program to allow
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits
for certain municipalities of up to 10 years, as well as
established a process to prevent States from
``administratively'' extending permits beyond their
statutorily-defined duration (typically five years) without
review and updating. These regulatory provisions were not
included in H.R. 2. No further action was taken on these
proposals in the 116th Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ This provision requires States, to the extent that there are
sufficient projects or activities eligible for assistance, to utilize
not less than 15 percent of their Clean Water SRF capitalization grant
for projects to address green infrastructure, water or energy
efficiency improvements, or other environmentally innovative
activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

WITNESSES

LDavid J. Berger, Mayor, City of Lima, Ohio, on
behalf of the U.S. Conference of Mayors

LBill Sterud, Chairman, Puyallup Tribal Council,
Tacoma, Washington

LOJ McFoy, General Manager, Buffalo Sewer
Authority, on behalf of the National Association of Clean Water
Agencies

LTom Teske, Vice President and General Manager, EJ
Americas, East Jordan, Michigan

LBrenda Coley, Co-Executive Director, Milwaukee
Water Commons, Milwaukee, Wisconsin

LDavid Mallino, Legislative and Political
Director, Laborers' International Union of North America

BUILDING BACK BETTER: THE URGENT NEED FOR INVESTMENT IN AMERICA'S
WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:01 a.m., in
room 2167 Rayburn House Office Building and via Cisco Webex,
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano (Chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present in person: Representatives Garamendi, Carbajal,
Stanton, Rouzer, Babin, Mast, and Mace.
Present remotely: Representatives Napolitano, DeFazio,
Huffman, Johnson of Texas, Lowenthal, Malinowski, Pappas,
Bourdeaux, Wilson of Florida, Delegate Norton, Webster, Katko,
Weber, and Resident Commissioner Gonzalez-Colon.
Mrs. Napolitano. Welcome to the first hearing of the
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment for the 117th
Congress. I call this hearing to order and ask unanimous
consent that the chair be authorized to declare a recess at any
time during today's hearing. And without objection, so ordered.
[Audio lost briefly.]
Mrs. Napolitano. Today's hearing focuses on the tremendous
clean water infrastructure needs facing our country, and on the
challenges facing both our communities--large and small, urban,
rural and Tribal--as well as our American families, in
addressing these needs. It is a privilege to serve as the
chairwoman of this subcommittee. I am pleased to be joined by
my colleague and ranking member, Congressman Rouzer from
Wilmington, North Carolina. We had a great meeting a few weeks
ago, and I look forward to working with him.
I also welcome the new Members to the subcommittee: Carolyn
Bourdeaux of Georgia; Eleanor Holmes Norton from the District
of Columbia; Greg Stanton of Arizona; Steve Cohen of Tennessee;
John Katko, my friend and cochair of the Mental Health Caucus
of New York; and Nancy Mace of South Carolina.
The subcommittee will have a busy agenda in the 117th
Congress, and I pledge to continue the longstanding tradition
of this subcommittee to work in a bipartisan fashion trying to
address the priorities of all Members, and being respectful
when we disagree.
We have an ambitious but achievable agenda this Congress.
We will hold hearings on WRDA 2020 implementation and lay the
groundwork for the enactment of the new WRDA bill in 2022. We
will want to hear from stakeholders about the implementation of
Congress' changes to the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. We will
look at ways to make our communities more resilient and learn
about how we can use natural infrastructure, water recycling,
my favorite subject, and other tools.
We also plan to look at ways to ensure Tribal communities
and disadvantaged communities are included in the planning
process for all water infrastructure projects in their
communities. We will strive to present a water infrastructure
financing bill that not only reauthorizes the Clean Water State
Revolving Fund, or the SRF, but also seeks to provide greater
assistance to rural and Tribal communities, to address the
affordability challenges facing all our communities, and to
encourage innovative energy efficiency and green infrastructure
projects.
Last Congress, the House passed H.R. 2 that would have
reauthorized the SRF. It would also have addressed a number of
the issues we will be discussing today, including the need to
help rural and Tribal communities, and the need to invest in
water reuse and recycling projects. The SRF did not pass the
Senate last year, but we will try again soon.
Finally, we will renew our constitutional obligation to
exercise congressional oversight over implementation of the
laws within our subcommittee's jurisdiction.
And before we begin, a few reminders, since we are
participating remotely. As chair of today's hearing, I will
make a good-faith effort to provide every Member experiencing
connectivity issues an opportunity to fully participate in the
proceedings. If a Member is experiencing any connectivity
issues or other technical problems, please inform committee
staff as soon as possible so you can receive assistance. A chat
function is available for Members on the Cisco Webex platform
for this purpose, and they can also call the committee's main
phone line at (202) 225-4472--again, (202) 225-4472--for
technical assistance by phone.
And finally, to insert a document into the record, please
have your staff email it to
[email protected]
.
Now for my opening statement on the topic of this hearing.
Today, our Nation's network of sewers, stormwater
conveyances, and treatment facilities is aging, often outdated,
and in many places, not meeting the needs of our communities or
water quality standards. The American Society of Civil
Engineers gave America's wastewater infrastructure a grade of
D-plus--D-plus--in its 2017 Infrastructure Report Card. A new
ASCE Report Card is expected soon, but we expect another poor,
low grade.
According to the EPA, communities report a need of $271
billion of investment over the next 20 years to bring their
wastewater treatment systems up to date in a state of good
repair. The need for sanitation infrastructure on Tribal lands
totals $2.78 billion. Yet these statistics only tell half the
story.
As noted by our witnesses here today, many communities also
face the challenge of ensuring that water and sewer utilities
remain affordable to those living in their community. As
communities of all sizes seek to improve the quality, safety,
and reliability of their water utilities, we must give them a
voice as they often struggle to also address the challenges of
declining rate bases, lower income households, and other
competing local needs. All of these factors compel us to find
ways to make water quality improvements more affordable to all
our communities.
Congress has already taken significant steps to help meet
this challenge. Through enactment of integrated planning
legislation and the promotion of nature-based or green
infrastructure alternatives to addressing local water quality
challenges, we have provided tools to all communities to
develop more cost-effective, long-term plans to meeting local
water challenges.
Getting the message directly to those involved is also a
challenge. However, more needs to be done. We have to find ways
to make sure the cost of Federal financing is affordable to all
communities and get them to the table to access this financing.
One significant step that is long overdue is to reauthorize
the Clean Water State Revolving Fund, SRF, a goal that has
eluded this Congress for almost 30 years. As witnesses note,
this program is universally important to providing affordable
financing to urban and rural communities alike, and its
successes are typically limited only by a lack of available
funding sources. We are planning to soon reintroduce the Water
Quality Protection and Job Creation Act to reauthorize the
Clean Water SRF, and I urge all our Members to support this
effort to address local water quality challenges.
However, for those communities where a State Revolving Fund
is still not enough to address local affordability needs, we
need to ensure other tools are available. We need to fund
targeted clean water grants, such as those authorized for
combined and sanitary sewer overflows, and stormwater capture
and reuse in the 2018 Water Resources Development Act.
Rural communities face a unique set of challenges. They
tend to be small and do not have a rate base large enough to
shoulder expensive, major infrastructure projects while
maintaining affordable rates. Often, rural communities do not
have the technical expertise necessary to design wastewater
projects or to even complete the technical documents necessary
to apply for funding.
In addition, rural communities may have to apply to
multiple State or Federal programs to obtain the assistance
they need, and the duplicative application requirements can
make it costly and time consuming to complete. I urge all of
our Members to pay very close attention. Listen to the stories
and reflect on the real challenges all our American families
face every day in obtaining safe and affordable water and
wastewater services.
[Mrs. Napolitano's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Chair, Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment

Today, our nation's network of sewers, stormwater conveyances, and
treatment facilities is aging, often outdated, and, in many places, not
meeting the needs of our communities or water quality standards.
The American Society of Civil Engineers recently gave America's
wastewater infrastructure a grade of a D+ in its 2017 Infrastructure
Report Card. According to the Environmental Protection Agency,
communities report a need of $271 billion of investment over the next
20 years to bring their wastewater treatment systems to a state of good
repair. The need for sanitation infrastructure on tribal lands totals
$2.78 billion.
Yet, these statistics only tell half the story.
As noted by our witnesses here today, many communities also face
the challenge of ensuring that water and sewer utilities remain
affordable to those living in the community.
As communities of all sizes seek to continuously improve the
quality, safety, and reliability of their water utilities, we must give
them a voice as they often struggle to also address challenges of
declining rate bases, lower-income households, and other competing
local needs.
All of these factors compel us to find ways to make water quality
improvements more affordable to all our communities.
Congress has already taken significant steps to help meet this
challenge. Through enactment of integrated planning legislation and the
promotion of nature-based or green infrastructure alternatives to
addressing local water quality challenges, we have provided tools to
all communities to develop more cost-effective, long-term plans to
meeting local water quality challenges. Getting the message directly to
those involved is also a challenge.
However, more needs to be done.
We have to find ways to make sure the cost of Federal financing is
affordable to all of our communities and get them to the table to
access this financing.
One significant step that is long overdue is to reauthorize the
Clean Water State Revolving Fund--a goal that has eluded this Congress
for almost 30 years.
As witnesses note, this program is universally important to
providing affordable financing to urban and rural communities alike,
and its successes are typically limited only by a lack of available
funding resources.
We are planning to soon re-introduce the Water Quality Protection
and Job Creation Act to reauthorize the Clean Water SRF, and I urge all
our members to support this effort to address local water quality
challenges.
However, for those communities where a State Revolving Fund loan is
still not enough to address local affordability needs, we need to
ensure other tools are available. We need to fund targeted clean water
grants, such as those authorized for combined, and, sanitary sewer
overflows and stormwater capture, and reuse in the 2018 Water Resources
Development Act.
Rural communities face a unique set of challenges. They tend to be
small and do not have a rate base large enough to shoulder expensive,
major infrastructure projects while maintaining affordable rates.
Often, rural communities do not have the technical expertise necessary
to design wastewater projects or even to complete the technical
documents necessary to apply for funding.
In addition, rural communities may have to apply to multiple state
or federal programs to obtain the assistance they need, and the
duplicative application requirements can make it costly and time
consuming to complete the application process. Last Congress, one of
our witnesses told us about the unique challenges her rural community
in Lowndes, Alabama faced--and still face today. We need to look at new
and innovative ways to make progress on addressing the needs of our
rural communities.
We also need explore whether the Federal government can play a
long-term role in helping subsidize the cost of clean water for
households in poverty, as we do today for household heating and cooling
costs through the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, or LIHEAP.
In the COVID relief package passed at the end of last Congress, we
included $638 million in ratepayer assistance funds for families
struggling to pay their water bills. We should look at whether or not
this program should be continued on a permanent basis.
In addition, we should look at how we can improve upon existing
water reuse and recycling programs to help those communities where
water is a sparse commodity.
Before us, we have a distinguished panel of witnesses that can talk
about real-world examples of where our network of clean water
infrastructure works, where it does not, and where we can do better.
I urge all of our members to pay attention, listen to their stories
and to reflect on the real challenges American families face, every
day, in obtaining clean, safe, and affordable water and wastewater
services.

Mrs. Napolitano. At this time, I am pleased to yield to my
colleague, the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Rouzer,
for any thoughts he may have. Mr. Rouzer?
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I, too, enjoyed our
visit the other week, enjoyed it a great deal, in fact.
I want to thank our witnesses for participating in this
hearing today. I am happy we have such a diverse panel so that
we can gain your perspectives on the issues facing local
communities in addressing the Nation's water and wastewater
infrastructure needs.
These needs, as we all know, are substantial and they
continue to grow. In many communities, water and wastewater
infrastructure is long past its design life and in need of
urgent repair, replacement, and upgrading. As a result, leaks
and blockages are all too common across the Nation and
represent a massive waste of a vital and sometimes scarce
resource.
Additionally, the needs are especially urgent for hundreds
of communities trying to remedy the problem of combined sewer
overflows, CSOs, and sanitary sewer overflows, also known as
SSOs. Shrinking municipal budgets, insufficient independent
financing capabilities, and increasingly burdensome regulations
without the necessary Federal support have strained
communities' efforts to address these critical needs.
This is especially the case for many of our small and rural
communities that many of us all around the country represent.
According to EPA, the total documented needs for sustainable
water infrastructure, CSO and SSO correction, and stormwater
management across our great country total at least $270 billion
over the course of the next 20 years. The needs for drinking
water infrastructure drive this figure to more than $600
billion--and these are considered fairly conservative
estimates. In my home State of North Carolina alone, $11
billion will be needed for clean water needs such as wastewater
treatment systems and sanitary sewers over the next 20 years.
So with talk of a major infrastructure package, today we
need to ask the not-so-simple questions: What funding level is
both appropriate and realistic? And how are we going to pay for
it? Talk of authorizing enormous dollar amounts is not going to
address these needs since unrealistically high dollar numbers
that will never get funded create a false hope and ultimately
solve nothing.
I believe it is going to take an all-hands-on-deck approach
to reverse the decline of our Nation's water infrastructure.
Federal, State, and local investment will be necessary, but
cannot be relied upon to solve all of the problems. Instead, we
need to move away from business as usual and utilize every tool
available. This means searching for new sources of funding,
increasing collaboration between the public and private
sectors, and improving how Federal regulations are implemented,
or deciding that they are not needed at all.
We need smarter asset management, increased efficiencies in
our water systems, and to achieve that, we need to incentivize
the adoption of new and innovative technologies that will cut
costs and improve water quality. In addition, communities,
particularly those that are struggling to address their needs
and reduce the financial burdens on households, need to be
giving greater regulatory flexibility, including through the
implementation of a vibrant integrated planning and permitting
approach in addressing the compliance mandates that have been
imposed upon them.
It has been 10 years since EPA developed its first guidance
for implementing integrated planning, but the agency has been
slow to work with States and communities to develop the most
effective and cost-efficient approaches for meeting clean water
objectives. Two years ago, legislation that codified EPA's
integrated planning initiative was enacted. EPA now needs to
work with the States and effectively implement the initiative
to help communities meet their needs in a more cost-efficient
manner.
We need to carefully prioritize our investments in water
infrastructure to ensure that we are adequately protecting the
public health, promoting the economic growth of our
communities, and preventing the degradation of the environment.
I look forward to hearing the thoughts from our witnesses
today on these very important and pressing issues. Madam Chair,
I yield back.
[Mr. Rouzer's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David Rouzer, a Representative in Congress
from the State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Water Resources and Environment
Thank you, Chair Napolitano, and thank you to our witnesses for
participating in this hearing today. I'm happy we have such a diverse
panel here so that we can gain your perspectives on the issues facing
local communities in addressing the Nation's water and wastewater
infrastructure needs. These needs are substantial, and they continue to
grow.
In many communities, water and wastewater infrastructure is long
past its design life and in need of urgent repair, replacement, and
upgrading. As a result, leaks and blockages are all too common across
the Nation and represent a massive waste of a vital, and sometimes
scarce, resource.
Additionally, the needs are especially urgent for hundreds of
communities trying to remedy the problem of combined sewer overflows
(or CSOs) and sanitary sewer overflows (or SSOs). Shrinking municipal
budgets, insufficient independent financing capabilities, and
increasingly burdensome regulations without the necessary Federal
support have strained communities' efforts to address these critical
needs. This is especially the case for many of our small and rural
communities.
According to EPA, the total documented needs for sustainable
wastewater infrastructure, CSO and SSO correction, and stormwater
management in our Nation are at least $270 billion over the next 20
years. The needs for drinking water infrastructure drive this figure to
more than $600 billion--and these are considered conservative
estimates.
In North Carolina alone, $11 billion will be needed for clean water
needs such as wastewater treatment systems and sanitary sewers over the
next 20 years.
So with talk of a major infrastructure package, today we need to
ask the not-so-simple questions: What funding level is both appropriate
and realistic? And how are we going to pay for it?
Talking about authorizing enormous dollar amounts is not going to
address these needs, since unrealistically high dollar numbers that
will never get funded create a false hope and solve nothing. I believe
it is going to take an all-hands-on-deck approach to reverse the
decline of our Nation's water infrastructure.
Federal, state, and local investment will be necessary, but cannot
be relied upon to solve all our problems.
Instead, we need to move away from ``business as usual'' and
utilize every tool available.
This means searching for new sources of funding, increasing
collaboration between the public and private sectors, and improving how
Federal regulations are implemented.
We need smarter asset management and increased efficiencies in our
water systems, and to achieve that, we need to incentivize the adoption
of new and innovative technologies that will cut costs and improve
water quality.
In addition, communities--particularly those that are struggling to
address their needs and reduce the financial burdens on households--
need to be given greater regulatory flexibility, including through the
implementation of a vibrant integrated planning and permitting
approach, in addressing the compliance mandates that have been imposed
on them.
It's been ten years since EPA developed its first guidance for
implementing integrated planning, but EPA has been slow to work with
states and communities to develop the most effective and cost-efficient
approaches for meeting clean water objectives. Two years ago,
legislation that codified EPA's integrated planning initiative was
enacted. EPA now needs to work with the states and effectively
implement the initiative to help communities meet their needs in a more
cost-efficient manner.
We need to carefully prioritize our investments in water
infrastructure to ensure that we are adequately protecting the public
health, promoting the economic growth of our communities, and
preventing the degradation of the environment.
I look forward to hearing the thoughts from our witnesses today on
these issues.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Rouzer.
Mr. DeFazio, you are recognized.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thanks to the
ranking member for his thoughts.
We are setting a very ambitious number, or want to, for the
SRF reauthorization. The estimates by the National Utility
Contractors Association is $1 billion invested creates 28,000
good-paying jobs.
There has been a lot of carrying on about the President
canceling the XL pipeline. Well, that would have created, one
time, 10,000 jobs, but would have also destroyed the boreal
forests of Canada, dramatically accelerated climate change with
the dirtiest fuel possible, et cetera. How about we do
something that actually helps the environment and makes this a
healthier country to live in? Let's invest in our wastewater
infrastructure.
It is a realistic number. We can get there very easily. For
instance, my transaction tax to drive out the parasite
speculators on Wall Street who front-run the market with
supercomputers would raise $77 billion a year. Now, is it
better to let them become billionaires, providing a useless
product and driving up stock prices for everybody else? Or
would it be better to say, hey, let's rebuild the Nation's
wastewater infrastructure. Wow, and if we invested $5 billion a
year, that would be 140,000 jobs a year, good jobs, Davis-Bacon
jobs, jobs that provide for a very good living wage and also
for benefits like healthcare and other things.
We have new challenges. As has been noted both by the chair
and the ranking member, systems are aging out. They are being
overwhelmed by population growth. They are being overwhelmed by
severe weather events due to climate change. These are real
problems, and we have to get ahead of this. We have to plan for
the future.
Systems go underwater in hurricanes; that has happened in
the ranking member's district and in other districts around the
country. I have a system in my district that is at a very
severe risk of flooding and contaminating two very large lakes.
And also I have a beach area in Oregon, Sunset Bay, which is
one of the most polluted beaches in the country because of the
combined sewer overflows.
We cannot afford not to make these investments, and we
cannot put all of the burden on the cities and counties and the
individual ratepayers to do this. We need to spread that a
little more widely because water does not observe State
boundaries, city lines, State lines, county lines, or anything.
This is an investment for all Americans. We did this 50 years
ago and we cannot do it now? That is just extraordinary to me.
How puny do you think we have become? We are better than that.
We can meet these challenges today. When I was a county
commissioner, we had a 75-percent Federal match to build our
system. And we have since continually upgraded it. The
population of the area has tripled. And we have still got
capacity in that system.
So these investments will yield huge benefits--economic
benefits, returns to cities, counties, States, and the Federal
Government in terms of taxes and economic activity, with good,
safe growth that does not jeopardize the environment.
So I am going to push for a very ambitious number, and then
we are going to find ways to pay for it. We are not going to be
puny and say, sorry, we cannot help you. At the current level
of investment, it would take 171 years to bring the existing
systems up to a state of good repair, and that does not even
include areas that do not have systems, like Tribal Territories
and others. So that is not acceptable. And I believe this
administration, as part of their package, will adopt very
ambitious goals in their infrastructure bill.
And then the one other thing that I want to add into this
is, as much as possible, we want to use natural systems. I have
something called the--oh, I have got to remember it--but it
made the list that McCain used to put out because it was
supposedly--oh, Falling Waters, because--they actually use a
very large natural area to do their tertiary treatment, and it
is actually a pleasant park area because it is tertiary
treatment.
And so we want to look at incorporating natural systems
wherever we can. And we also want to incentivize the wastewater
districts to capture their methane, 26 times as potent as CO2
in causing climate change. We can. And I was inspired by
testimony 2 years ago from a sewer district in New Jersey that
rebuilt their system, captured their methane, generated their
own electricity, and sold electricity onto the grid, had a new
system, and did not have to substantially raise their rates,
and helped the environment.
So there are better ways to do this, innovative and
interesting ways to do this, using 21st-century technology. And
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today about their
ideas on how we can accomplish these goals. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
[Mr. DeFazio's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Peter A. DeFazio, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Oregon, and Chair, Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and congratulations on holding the
first hearing of the Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment
for the 117th Congress.
Today's hearing will highlight the tremendous infrastructure needs
facing this nation, as well as the consequences to everyday Americans
from Congress's failure to invest in our water-related infrastructure
systems.
As I have mentioned many times before, in the days before enactment
of the Clean Water Act, our nation's waters were so polluted that they
typically were unsafe for swimming, were unable to support life, or
they literally caught fire.
Recognizing that we needed to do things differently and that
pollution does not respect political or state boundaries, Congress
enacted a comprehensive, national water pollution control program and
provided states and communities with substantial funding to help
address local water quality challenges.
In the years immediately following the Clean Water Act, significant
progress was made in cleaning up our waters. Yet, in recent years, the
importance of safe, reliable, and affordable water systems has, again,
become front page news all across the country.
Cities, like Flint, Detroit, and Toledo, are now more well-known
for water contamination than likely any other issue. Just a quick
internet search for the term ``sewer overflow'' will produce hundreds
of other American cities--large and small--that are operating in a 21st
century economy with antiquated, undersized, or crumbling water-related
infrastructure. Even in my own district, the Sunset Bay State Park near
Coos Bay was listed as one of America's Dirtiest Beaches because of
local sewer overflows and stormwater runoff.
All these stories remind us of what we already should know--that
our nation's network of water infrastructure is aging, outdated, and in
desperate need of repair. In addition, our water-related infrastructure
is woefully inadequate to adapt to a changing climate, and to the
extreme weather events and coastal storms that have become the norm.
Numerous studies and reports have documented the poor national
condition of our water infrastructure and the growing financial gap
between infrastructure needs and available resources.
According to the most recent U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Clean Water Needs Survey, States have documented a need for $271
billion in investment over the next 20 years--that's almost $14 billion
needed annually for wastewater infrastructure--and it is likely this
estimate, which is now almost a decade old, significantly
underestimates the REAL need.
And yet, do you know how much the Federal government is ACTUALLY
investing in wastewater infrastructure annually? About $1.6 billion in
the fiscal year 2021 appropriations bill.
At our current rate of federal investment, it will take us almost
170 years just to address existing wastewater infrastructure needs, and
that doesn't include investments to address the challenges posed by
climate change, extreme weather events, and the resilience of our water
utilities.
Last Congress, this Committee and the House passed multiple
proposals to restore the federal commitment to investing in our
Nation's wastewater infrastructure. H.R. 2, the Moving Forward Act,
included $40 billion in federal investment in the Clean Water State
Revolving Fund to help address the $271 billion backlog in clean water
needs. It also established minimum allocations for rural and small
communities for water infrastructure investment.
The legislation attempted to address affordability concerns by
ensuring a minimum of 10 percent of annual Clean Water SRF funding
would be in the form of grants or other financial assistance to help
communities ensure the affordability of wastewater service to
households that may have difficulty making ends meet.
H.R. 2 would have boosted resilience and green infrastructure
investments by requiring states to use a minimum of 15 percent of their
annual SRF capitalization grants for natural or nature-based approaches
to addressing local water quality challenges. The legislation
encouraged the use of technologies that recapture and reuse energy
produced from the treatment of wastewater, such as methane recapture.
To address concerns with resiliency of wastewater treatment works,
the legislation established a new clean water grant authority for
communities to assess and address vulnerabilities of wastewater
utilities to manmade or natural disasters.
The legislation attempted to address the concerns of inequity on
tribal lands, by establishing a statutory allocation formula for the
distribution of funds among the states and codified the allocation for
tribes and the U.S. territories.
H.R. 2 also would have helped prevent the discharge of industrial
chemicals and put $1 billion in new Federal assistance towards helping
communities address ongoing contamination of waterways by
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) or ``forever chemicals.''
Clean, safe, and reliable water is a basic human right and we
should all fight against efforts to weaken those protections.
Communities throughout the country are generally trying to do the
right thing--to ensure clean, safe, and reliable water services to
their citizens.
However, Congress must do its part as well to ensure that we meet
the Clean Water Act's ``fishable and swimmable'' goals established
almost 50 years ago and do so in a manner that is affordable for all
hard-working American families.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
And now I would like to yield some time to the ranking
member of the committee, Mr. Graves, if he is available. Mr.
Graves?
[No response.]
Mrs. Napolitano. I guess he is not there yet. So I will go
on to the next item. Before we proceed, I ask unanimous consent
to insert into the record the following statements: a statement
from committee member Representative Strickland; a statement by
the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund; a statement by
the National Utility Contractors Association; a statement by
the Clean Water for All Coalition; a statement by the Ohio
Environmental Council; a statement by the WateReuse
Association; and a statement by the American Society of Civil
Engineers.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
[The identified statements follow:]

Statement of Hon. Marilyn Strickland, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, in Support of the Testimony of Puyallup Tribe
Chairman Bill Sterud, Submitted for the Record by Hon. Grace F.
Napolitano
Distinguished members of the subcommittee--it is an honor to have
the opportunity to discuss these important issues. First and foremost,
I extend my sincere thanks to Chairwoman Napolitano and Chairman
DeFazio for working with my office to extend an invitation to the
Puyallup Tribe to testify at today's hearing.
Any conversation on wastewater infrastructure and the dire need for
investment must include Tribal voices at the table. Chairwoman
Napolitano and Chairman DeFazio understand that fundamental truth, and
I am heartened that the Puget Sound, Washington's 10th Congressional
District, and the needs of the Puyallup Tribe are well-represented
through the testimony of Chairman Bill Sterud. I thank him for his
participation and leadership.
As reflected in Chairman Sterud's testimony, it is clear that the
Congress must renew our investment in the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund (SRF), a key tool for our Tribes and communities. The
Environmental Protection Agency projected that at least $271 billion in
investment over 20 years is required to sufficiently repair our
wastewater treatment infrastructure.
I echo Chairman Sterud's testimony in highlighting both the health
and infrastructure disparities for Tribal communities. The Indian
Health Service estimates that the current water infrastructure
sanitation needs for Native American homes and communities is $2.78
billion. Approximately 30 percent of homes across our nation's Tribes
require sanitation facility improvements. I stand with the Puyallup
Tribe and the Chairman in supporting an increase to the Clean Water
Indian Set-Aside (CWISA) program, because our Tribes' health and
wellbeing depend on it. I look forward to working with the Chairwoman
this Congress on this, and other issues to support our water
infrastructure.
I want to close by emphasizing that in the wake of a global
pandemic, our Tribal communities need federal investment now more than
ever. I am looking forward to working with the distinguished members on
this committee to ensure that ``building back better'' is not just a
slogan, but a mandate to improve our communities. Thank you very much
for your time.

Letter of February 19, 2021, from Lisa Cylar Barrett, Director of
Policy, and Coty Montag, Senior Counsel and TMI Researcher, NAACP Legal
Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., Submitted for the Record by Hon.
Grace F. Napolitano
February 19, 2021.
Hon. Peter A. DeFazio,
Hon. Sam Graves,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, 2165 Rayburn House
Office Building, Washington, DC.

Re:  Written Testimony for Hearing Entitled ``Building Back Better: The
Urgent Need for Investment in America's Wastewater Infrastructure''

Dear Chairman DeFazio and Ranking Member Graves:
The NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)
appreciates the opportunity to submit written testimony for the
February 23, 2021 hearing that will be held by the United States House
of Representatives' Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment,
entitled ``Building Back Better: The Urgent Need for Investment in
America's Wastewater Infrastructure.'' The price of water and
wastewater has greatly increased in recent decades, and scores of
communities across the nation that cannot afford to pay drastically
higher rates have been plagued by service shutoffs and lien sales,
leading to home foreclosures and evictions. These practices have been
shown to disproportionately impact Black communities. Increased federal
funding for water and sewer systems targeted to communities that have
been historically overlooked is essential to combating the nation's
water affordability crisis, and we urge the Subcommittee to consider
the demonstrated impact of rising rates on Black communities as you
evaluate solutions to this crisis.
LDF was founded in 1940 by Thurgood Marshall.\1\ Throughout our
history, we have consistently worked to address inequities in the
provision of water services. In the late 1960s, LDF litigated Hawkins
v. Shaw, the first lawsuit seeking to redress racial disparities in the
provision of certain municipal services, including water and sewer
services, under the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.\2\ In
Hawkins, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals determined that the town of
Shaw, Mississippi, violated the constitutional guarantee of equal
protection by failing to provide the same level of water, sewer, and
other municipal services in its Black neighborhoods as were provided in
Shaw's white neighborhoods.\3\ In the years since the Hawkins case was
litigated, LDF advocated for a moratorium on water shutoffs in Detroit
\4\ and to an end to the placement of water liens on homes in Flint.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ It has been an entirely separate organization from the NAACP
since 1957.
\2\ 303 F. Supp. 1162 (N.D. Miss. 1969).
\3\ Hawkins v. Shaw, 437 F.2d 1286, 1290 (5th Cir. 1971), aff'd,
461 F.2d 1171, 1173 (5th Cir. 1972).
\4\ NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, Inc., Detroit Water Shutoff
Crisis, https://www.naacpldf.org/case-issue/detroit-water-shutoff-
crisis/.
\5\ NAACP Legal Defense Fund & ACLU of Michigan, Moratorium on
Placement of Liens on Homes for Unpaid Water Bills (May 16, 2017),
https://www.naacpldf.org/files/about-us/
Letter_to_Flint_City_Council_RE_Moratorium_on_Property_Liens.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In June 2019, LDF and its Thurgood Marshall Institute (TMI)
released a report entitled Water/Color: A Study of Race and the Water
Affordability Crisis in America's Cities.\6\ We have attached a copy of
our report to submit into the record for your consideration. Our report
makes an explicit link between race and water affordability and
explains the current water affordability crisis impacting Black
communities across the nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Coty Montag, NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, Inc., Water/Color:
A Study of Race and the Water Affordability Crisis in America's Cities
(2019), https://tminstituteldf.org/publications/2383/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
LDF's report begins with a historical overview of the construction
of urban water systems in the U.S. and the development of water policy
from the late 18th century to the present, including a discussion of
Black access (or lack thereof) to water systems and services over time.
Our report also explains the current water affordability crisis
impacting Black communities and identifies failing infrastructure as
the biggest contributor to rising costs. Cities have struggled to
afford needed infrastructure repairs and have passed rising costs on to
residents through frequent rate increases. These rising costs have been
exacerbated by the lack of federal investment in local water and
wastewater systems, which has been on a steady decline since the late
1970s.
To demonstrate the disproportionate impact of rising water bills on
Black communities, LDF's report includes a review of the affordability
crises in Baltimore and Cleveland. Our research demonstrates how water
services are allocated in both metropolitan areas, documents the spike
in water costs in recent years, and analyzes each jurisdiction's use of
water liens for unpaid bills. The report concludes by providing a
framework for potential litigation and policy solutions to challenge
water lien sales and service shutoffs that have a disproportionate
impact on Black communities.
Following the publication of LDF's report, we have advocated for
increased water infrastructure funding at the federal level and have
supported local legislation seeking to make water more affordable for
residents. We have also recently pursued litigation against
municipalities to end discriminatory and unfair water practices.\7\
Additionally, LDF has repeatedly urged federal and state officials to
enact shutoff moratoriums during the COVID-19 pandemic.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Complaint, Taylor v. City of Detroit, No. 20-cv-11860 (E.D.
Mich. July 9, 2020); Complaint, Pickett v. City of Cleveland, No. 19-
cv-2911 (N.D. Ohio Dec. 18, 2019).
\8\ See, e.g., NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, Inc., LDF Sends
Letter to National Governors Association Requesting a Moratorium on
Foreclosures, Evictions, and Water and Utility Shut Offs (Apr. 3,
2020), https://www.naacpldf.org/press-release/ldf-sends-letter-to-
national-governors-association-requesting-a-moratorium-on-foreclosures-
evictions-and-water-and-utility-shut-offs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the demonstrated impact of rising water and wastewater bills
on Black communities across the nation, it is critical that any
investment solutions to the nation's water affordability crisis
consider the racial impact of rising water and sewer bills. We
appreciate the opportunity to submit this written testimony and welcome
the opportunity for further discussions with the Subcommittee on this
important issue.
Very truly yours,
Lisa Cylar Barrett, Director of Policy.
Coty Montag, Senior Counsel and TMI Researcher.
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.
cc:  Honorable Grace F. Napolitano
Honorable David Rouzer

Statement of the National Utility Contractors Association, Submitted
for the Record by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano
The National Utility Contractors Association (NUCA) represents
construction contractors, manufacturers, and distributors who build and
maintain a wide range of our nation's infrastructure. Member companies
provide the manpower and equipment needed to build, repair, and
maintain the infrastructure needed for water and wastewater, gas
distribution, broadband, electric as well as the nation's surface
transportation system. NUCA appreciates the opportunity to provide a
statement for the record as the Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment.
Our nation's underground water and sewer infrastructure ensures
that Americans have access to clean drinking water and safe sanitary
wastewater systems, provides businesses with the resources they need to
keep our economy moving, and protects our nation's waterways, beaches,
and a range of recreational opportunities. Taken together, well-
functioning infrastructure is indispensable to the health of our
country.
However, as wastewater systems continue to age and are tested by
extreme weather events, communities face increasing difficulties in
paying for needed infrastructure improvements. Recent events in Texas,
where winter weather has left thousands without access to clean water,
underscore the vulnerability of our nation's water infrastructure and
the dire need for additional investment. At the same time, federal
spending accounted for just four percent of all spending on wastewater
utility infrastructure in recent years. Given that the Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA) most recent assessment found that $271
billion will be needed to maintain and replace wastewater and
stormwater treatment systems over the next twenty years, Congress must
act this year.
While investment in water and wastewater infrastructure enhances
public health and environmental protection, it also creates high-paying
jobs, generates significant economic activity and expands the local tax
base. Industry studies have indicated that every $1 billion invested in
water and wastewater infrastructure creates up to some 28,000 new jobs
with average annual earnings of more than $50,000 and increases demand
for products and services in other industries by more than $3 billion.
Due to the economic ripple effect that construction employment
offers, investment in water infrastructure generates measurable
employment in hundreds of standard industry classifications recognized
by the U.S. Census Bureau. Moreover, a $1 billion investment also
results in tens of millions of dollars in state and local tax revenue
at a time when they unarguably need it most.
To that end, NUCA strongly supports measures that would ensure a
steady level of federal investment in water infrastructure, and
particularly a major reauthorization of the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund (CW SRF). Likewise, NUCA would strongly support a significant
increase in funding for the Water Infrastructure and Innovation Act
(WIFIA) program, which provides long-term, low-cost credit assistance
for regionally and nationally significant water and wastewater
projects. Both the WIFIA and the CW SRF programs have proven highly
efficient and successful since their establishment, but continue to
suffer from a lack of reliable funding.
In addition to traditional public funding, NUCA continues to
support innovative solutions to the funding shortfall facing America's
clean water infrastructure. Congress should consider measures that
would open the door for more private sector investment through
innovative financing such as lifting the cap on exempt facility bonds
(private activity bonds) for water and wastewater infrastructure
projects.
NUCA's water infrastructure experts are available to your committee
staff to discuss these issues and others solutions which have the
promise to deliver what the American people want and deserve: reliable
clean water and wastewater infrastructure systems to keep their
communities safe and healthy.
We appreciate your leadership in examining this critical issue at a
time when our nation's wastewater infrastructure is more in need of
overhaul than ever. Thank you for your consideration.

Letter of February 19, 2021, from the Clean Water for All Coalition,
Submitted for the Record by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano
February 19, 2021.
Dear Committee Chair DeFazio, Subcommittee Chair Napolitano,
Representative Graves, and Representative Rouzer:
The undersigned members and partners of the Clean Water for All
Coalition appreciate this opportunity to express our strong support for
robust increases in funding to the Clean Water State Revolving Fund and
other wastewater and stormwater infrastructure programs.
All people in America should have access to water infrastructure
systems that provide safe, clean, and affordable water--systems that
protect people's health, sustain thriving ecosystems, and support a
robust and diverse workforce. Wastewater and stormwater infrastructure
should meet the needs of all communities, equitably and sustainably, no
matter where they are located. It must also work in tandem with nature
and be resilient to the effects of climate change, now and in the
future.
In many areas, our nation's infrastructure is no longer up to the
task of meeting these goals. Pipes, septic tanks, and treatment
facilities have exceeded their intended lifespans and are breaking
down, with the most severe impacts often falling on low-income
communities and communities of color. The American Society of Civil
Engineers gave the nation's wastewater infrastructure a D+ grade in its
2017 infrastructure report card. Critically, climate change is already
adding further stress to these systems.
In 2012, the EPA estimated that we need to invest $271 billion in
maintaining and repairing our wastewater infrastructure over the next
twenty years just to meet current environmental and health standards--a
figure that is now outdated and is almost certainly an underestimate.
Infrastructure costs have continued to rise in recent years as
communities have worked to implement important water pollution control
projects. Yet according to Congressional Budget Office data, federal
funding for water and wastewater utilities has decreased fourfold since
1980, leaving state and local governments to pick up the tab. These
costs are becoming increasingly difficult for communities to afford.
The passing on of infrastructure repair costs to consumers has created
an affordability crisis for many across the country, with wastewater
prices more than doubling over the last twenty years.
The global COVID-19 pandemic has magnified and exacerbated the
existing challenges facing our water systems and the inequities
blocking access to clean, safe water. Too many communities, especially
low income and communities of color, suffer from failing water
infrastructure, polluted water supplies, unaffordable water rates, and
many other water issues that make it even more difficult to survive in
this time of chaos and crisis. The pandemic has also caused serious
financial harm to water and wastewater utilities; the National
Association of Clean Water Agencies estimates that the financial cost
on wastewater utilities will be approximately $16.8 billion, including
a 20 percent drop in sewer revenues. Without federal funding to help
make up the loss, utilities may end up raising rates, worsening
existing affordability challenges.
Significantly increasing federal funding for water infrastructure
would support public health and the environment, yielding cleaner
water, fewer toxic algal blooms, and more efficient infrastructure that
produces less harmful climate pollution. It would also generate much-
needed economic activity and create hundreds of thousands of jobs.
Research by BlueGreen Alliance has found that by investing 105 billion
dollars over ten years, we could improve our drinking and clean water
systems to a ``B'' grade and create 654,000 job-years across the U.S.
economy.
As the Committee develops legislation to establish and authorize
infrastructure funding programs, we urge you to make the following
investments in our nation's clean water systems:

$10 billion per year for the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund (CWSRF).

$400 million per year for the Sewer Overflow and
Stormwater Reuse Municipal Grants Program.

$200 million per year for grants to publicly owned
treatment works to implement a pretreatment standard or effluent
limitation for per- or polyfluoroalkyl (PFAS) developed by the EPA.

$50 million per year for a new Low-Income Decentralized
Wastewater Grant Program.

$20 million per year for a new Clean Water Infrastructure
Resiliency and Sustainability Program, which would help increase the
resilience of publicly owned treatment works to natural disasters and
climate change.

$10 million per year for a new Small Publicly Owned
Treatment Works Water and Energy Efficiency Grant Program.

$5 million per year for the Water Infrastructure
Workforce Development Program.

$50 million per year for technical support to help
utilities in rural, small, tribal, and economically disadvantaged
communities access available federal infrastructure funding.

It is also critical that any legislation the Committee develops
must go beyond funding alone and incorporate necessary policy reforms
to the CWSRF and other key infrastructure programs. The Committee
should also:

Require states to provide at least 20 percent of the
annual Clean Water State Revolving Fund capitalization grant to
disadvantaged communities in the form of grants rather than loans
(``additional subsidization''), and raise the current cap on additional
subsidization beyond the current 30 percent maximum.

Direct states to provide at least 20 percent of the
annual CWSRF capitalization grant to projects that incorporate green
infrastructure and other nature-based solutions that provide social,
economic, and environmental benefits to communities.

Require and fund a study analyzing the historical
distribution of federal funds to low income, rural, and minority
communities, as well as communities of indigenous peoples, under Clean
Water Act infrastructure programs.

Adopt measures designed to ensure that infrastructure
investments are affordable, including incentives for states and
wastewater utilities to adopt low-income customer assistance programs,
equitable rate structures, and strategies that reduce system-wide
costs.

Incentivize inclusive workforce development and
procurement through requirements for apprenticeships; inclusion of
local disadvantaged workers; and preferences for minority-owned, women-
owned, and disadvantaged firms.

Clarify that PFAS dischargers are subject to limits under
the Clean Water Act and set deadlines for EPA to establish pretreatment
standards, effluent limitation guidelines, and water quality criteria.

Finally, we urge the Committee to reject any legislative proposals
to roll back clean water laws, such as provisions weakening pollution
discharge permit requirements for wastewater treatment plants.
Thank you for considering our views. We look forward to working
with the Committee to achieve our shared goal of wastewater and
stormwater infrastructure that provides clean water for all.
Sincerely,
Benjamin Swanson,
Executive Director, Central Florida Advocates for Clean & Clear
Waterways;
Jack West,
Policy and Advocacy Director, Alabama Rivers Alliance;
Molly M. Flanagan,
COO and Vice President, Programs, Alliance for the Great Lakes;
Katie Huffling,
Executive Director, Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments;
Ted Illston,
Senior Director of Policy and Government Relations, American Rivers;
Rachel Conn,
Amigos Bravos;
Harriet Festing,
Executive Director, Anthropocene Alliance;
Mariana Del Valle Prieto,
Clean Water and Ocean Advocate, GreenLatinos;
Tracy Kolian,
Health Policy Consultant, Children's Environmental Health Network;
Jennifer Peters,
National Water Programs Director, Clean Water Action;
Julian Gonzalez,
Legislative Counsel, Earthjustice;
Dan Silver,
Executive Director, Endangered Habitats League;
Laura Miller,
Clean Water Advocate, Environment America;
Colin O'Neil,
Legislative Director, Environmental Working Group;
Liz Kirkwood,
Executive Director, For Love of Water (FLOW);
Kristy Meyer,
Associate Director, Freshwater Future;
Cynthia Sarthou,
Executive Director, Healthy Gulf;
Edward L. Michael,
Government Affairs Chair, Illinois Council Trout Unlimited;
Madeleine Foote,
Deputy Legislative Director, League of Conservation Voters;
Katharine Lange,
Policy Specialist, Massachusetts River Alliance;
Albert Ettinger,
Counsel, Mississippi River Collaborative;
George S. Hawkins,
Founder and President, Moonshot Missions;
Caitlin Wall,
Water Policy Manager, National Audubon Society;
Alexis Lopez-Cepero,
Senior Legislative Analyst, National Parks Conservation Association;
Glenn Watkins,
Policy Specialist, Water Resources, National Wildlife Federation;
Rebecca Hammer,
Deputy Director of Federal Water Policy, Natural Resources Defense
Council;
Rev. Sandra L. Strauss,
Director of Advocacy and Ecumenical Outreach, Pennsylvania Council of
Churches;
Katherine Baer,
Director of Science and Policy, River Network;
Lorette Picciano,
Executive Director, Rural Coalition;
Dalal Aboulhosn,
Deputy Director of Policy, Advocacy and Legal, Sierra Club;
Geoff Gisler,
Senior Attorney, Southern Environmental Law Center;
Katie Day,
Staff Scientist, Surfrider Foundation;
Kathy Hawes,
Executive Director, Tennessee Clean Water Network.

Letter of February 22, 2021, from Pete Bucher, Managing Director of
Water Policy, Ohio Environmental Council, Submitted for the Record by
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano
February 22, 2021.
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano,
Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, House Transportation
and Infrastructure Committee, Rayburn House Office Building,
Washington, DC.
Hon. David Rouzer,
Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, House Transportation
and Infrastructure Committee, Rayburn House Office Building,
Washington, DC.

Dear Chairwoman Napolitano and Ranking Member Rouzer:
On behalf of thousands of Ohioans members, I write to offer our
appreciation and support for the Subcommittee's work today examining
the Clean Water State Revolving Fund. Today's hearing should highlight
the pressing need for a federal response to the nationwide water
infrastructure crisis and reinforce the call to quickly take up
comprehensive legislation to invest in clean water, particularly during
this public health crisis. The OEC and our partners look forward to
working with the Subcommittee to strengthen its recent legislative
proposal, the Water Quality Protection and Job Creation Act of 2021, to
meet our regional and nationwide needs while prioritizing resilience
and investments in our most vulnerable communities.
Despite being a water rich state, we face many water challenges in
Ohio. These challenges include both legacy and emerging water
contamination threats, such as lead in our pipes, agricultural
pollution, and emerging contaminants like PFAS and microplastic
pollution, in addition to aging and crumbling water infrastructure.
In 2014, nearly half a million Toledoans were left without safe
drinking water because the toxin produced by a harmful algal bloom got
into the drinking water supply. In 2016, the community of Sebring, Ohio
had lead contamination in their water for 5 months due to lead leaching
from the pipes into the water supply after a change to the water
treatment system. The state of Ohio does not yet know the scope of our
PFAS problem, widespread testing for these harmful chemicals throughout
Ohio's drinking water systems began just this year.
In the face of all of these drinking water pollutants Ohio, like
the Great Lakes region, is facing a water infrastructure crisis. Ohio
has a $27 billion need for water infrastructure upgrades over the next
20 years.\1\ Without federal investment, this cost will ultimately fall
on communities and consumers, at a time when water rates are rapidly
increasing across the nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.greaterohio.org/publications/strengthening-ohios-
water-infrastructure-financing-and-policy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This work is increasingly unaffordable as the federal contribution
has declined precipitously over the last 4 decades, falling from 63
percent of water infrastructure spending to 9 percent today. Too often
these costs are being passed on to those who can least afford it,
disproportionately impacting communities that have historically borne
the brunt of environmental injustice with water utility bills doubling
or tripling over the last decade in many cities.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.apmreports.org/story/2019/02/07/great-lakes-water-
shutoffs
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prioritizing funding for our water infrastructure results in a
triple win: a win for workers, a win for clean drinking water, and a
win for Ohio's communities. In Ohio, Governor DeWine led the charge to
secure an unprecedented $172 million investment in our water quality
through H2Ohio.\3\ Nationally, Congress has steadily invested in clean
water through the Farm Bill, the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative,
and the Land and Water Conservation Fund in recent years. Congress now
must build upon this good record by increasing its investment in clean
water and infrastructure amid growing challenges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ http://h2.ohio.gov/governor-dewine-outlines-h2ohios-first-year-
accomplishments/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These challenges are only expected to get worse as a changing
climate leads to more rainstorms that overwhelm sewer systems and
contaminate drinking water sources, pushing our current infrastructure
past its limits. Investing in our region's water infrastructure would
not only protect public health but allow for important infrastructure
upgrades improving the resiliency of our communities, reducing
maintenance and operational costs, and creating good paying local jobs
during this economic crisis. We urge Congress act quickly and lead a
comprehensive federal response to the nation's water infrastructure
crisis by:

Supporting reauthorization of the EPA's Clean Water State
Revolving Fund at a minimum of $10 billion annually.

Requiring a minimum 20 percent set-aside for additional
subsidization, raising the 30 percent cap, and expanding grant options
instead of loans targeted at small and disadvantaged communities to
address the affordability crisis our most vulnerable and under
resourced communities face.

Codifying the Green Project Reserve at no less than 20
percent, providing technical support and incentivizing the use of
natural infrastructure that supports communities trying to end
stormwater runoff and build resilience in the face of climate change.

Requiring states to give priority to projects in
disadvantaged communities when developing annual project prioritization
lists; use SRF funds for technical assistance to help these communities
submit project proposals.

Promoting economic development in these communities
through local hiring and job training opportunities for local workforce
development in SRF funded projects.

Supporting the reauthorization of the EPA's Sec. 221
Sewer Overflow and Storm Reuse Municipal Grants at a minimum of $400
million annually.

Reducing the non-federal cost share for financially
distressed communities to a maximum of 25 percent and creating a 20
percent set-aside to help address the needs of small communities.

Supporting state water quality protection through the
reauthorizations of the Sec. 106 State Water Pollution Control Grants
and the Sec. 319 Nonpoint Source Pollution Management Programs at a
minimum of $500 million and $200 million annually.

Preserving and strengthening source water protections
that also help reduce runoff, support fish and wildlife, and provide
recreational opportunities.

Supporting funding to address the growing threat of
emerging contaminants, providing at least $300 million annually to
implement wastewater standards and remediation of PFAS chemicals and
other contaminants such as pharmaceuticals and microplastics/
microfibers.

Dedicating resources through the EPA and other relevant
agencies to address the growing water affordability crisis.

Incorporating measures to ensure people can afford
their water, such as providing more flexible financing options like
grants for disadvantaged communities; supporting and creating programs
like those in last year's Low Income Sewer and Water Assistance Program
Act that help low-income households pay their water bills; providing
incentives for utilities to adopt more equitable water and sewer rate
structures; and ensuring funding is invested in communities in ways
that empower and build those communities through job training and long-
term employment.

Ensuring that infrastructure legislation does not
undermine or weaken environmental protections.

The Coalition looks forward to working with the Subcommittee to
strengthen its recent legislative proposal, the Water Quality
Protection and Job Creation Act of 2021, and supporting its quick
passage. It is critical we begin to address this infrastructure crisis
that has hamstrung communities and left too many low-income and
minority households facing unsafe and unaffordable water. Fixing our
region's failing infrastructure can put people to work, set the stage
for economic revitalization in our towns and cities, and ensure safe,
clean, and affordable water is available to all. Our communities stand
ready to get to work, delaying action will only make the problems worse
and costlier to solve.
We are pleased to offer our support for much-needed legislation. If
you have any questions, please contact me.
Sincerely,
Pete Bucher,
Managing Director of Water Policy, Ohio Environmental Council.

cc:  The Honorable Peter DeFazio
The Honorable Sam Graves
The Honorable John Katko

Statement of Patricia Sinicropi, Executive Director, WateReuse
Association, Submitted for the the Record by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano
Thank you for providing the opportunity to submit written testimony
on Building Back Better: The Urgent Need for Investment in America's
Wastewater Infrastructure. I submit this testimony today on behalf of
the WateReuse Association and its members to highlight the importance
of water reuse and recycling in building resiliency and strengthening
America's infrastructure.
WateReuse is a not-for-profit trade association for water
utilities, businesses, industrial and commercial enterprises, non-
profit organizations, and research entities that advocate for water
recycling. WateReuse and its state and regional sections represent
nearly 250 water utilities serving over 60 million customers, and over
200 businesses and organizations across the country. The WateReuse
Association's mission is to engage its members in a movement for safe
and sustainable water supplies, to promote acceptance and support of
recycled water, and to advocate for policies and funding that increase
water reuse.
Water reuse, also known as water recycling, is the process of
intentionally capturing wastewater, stormwater, saltwater or graywater
and cleaning it as needed for a designated beneficial freshwater
purpose, such as drinking, industrial processes, irrigation,
groundwater replenishment, and watershed restoration. The fundamental
principle of water reuse is using the right water for the right
purpose, everywhere and all the time. By advancing water reuse, we
protect and enhance the environment while helping communities build
resilience to drought, flooding, and other impacts of climate change.
Across the country, water, wastewater, and stormwater managers have
shown that water recycling is often a central feature in innovative,
integrated approaches to solving water management challenges, including
challenges brought on by climate change. In the West and South, the
integration of water recycling has often been driven by water supply
challenges and the need for drought-resilient supplies. Elsewhere in
the country, in the Pacific Northwest, and in cities such as Chicago,
Atlanta, and New York, water recycling has been used to help manage
stormwater, address water quality challenges, and relieve overburdened
combined sewer-stormwater management systems. Water reuse is also
helping communities along our coasts manage the threat of sea level
rise and saltwater intrusion through replenishing depleted coastal
aquifers.
Some important examples of how communities and businesses are
increasingly turning to water reuse to stabilize their water management
systems and ensure stronger and more resilient supplies include:

By 2035, the City of Los Angeles expects to recycle 100%
of its water supplies and reduce its reliance on costly imported water
from the Colorado River.

Truckee Meadows Water Authority in Reno is planning 13-
mile pipeline to provide 1.3 billion gallons of recycled water annually
to the Tahoe-Reno Industrial Center, home to Tesla, Switch and Google,
and ensure 20,000 jobs remain in Nevada.

The Hampton Roads region of Virginia, home to the largest
concentration of military and naval installations, plans to recycle
100% of its effluent through an aquifer recovery system to prevent
rising sea levels from threatening inundating the entire region.

These are just some of the countless examples of how water
recycling is becoming an essential ingredient in efforts to preserve
American jobs, businesses and communities as the country adapts and
builds resilience to fight climate change.
In order to Build Back Better and Stronger, WateReuse strongly
urges Congress to substantially increase investments in each of the
following programs in FY 2022, through both the annual appropriations
process and through an infrastructure package:

Pilot Program for Alternative Water Source Grants;

Title XVI-WIIN Water Reclamation and Reuse Competitive
Grants Program;

Sewer Overflow and Stormwater Reuse Municipal Grants
Program; and

Clean Water State Revolving Fund Program.

Investment in water reuse builds communities that are modern,
sustainable and stable--ready for families to flourish and businesses
to grow. We urge Congress to act swiftly to provide communities the
tools and resources they need to modernize their infrastructure, build
resilience, and protect the environment and public health.
Thank you for considering our testimony. Please do not hesitate to
reach out to the WateReuse Association's Policy Director, Greg Fogel,
with any questions.

Statement of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Submitted for the
Record by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano
Introduction
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) appreciates the
opportunity to submit our position on the importance of long-term,
strategic investment in our nation's water infrastructure systems. ASCE
also thanks the U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and
Infrastructure Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment for
holding a hearing on this critical issue. ASCE is eager to work with
the Subcommittee in the 117th Congress to reauthorize the Clean Water
State Revolving Fund. With millions of new users expected to be
connected to centralized wastewater treatment centers in the coming
years, our nation's wastewater systems will continue to be tested.
As we prepare for the year ahead, ASCE urges Congress to prioritize
our nation's water infrastructure by developing legislation that not
only makes critical investments, but creates jobs, protects public
safety and acts as an economic recovery tool. Investment in our
nation's wastewater systems should be included in any broad
infrastructure package that is considered.
ASCE's 2017 Infrastructure Report Card
Infrastructure is the foundation that connects the nation's
businesses, communities, and people, serves as the backbone to the U.S.
economy, and is vital to the nation's public health and welfare. Every
four years, ASCE publishes the Infrastructure Report Card, which grades
the nation's major infrastructure categories using a simple A to F
school report card format. The Report Card examines the current
infrastructure needs and conditions, assigning grades and making
recommendations to raise them.
ASCE's 2017 Infrastructure Report Card rated the overall condition
of the nation's infrastructure a cumulative grade of ``D+'' across
sixteen categories, with an investment gap of $2 trillion. The Report
Card gave our nation's wastewater infrastructure category a grade of
``D+,'' while our nation's drinking water infrastructure category
received a grade of ``D.'' On March 3, 2021 ASCE will release the 2021
Report Card for America's Infrastructure. The 2021 Report Card will
grade 17 categories of the nation's infrastructure, with stormwater
being added for the first time.
Nearly 240 million Americans--76% of the population--rely on the
nation's 14,748 treatment plants for wastewater sanitation. There are
over 800,000 miles of public sewers and 500,000 miles of private
lateral sewers connecting private property to public sewer lines. Each
of these conveyance systems is susceptible to failure, blockages, and
overflows.
As cities continue to experience population growth and rural
households switch from septic systems to public sewers, pressure on
existing centralized systems will require billions of dollars in
investment to meet federal regulatory requirements. Over the next two
decades, it is estimated that more than 56 million new users will be
connected to centralized wastewater systems, which will require the
construction of 532 new systems by 2032 to meet future demand. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) \1\ estimates that over the
course of the next 20 years, $271 billion will be needed for wastewater
infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Environmental Protection Agency, Clean Water Needs Survey, 2012
Report to Congress, December 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, the COVID-19 pandemic has made a difficult situation
worse. A sizable portion of our existing infrastructure systems are
supported with user-generated revenue streams. With the onset of the
pandemic, commercial water use is down and municipal and state budgets
are buckling under unprecedented demands, meaning less support is
available for parks, schools, and other publicly-owned infrastructure,
precisely at the time we should be investing.
Therefore, ASCE believes that Congress should make infrastructure
investment a centerpiece of its immediate response and long-term
economic recovery strategy. Now is the time to renew, modernize, and
invest in our infrastructure to maintain our international
competitiveness.
Investment Shortfalls Total Billions of Dollars
A well-maintained public drinking water and wastewater
infrastructure is critical for public health, strong businesses, and
clean waters and aquifers. However, funding both capital projects and
operations and maintenance (O&M) is difficult because the public often
does not appreciate the modern convenience of wastewater and drinking
water treatment, making it difficult to convey the need for water rate
increases. Furthermore, capital spending has not kept pace with needs.
If these trends continue, the funding gap will only widen, resulting in
leaking pipes, source water pollution, and increases in the cost of
O&M.
Despite increased efficiency methods and sustainable practices,
there is a growing gap between the capital needed to maintain drinking
water and wastewater infrastructure and the actual investments made. To
estimate this gap and quantify the failure to invest in our water
infrastructure, last year ASCE, in conjunction with the Value of Water,
released The Economic Benefits of Investing in Water Infrastructure:
How Failure to Act would Affect the U.S. Economic Recovery.
This economic study analyzed the impact of current water
infrastructure investment trends on America's GDP, jobs, personal
income, and businesses and found that the U.S. had an investment gap of
$81 billion in 2019 alone, with $129 billion in capital needs but only
$48 billion in investments. Furthermore, despite the growing need for
water infrastructure, the federal government's share of capital
investment has fallen from 31 percent in 1997 to a mere four percent in
2017. This underinvestment, will cause our infrastructure to further
degrade, resulting in a loss of 636,000 jobs annually and $2.9 trillion
in GDP by 2039.
If as a nation we invested an additional $964 billion over the next
10 years or approximately $96 billion annually across all levels of
government and the private sector to our water infrastructure needs,
the benefits would be immense and include:

$732 billion in business sales would be protected. The
economic gains from more reliable and efficient water systems would
build over time; most would accrue in the second decade as households
and businesses reap the benefits of improved water reliability.

The investment would protect 333,000 jobs and household
disposable income would rise by more than $2,000 per household.

Of these new jobs protected, 26 percent would be in
manufacturing and professional services stimulated by the boost in
infrastructure spending.
Solutions
Fortunately, Congress has provided some federal funding options
that could help close the funding gap needed for drinking water and
wastewater infrastructure if appropriated. Certainly, federal funding
is not the only answer; since the mid-1970s, money from local and state
governments has represented an increasing percentage--nearly 95%--of
public drinking water and wastewater investment. However, cities and
towns across the country report that complying with federal wastewater
and stormwater regulations represent some of their costliest capital
infrastructure projects.
As some water systems have become privatized, private capital has
become another financing mechanism. Regardless of whether a water
system is publicly or privately owned or managed, households and
businesses still ultimately foot the bill. Therefore, care must be
taken to ensure that rates are set at levels sufficient to maintain and
upgrade infrastructure while not increased so much that low-income
residents would face financial hardship. ASCE was pleased to see the
creation of the Low-Income Household Drinking Water and Wastewater
Emergency Assistance Program under the fiscal year 2021 appropriations
package. Providing $638 million to the Department of Health and Human
Services for grants to states in order to assist low-income households
pay for their drinking water and wastewater utilities will prove vital
to families that struggle to pay their water bill. We look forward to
working with Congress to ensure that this program continues to receive
sufficient funding going forward.
Next, the federal government funds many infrastructure categories,
and of all of these, water services receive less than 5%. However, the
Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF) and the Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund (DWSRF)--both authorized by Congress several decades
ago--play a vital role in providing much-needed support for investments
in state and local drinking and wastewater infrastructure.
In the past 30 years, the federal government has loaned $42 billion
to all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico through the
CWSRF, which has given states the ability to fund over $126 billion in
wastewater infrastructure system improvements--all through low-interest
financing. Every dollar provided by the federal government is matched
at 20 percent by the state.
Likewise, the DWSRF program provides low-interest loans to state
and local infrastructure projects. The EPA provides an allotment of
funding for each state, and like the CWSRF, each state provides a 20
percent match. Since the program's inception, $35.4 billion of low-
interest loans have been allocated. ASCE was pleased that the DWSRF was
reauthorized at increasing funding levels in the America's Water
Infrastructure Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-270, Sec. 2023) and urges Congress
to reauthorize the CWSRF at increasing funding levels, as well.
ASCE believes that our nation's elected leaders need to act quickly
to address the growing gap in wastewater infrastructure investment. We
urge Congress to:
1.  Renew the federal commitment to water infrastructure by
reinvigorating the CWSRF program through permanent reauthorization and
tripling the amount of annual authorization and appropriations.
2.  Fully fund the WIFIA program at no less than the FY21 enacted
level of $65 million.
3.  Eliminate the state cap on private activity bonds for water
infrastructure projects to bring an estimated $6 billion to $7 billion
annually in new private financing to bear on the problem.
4.  Create legislation to allow Public Private Partnerships (P3) as
one of many methods of financing water infrastructure improvements.
ASCE supports the use of P3 project delivery methods to enhance
federal, state and local resources when the public interest is
protected.
5.  Create legislation to establish a dedicated source of revenue
for drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects that would
provide a stable, long-term basis for financing for these critical
systems.
6.  Preserve tax exempt municipal bond financing, which provides
communities with low-cost access to capital for drinking water and
wastewater infrastructure upgrades.
7.  Support green infrastructure solutions, which provide co-
benefits such as water and quality improvement, aesthetic value to
communities, and cost competitiveness.

Finally, ASCE believes our nation must prioritize the investment
needs of our wastewater and drinking water infrastructure to ensure
public health, a strong economy, and clean and safe water sources.
Strategic, robust, and sustained investments in these water
infrastructure systems from a variety of mechanisms must be made
quickly if we hope to close the growing funding gap. ASCE thanks the
Subcommittee for holding this hearing and bringing attention to this
critical matter. We look forward to working with you to find solutions
to our nation's wastewater infrastructure investment needs.

Mrs. Napolitano. OK. We will proceed to the witnesses, and
I will start with Mr. Berger. Hold on just a second. OK.
We thank you. We will proceed to hear from our witnesses
testifying today. Thank you for being here, and welcome. We
have Mr. David J. Berger, mayor of the city of Lima, Ohio; Bill
Sterud, chairman of the Puyallup Tribe of Indians in Tacoma,
Washington; Oluwole McFoy, general manager of the Buffalo Sewer
Authority in Buffalo, New York; Tom Teske, vice president and
general manager of EJ Americas in East Jordan, Michigan; Brenda
Coley, co-executive director of Milwaukee Water Commons; and
David Mallino, legislative and political director of Laborers'
International Union of North America. Welcome, all of you.
And without objection, your prepared statements will be
entered into the record, and all witnesses are asked to limit
their remarks to 5 minutes. And I ask everybody to please mute
their mics until you have a chance to ask questions.
I will address Mr. Berger because you have been an
excellent witness for the subcommittee before, and I remember
that.
I am told you are retiring in November, having served as
mayor of Lima, Ohio, for 32 years. That is quite a record.
Thank you for your many years of service to your community, and
congratulations on your well-deserved retirement.
You may proceed with your testimony, sir. Mr. Berger, you
are on.

TESTIMONY OF HON. DAVID J. BERGER, MAYOR OF THE CITY OF LIMA,
OHIO, ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES CONFERENCE OF MAYORS; BILL
STERUD, CHAIRMAN, PUYALLUP TRIBE OF INDIANS; OLUWOLE McFOY,
GENERAL MANAGER, BUFFALO SEWER AUTHORITY, ON BEHALF OF THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CLEAN WATER AGENCIES; TOM TESKE, VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL MANAGER, EJ AMERICAS; BRENDA COLEY, CO-
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MILWAUKEE WATER COMMONS; AND DAVID MALLINO,
LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, LABORERS' INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NORTH
AMERICA

Mr. Berger. Thank you and good morning, Chair Napolitano,
Ranking Member Rouzer, and other members of the committee. I
serve as not only the mayor of Lima for the last 32 years, I am
also the chair of the Mayors Water Council of the U.S.
Conference of Mayors. I thank you for the invitation to give
the Conference of Mayors' perspective regarding the urgent need
for investment as well as a new approach to address America's
wastewater infrastructure needs.
As mayor, I spent over 15 years in negotiations with Ohio
EPA and U.S. EPA over long-term control plans to solve a set of
combined and sanitary sewer overflow problems. I also
participated in a decade of discussions with EPA headquarters
and regional offices on integrated planning, green
infrastructure, and affordability. So a significant portion of
my professional life has been spent on this, which makes me a
reluctant expert.
And my message is this: We are on an unsustainable path
when it comes to providing water and wastewater services in an
affordable manner. Local governments are stuck on an
unsustainable financial treadmill. Decisions made by the
Federal Government to reduce financial assistance without
restricting costly mandates have placed a severe financial
burden on us.
The combination of consequences from Federal water policy
mandates that force aggressive and oftentimes unachievable
goals, coupled with the high cost of building and operating the
necessary infrastructure to provide core services that comply
with Federal mandates, is now beyond the means of half the
Nation's population.
The net effect: Mandates, and the lack of Federal
infrastructure investments, put cities in increasingly higher
long-term debt, with accompanying rate hikes that have the
effect of raising basic service levels that are unaffordable to
a growing percentage of Americans.
I want to thank this subcommittee for drafting the Water
Quality Protection and Job Creation Act, a bill without any
additional mandates included. We are already struggling with
the burden placed on us, and we ask that you recognize that we
cannot do more without a substantial influx of new money from
the Federal Government and a change in the way that we handle
mandates.
Local governments are doing their part. The 2018 census
estimates that cities spent $130 billion for municipal water
and sewer utilities. And from 1993 to 2018, we cumulatively
spent $2\1/4\ trillion: $1.23 trillion on water supply and $997
billion on sewer and wastewater. That means that 98 percent of
annual spending on water and sewer utilities is by local
governments.
During that same timeframe, with the exception of 2018, the
amount of money appropriated to the Clean Water and Drinking
Water SRFs never exceeded $3 billion annually in the form of
grants to States who in turn give us loans that we have to pay
back with interest. Our investment has been additionally
challenged by other economic factors.
Take, for example, the impacts of the great recession on
water and sewer utilities. When recessions hit and revenues
decline, utilities must pare budgets and shift resources to
continue service for public health protection and regulatory
compliance. The result was to ultimately stifle up to $105
billion in infrastructure investment over more than a decade,
and thereby stress our systems even more.
Further, it has been decades that we have seen anything but
level funding from Congress. Higher authorization levels
without increases in appropriations is frustrating at best. We
need the Federal Government to step up.
The Conference of Mayors developed the Mayors 2020 Vision
document, where we call for additional Federal funding in the
area of water and wastewater infrastructure, as well as
additional flexibility in order to maintain affordability for
our citizens and our cities. Our recommendations include:
promoting integrated planning, implementing the 2021
affordability guidelines, investing in smart technologies, and
developing efficiencies in the water/energy nexus.
By thinking more broadly and creatively, we can better
tackle our infrastructure needs and provide cost savings
solutions. We also recommend taking a critical look at what our
infrastructure and compliance priorities should be. If a
mandate costs millions of dollars but has modest environmental
benefits, would that money not be better spent on other more
pressing infrastructure, environmental, and public health
priorities?
Related to this, I would like to thank this committee for
passing integrated planning legislation, which my own community
has utilized. Integrated planning can provide the flexibility
to begin to realign requirements with local priorities and
local financial capabilities. It is a huge step in the right
direction.
We need more tools like this to maintain and rebuild our
infrastructure while addressing resiliency and cybersecurity.
On behalf of the Conference of Mayors, we stand ready to work
with you to help develop these necessary solutions.
Thank you for inviting me to participate.
[Mr. Berger's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David J. Berger, Mayor of the City of Lima,
Ohio, on behalf of the United States Conference of Mayors
Introduction
Good morning Chairman Napolitano, Ranking Member Rouzer, and
members of the Committee. My name is Dave Berger, I have served as the
Mayor of Lima, Ohio for 32 years and currently serve as the Chair of
the Conference of Mayors Water Council and Vice-Chair for the
Conference's Environment Committee.
I thank you for this invitation to give the Conference of Mayors'
and my perspective regarding the urgent need for investment in
America's Wastewater Infrastructure with a particular focus on the
federal role in local infrastructure investment.
I am speaking before you today to provide you with some real-world
experience of what is going on in the field of wastewater
infrastructure to illustrate the current problems that face many
communities throughout the United States.
In the 32 years as mayor of my city, I spent over a decade and a
half in negotiations with Ohio EPA and USEPA over Long-Term Control
Plans to solve a combined and sanitary sewer overflow problem. And as a
member of the Conference's Water Council, I also participated in over
10 years of discussions with EPA Headquarters and Regional offices on
the issues of Integrated Planning, green infrastructure and
affordability. So, a significant portion of my professional life has
been spent on this and related matters which makes me a reluctant
expert in this field.
And my message to you is this--we are on an unsustainable path when
it comes to providing water and wastewater services in an affordable
manner.

Local governments are stuck on an unsustainable financial
treadmill when it comes to providing water and wastewater services;
decisions made by Congress and the Administration to eliminate or
reduce financial assistance without restricting costly mandates have
placed a severe financial burden on our nation's cities and the public.

The combination of consequences from federal water policy
mandates that force aggressive, and in many cases unachievable, goals,
coupled with the high cost of building, maintaining and operating the
necessary infrastructure to provide core city services that comply with
federal mandates is now beyond the means of half the nation's
population. This is an artifact of federal policy that forces the lower
half of the income strata to afford the same rates as the upper half of
household incomes.

The net effect of mandates and lack of federal
infrastructure investment (both capital and operations) puts cities in
increasingly higher long-term debt with accompanying rate hikes that
has the effect of raising basic service rates to levels that are
unaffordable to a growing percent of the 80% of Americans served by
these systems.

I do want to thank this subcommittee for introducing the Water
Quality Protection and Job Creation Act of 2021 that will begin to
address one of these issues--additional federal investment. The
nation's cities need Congress to provide more resources so local
governments can continue to provide these utility services to our
citizens and afford the ever growing compliance costs of regulations.
And we are grateful that you have introduced a straightforward
reauthorization bill without any additional mandates or requirements
included. We are already struggling with the burden placed on us and we
ask that you recognize that we cannot do more without a substantial
influx of new money.
Please note that our needs at the local level could better be
served by Congressional support to place emphasis on infrastructure
renewal and technological upgrades, cybersecurity needs, as well as
resiliency needs in a changing environment. We ask ourselves at the
local level--``are we looking at and putting resources to real and
priority problems?'' I refer you to the section below entitled,
Solutions--Mayors 2020 Vision Document, to see the list of priorities
the Conference of Mayors is asking Congress to consider.
The Conference of Mayors supports this legislation because it
focuses on the level and categories of federal financial assistance
primarily to States, and some local governments who are beneficiaries
of intergovernmental transfers when they obtain loans from the State
Revolving Fund (SRF) program. Some local governments rely on SRF loans
to finance capital projects, but many cities do not access the SRF,
relying instead on exempt facility revenue bonds, pay-go, and other
financial instruments.
We support this legislation because it continues to authorize
federal money targeting financial assistance to low-income
neighborhoods, options for loan repayment by cities with SRF loans,
(e.g., no interest loans, capital forgiveness, etc.), and it remains a
program aimed at helping utility infrastructure investment including
green infrastructure projects. All of these are related to important
local needs: the poor in our communities and how financial resources
from Congress can help us address their needs; the SRF stays (and
should stay) the program to provide federal financial assistance to the
nation's cities and counties and their water and sewer utilities
infrastructure investment. We applaud the Committee's support to local
government. Our hope is that Congress actually appropriates the needed
resources over the next decade to prepare the nation for the
anticipated emergence of natural disasters on a grand scale, triggered
by climate change.
Local Utility Infrastructure Investment is Stuttering When it Needs to
Grow
Local governments are charging and taxing customers with the
highest rates ever seen--year after year double digit rate increases to
maintain service and comply with regulations. But, local governments
are doing their financial part. A recent analysis of the 2018 Census
estimates local governments spending $130 billion for municipal water
and sewer utilities--a historically high annual investment. From 1993
to 2018, local governments cumulatively spent on water and sewer
utilities exceeded $2.251 Trillion: $1.225 Trillion on Water Supply
Utilities; $997 Billion on Sewer and Wastewater Utilities. In the
United States, 98% of annual spending on water and sewer utilities is
by local government.
I just want to emphasize that again--local governments have spent
$2.251 Trillion since 1993. In the past, the federal government funded
about 75% of the infrastructure that brought most cities into
compliance with secondary treatment standards. This federal cost share
made the federal government a partner in upgrading treatment plants and
improving water quality. And, because the federal government was
spending its own money as well as city money, the federal government
paid close attention to ensuring that improvements were cost effective.
Unfortunately, that same commitment is no longer there. During that
same 1993-2018 timeframe, with the exception of the year when money was
allocated under ARRA, the amount of money appropriated to the Clean
Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Funds never exceeded $3
billion annually or less than 3% of what local governments spent
annually. And again, this money is given as grants to states, that in
turn, give the money to us in the form of loans that we have to pay
back.
This investment has not been enough and has been additionally
challenged by other factors. One of the reasons why local governments
are challenged with making needed infrastructure investment in water
and wastewater utilities is disruption from national economic
recessions. A familiar pattern is easily described.
Take, for example, The United States Conference of Mayors research
report on the impacts of the Great Recession (December 2007-June 2009)
on municipal water and sewer utilities. An analysis of Census data that
compared local spending on 10 different water utility construction
categories indicates that when recessions hit, utilities tend to pare
budgets, shift resources to continue service for public health
protection and regulatory compliance. The result was to ultimately
stifle up to $105 billion in utility infrastructure investment over
more than a decade.
The recessionary period ended in 2009 and the recovery years
reached pre-Recession levels of investment in 2019. In 2019 local
governments spent $41 billion on utility capital construction, but this
was the same level of construction investment in 2007 at the height of
an economic expansion that turned down rapidly. The purchase power of
$41 billion invested in utility infrastructure in 2019, due to
inflation, may really be closer to the purchase power in 2005-2006
between $30 billion to $35 billion.
Construction spending was growing at 11% annually before the Great
Recession. Post Great Recession growth in construction spending was
between 1% and 1.5%
The Great Recession recovery period for utility construction
spending lasted from 10 to 15 years. If it didn't happen, utility
infrastructure capital investments would have been $105 billion higher
from 2010 to 2019. What was lost? Sewer line-pump--$34 billion;
Wastewater plant--$25 billion; Water line--$25 billion; Water plant--
$21 billion.
Do these factors need to be taken into account by Congress when
considering policy in this arena? We urge the Committee to consider
these factors when authorizing resources.
Solutions--Mayors 2020 Vision Document
We need to rethink the issue of infrastructure investment as we
move forward--one that balances investment, costs, and determining
priorities.
Last year, the Mayors created a bipartisan call for action, called
The Mayors' 2020 Vision: An American Breakthrough which highlighted 10
priority issue areas that the Mayors of this nation are calling on the
President and Congress to address that, we believe, will make our
country stronger, more economically competitive, and improve the lives
of all Americans, including our most vulnerable citizens.
Included in our 2020 Vision document was an infrastructure section
entitled, Build Modern, Resilient Infrastructure to Address Climate
Change, Promote Environmental Justice, and Enhance Opportunity and
Productivity: Transportation, Water, Green Energy, and Technology
Systems.
In this document, mayors call on the President and Congress to:

Raise existing federal funding commitments substantially,
particularly in the form of grant funding, to support the modernization
and expansion of our Nation's drinking water, wastewater treatment,
stormwater, and flood protection systems. This includes addressing
public health threats from lead contamination in older, legacy water
systems as well as helping mitigate the impact of unfunded federal
mandates on communities where user fee increases to comply with these
mandates are making water rates unaffordable for more and more local
residents. The federal government should assist localities in meeting
Clean Water Act obligations including (but not limited to) TMDLs for
stormwater as it did in the past by funding upgrades of treatment
plants to secondary treatment.

Implement the Integrated Planning Permit law to ensure
cities and their customers are not overly financially burdened and to
allow cities maximum flexibility to address specific challenges in a
smart, prioritized manner.

Change the current clean water act law to allow cities to
have 10-year, rather than five-year, treatment works permit terms.

Continue to advocate for better ``Affordability''
assessments involving compliance with unfunded federal mandates,
including the elimination of costly penalties.

Direct new resources funding to support local government
efforts to study, evaluate, and undertake capital investments to combat
cybersecurity threats and improve water system resiliency from natural
disasters.

Assist in providing funding or federal credits for
premise plumbing upgrades on private property to prevent and reduce
contamination from pipes.

Fund the Corps of Engineers' authority to allow for water
and wastewater infrastructure investment which would allow for
additional grant funding for the Nation's water and wastewater
infrastructure.

Increase funding for newly established programs including
the water workforce development grant, CSO and stormwater
infrastructure needs, increasing system resiliency, and accelerating
innovative technologies in the water sector.

As you can see from this list, we call for additional federal
funding which your legislation authorizes. Besides additional funding,
our 2020 Vision document also addresses the need for making the
solutions more affordable which included promoting integrated planning,
developing better affordability guidelines, allowing for 10-year
permits, additional investment in smart technologies (including smart
pipes), and improvements in the water-energy nexus. By thinking more
broadly, we can better tackle our infrastructure needs and provide
cost-saving solutions.
We also recommend taking a critical look at what our infrastructure
and compliance priorities should be. We need to be more mindful that if
something costs hundreds of millions of dollars to have a modest
environmental benefit, would that money be better spent on other, more
pressing infrastructure, environmental, and public health priorities.
Related to this last point, I would like to thank this committee
for your work in passing Integrated Planning legislation which my own
community has utilized. Integrated planning can, if implemented
properly, provide the flexibility to begin to realign standards and
requirements with local priorities and local financial capability. It
is a huge step in the right direction, and I encourage you to work with
us to develop additional solutions and approaches as we rethink our
approach to infrastructure investment that is more sustainable. We need
a combination of additional investment, financing tools, determining
and prioritizing critical needs, and minimizing or eliminating unfunded
federal mandates as part of a comprehensive solution.
On behalf of the Conference of Mayors, we stand ready to work with
you to help develop these necessary solutions. Thank you again for this
opportunity to speak with you today.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much, sir.
And now we will hear from Mr. Bill Sterud. You may proceed,
Mr. Sterud.
Mr. Sterud. Good morning. My name is Bill Sterud. I am the
chairman of the Puyallup Tribe of Indians in Tacoma,
Washington. I would like to thank Chairman DeFazio, Chairwoman
Napolitano, and our congresswoman, Congresswoman Strickland,
for the opportunity to present testimony on this important
topic of the need for greater investments in America's
wastewater infrastructure.
The Puyallup Tribe is a federally recognized Tribe located
in Pierce County, Washington, along the shores of Commencement
Bay, a large inlet of Puget Sound. The reservation consists of
approximately 28 square miles in Pierce County, Washington, and
includes the city of Fife and portions of the city of Tacoma.
Today, the Tribe has more than 5,461 members. In addition to
serving our members, we serve more than 29,000 Native Americans
from our 200 federally recognized Tribes in Alaskan Villages.
The pandemic has brought into focus the massive health
disparities that exist between Indian Country and the rest of
America. In many cases, this health disparity exists because
there is a lack of water and sanitation infrastructure in
Indian Country. The Indian Health Service estimates almost 30
percent of the homes of Indian Country lack proper sanitation
infrastructure. Thus, the simple act of washing your hands for
20 seconds is something that too many people in Indian Country
cannot do.
The lack of waste sanitation infrastructure results in
higher incidences of cancer, obesity, diabetes, and other
chronic diseases. Beyond the direct health impacts that Indian
Country experiences because of poor sanitation, there is the
impact to our natural environment.
Numerous reports have documented the impact that outdated
and failing septic and sewage treatment facilities are having
on the health of the Puget Sound. Failing septic and sewage
treatment facilities are a direct threat to all life in the
Puget Sound.
Wastewater treatment plants account for about 70 percent of
Puget Sound's over-nutrients. The increased nutrients in the
Puget Sound deplete the oxygen levels in the water, causing a
condition called hypoxia, creating dead zones in the water.
Essentially, when a creature enters a hypoxic water area, it
dies from the lack of oxygen before it can get out.
Today, the Indian Health Service estimates that there is a
$2.57 billion backlog in sanitation infrastructure in Tribal
communities. We know it is far greater as the Indian Health
Service only considers Indian homes, and does not consider the
sanitation needs of our government facilities, schools,
businesses, or non-Indian homes in our communities. The EPA's
Clean Water Indian set-aside is an important partner in
addressing this need. The current $30 million that is provided,
while appreciated, is insufficient. We need a substantial
investment now to address this critical backlog.
Thus, we support the proposed Water Quality Protection and
Job Creation Act and the proposed $2.5 billion wastewater
infrastructure assistance for Indian communities. With this
increase in funding, some important changes could be made to
the program.
We think that a portion of this increased funding should be
dedicated to improving environmental water quality, with an
impasse on protecting treaty resources. In this regard, we
think the program should encourage Tribes and other governments
to work together to address this issue. We want to work with
municipal systems to address combined sewer overflows. The
Puyallup Tribe receives notices about CSOs almost every day.
This means that every day, raw sewage flows into Puget Sound.
We think the program can be adapted to encourage more
partnerships between governments to work cooperatively to
address these environmental threats. We also think the program
must be modified to allow Tribes to use this funding to address
the sanitation needs of the entire reservation community. It
does not matter if the waste is from a home or a Tribal school;
it presents the same health and environmental threat. Thus,
Tribes need the resources to address these sanitation
deficiencies associated with our community facilities and our
businesses.
We appreciate the opportunity to testify and highlight the
needs of Indian Country on this critical topic. Thank you.
[Mr. Sterud's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Bill Sterud, Chairman, Puyallup Tribe of Indians
Good morning my name is Bill Sterud. I am the Chairman of the
Puyallup Tribe of Indians. I would like to thank Chairman DeFazio,
Chairwoman Napolitano and our Congresswoman, Congresswoman Strickland
for the opportunity to present testimony on this important topic of the
need for greater investment in America's wastewater infrastructure and
the need to better support infrastructure in Indian country.
I want to begin by telling you about my Tribe. The Puyallup Tribe
is a federally recognized Tribe located in Pierce County, Washington
along the shores of Commencement Bay, a large inlet of Puget Sound. The
history of relations between the United States and our Tribe is
spotted, but in recent decades we have made great strides forward
achieving recognition of our Treaty rights, restoring our Tribal land
base, and developing programs to better serve our members.
The Reservation consists of approximately 28 square miles in Pierce
County, WA and includes the city of Fife and portions of the city of
Tacoma. Today, the Tribe has more than 5,461 members. Further, in
addition to serving our members, we serve more than 29,000 Native
Americans from over 200 federally recognized tribes and Alaskan
villages, who, due to the federal Indian relocation program of the
1940s and 1950s, now call the area on and around the Puyallup
Reservation home. The services we provide to our members and those
Indian people living in our territory include housing, natural
resources protection, law enforcement services, elder services, health
care services, transportation, and educational services.
Foundational to the Tribe are our natural resources, the fish,
wildlife and fauna, water, land and air in our territory. We depend on
these resources for our economic, cultural, and spiritual health and
well-being. Thus, the protection and preservation of these resources is
a priority for the Puyallup Tribe. However, there is no greater
resource for the Puyallup Tribe than our people and protecting and
preserving the health and well-being of our members is our top
priority. The Clean Water Act Revolving fund and the Indian set-aside
that is a part of it, is an important tool for all tribes to protect
the health of their members and protect the health of their natural
environment.
The pandemic has brought into critical focus the massive health
disparities that exist between Indian country and the rest of America.
In many cases this health disparity exists because there is a lack of
water and sanitation infrastructure in Indian country. In its most
recent FY 2021 Budget Justification, the IHS estimated that 1.6% of all
American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) homes lacked water supply or
wastewater disposal facilities; and that approximately 27% of AI/AN
homes needed some form of sanitation facilities improvements--
essentially 30% of the homes in Indian county lack proper sanitation
infrastructure. Thus, the simple act of washing your hands for twenty
seconds is something that too many people in Indian country cannot do.
Beyond the pandemic, one critical metric that demonstrates the
impact of inferior sanitation on health is the rate of Helicobacter
pylori (H. pylori) infection. H. pylori is a bacteria found in fecal
matter that enters a community's water supply because of a lack of
proper sanitation waste disposal systems. One report estimates the
prevalence of H. pylori in tribal communities to be 64-81%. See,
Disparities in Cancer Incidence and Trends among American Indians and
Alaska Natives in the United States, https://cebp.aacrjournals.org/
content/28/10/1604 ``Disparities''. This is a prevalence rate that is
seen in third world countries.
The significance of this is that approximately 89% of stomach
cancers are estimated to be attributable to chronic H. pylori
infection. See, Helicobacter pylori and Stomach Cancer Among Native
Americans in Northern Arizona, https://in.nau.edu/nacp/helicobacter-
pylori-and-stomach-cancer-among-native-americans-in-northern-arizona.
Thus, it is not surprising that the rate of stomach cancer among Indian
people is almost double that of the non-Indian community. Disparities.
Most of these deaths could have been prevented if people had not been
exposed to poor sanitation. Other health indicators like obesity and
diabetes can also be directly tied to a lack of access to clean water
to drink.
Beyond the direct health impacts that Indian country experiences
because of poor sanitation, there is the impact to our natural
environment because of poor sanitation facilities. Numerous reports
have documented the impact that outdated and failing septic and sewage
treatment facilities are having on the health of the Puget Sound. When
septic and sewage treatment facilities fail, bacteria enters our
waterways threatening our valuable shellfish industry. But failing
septic and sewage treatment facilities are not just a direct threat to
the shellfish, they are an existential threat to all life in the Puget
Sound.
It is well documented that excessive levels of nutrients, like
nitrogen, negatively impact the Puget Sound. According to a 2019 report
from the Salish Sea model, wastewater treatment plants account for
about 70% of the Puget Sound's over nutrients during warmer months.
See, https://www.invw.org/2020/12/07/outdated-sewage-treatment-is-
suffocating-fish-in-puget-sound/ Specifically, the increased nutrients
in the Puget Sound deplete the oxygen levels in the water, causing a
condition called hypoxia, creating dead zones in the water.
Essentially, when a living creature enters a hypoxic water area it dies
from the lack of oxygen before it can get out. These dead zones can be
as big as six miles in diameter.
The Supreme Court affirmed that states have an obligation to
address aging infrastructure's impact on Treaty protected fisheries and
wildlife habitat. U.S. v. Washington, 853 F.3rd 946 (9th Cir. 2017),
affirmed per curium, 584 U.S._(2018). While this case involved road
culverts, the threat to treaty protected fisheries resources is equally
as great from failing sewer and sanitation facilities. This obligation
is not only shared by the states, it's shared by the federal trustee as
well. Thus, the federal government has a trust responsibility to
address the impact of failing sanitation facilities on our treaty
protected trust resources.
In 1976, as part of the groundbreaking Indian Health Care
Improvement Act, Congress required the Indian Health Service to report
the sanitation deficiencies in Indian country. 25 U.S.C. 1632(g). This
list has documented for more than 40 years a growing sanitation backlog
in Indian country. Today, the Indian Health Service estimates that
there is a $2.57 billion backlog in sanitation infrastructure in tribal
communities. We know it is far greater as the Indian Health Service
only considers Indian homes and does not consider the sanitation needs
of our governmental facilities, schools, businesses, or non-Indian
homes in our communities. Unfortunately, notwithstanding this level of
need, the Indian Health Service only requested $190 million in FY 2021
for both drinking water and sanitation facilities in Indian country.
This will address only about 7% of the total need.
While the EPA's Clean Water Indian set-aside (CWISA) is an
important partner with IHS in addressing this backlog, the $30 million
now provided is woefully insufficient. We need a substantial investment
now to address this critical backlog. Thus, we support the proposed
Water Quality Protection and Job Creation Act and the proposed $2.5
billion in wastewater infrastructure assistance for Indian communities.
With this increase in funding some important changes could be made
to the program. We think that a portion of this increased funding
should be dedicated to improving environmental water quality with an
emphasis on protecting treaty resources. In this regard, we think the
program should encourage tribes and other governments to work together
to address this issue. At Puyallup, we want to work with municipal
systems to address combined sewer overflows (CSOs). The Puyallup Tribe
receives notices that a CSOs occurs almost every day. This means that
every day raw sewage flows into the Puget Sound. We think the program
can be adapted to encourage partnerships between governments to work
collaboratively to address these environmental threats.
We also think the program must be modified to allow tribes to use
this funding to address the sanitation needs of the entire Reservation
community. It does not matter if the waste is from a home or a tribal
school, it presents the same health and environmental threat. Thus,
tribes need the resources to address these sanitation deficiencies
associated with our community facilities and our businesses.
We appreciate the opportunity to testify and highlight the needs of
Indian country on this critical topic.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much for your testimony.
We will proceed with Mr. McFoy. You may proceed.
Mr. McFoy. I would like to begin by thanking the House
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure chair, Peter
DeFazio, and the Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment chair, Grace Napolitano, as well as the respective
ranking members Congressman Sam Graves and Congressman David
Rouzer, along with the other members of the subcommittee who
are present, for this opportunity to talk with you today about
the importance of Federal investment in water infrastructure.
My name is Oluwole McFoy, and I am the general manager of
the Buffalo Sewer Authority. I am an active member of the New
York Water and Environment Association and board member of U.S.
Water Alliance, and I serve on the board of directors for the
National Association of Clean Water Agencies, or NACWA, and I
am testifying on behalf of that association today.
NACWA represents hundreds of public wastewater and
stormwater agencies nationwide that are on the front lines of
public health and environmental protection. While I am here
today to share my experiences from Buffalo, many of the
challenges facing my city are shared by other utilities and
communities nationwide.
Buffalo is a northeastern city that has seen its share of
ups and downs. It is a city with a proud record of innovation,
fortitude, and perseverance, while also having a pretty good
football team as of late. Historically, cities like Buffalo had
a partner in the Federal Government when it came to building
critical infrastructure like water and sewer systems.
From the WPA funding that allowed the ribbon-cutting of our
primary treatment plant to the construction grants program that
ushered in our secondary plant expansion, this partnership was
vital to helping Buffalo and other communities around the
United States provide working-class families the opportunity to
have good jobs, good wages, and stable neighborhoods.
However, over the last decades, the nature of that
partnership has changed as the Federal Government's investment
grew smaller and smaller, now estimated below 5 percent, and
localities like Buffalo had to take on greater shares of the
infrastructure cost.
That shift to a greater local cost share had unintended
consequences because it came at a time when local governments
were losing their ability to raise revenue sufficient to cover
the high costs of these types of capital projects. As a result,
our infrastructure deteriorated, with the work being done on it
relegated to mostly maintenance, repairs, and necessary
replacements.
This has proven to be an unsustainable approach. Currently,
the costs of capital infrastructure are being borne by a
segment of ratepayers who, as in Buffalo, a city with a 30-
percent poverty rate, simply cannot afford to pay it. The key
to ending this cycle and restoring a sense of equity to our
water utility system is having a reengaged Federal partner that
is willing to help fund the infrastructure work that will allow
cities to modernize their systems.
The recent commitment by Congress of $638 million towards
low-income water assistance is a critical stopgap policy that
will help meet the immediate needs of residents for whom water
is becoming increasingly inaccessible. However, only long-term
and sustained infrastructure investment by and in partnership
with the Federal Government will ever achieve the necessary
water affordability that we all need to see become a reality.
This can be accomplished through significant increased
funding to existing programs like the Clean Water SRF, WIFIA
loan program, the Water Workforce grant program, and the Sewer
Overflow/Stormwater grant program. This can also be
accomplished by establishing a permanent Federal low-income
water assistance program as well as through a strong jobs and
infrastructure-based stimulus package. NACWA is pleased to
strongly support all of these approaches through our new
``Affordable Water, Resilient Cities'' campaign.
Water is not only a requisite for life, but also an
important contributor to our public health, economic
development, and the revitalization of our neighborhoods. We
cannot consistently deliver innovative green infrastructure and
smart water projects to protect the environment without our
Federal partner.
We are not asking for just an infusion of funding, but
instead for a recommitment to the idea that people who live in
cities like Buffalo have a future where they can raise a
family, find a good job, and live a healthier life.
Finally, it is important that local policymakers have the
ability to use the Federal funds in the manner that will result
in the greatest good in their respective cities. In Buffalo, we
are committed to balancing the imperative calls for racial
equity, environmental justice, climate change, and economic
development in every policy and program we undertake.
I hope that the subcommittee will consider these factors as
it continues its work to develop legislation that will help
improve water infrastructure system funding in Buffalo and
other cities and communities across the Nation.
I would like to thank the members of the subcommittee for
their time and the opportunity to present my thoughts on the
critical need for increased Federal investment in water
infrastructure. I will be happy to answer any questions that
you may have.
[Mr. McFoy's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Oluwole McFoy, General Manager, Buffalo Sewer
Authority, on behalf of the National Association of Clean Water
Agencies
I would like to begin by thanking the House Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure chair Peter DeFazio and the
Subcommittee on Water and the Environment chair Grace Napolitano, as
well as the respective ranking members; Congressman Sam Graves and
Congressman David Rouzer, along with the other members of the
subcommittee who are present, for this opportunity to talk with you
today about the importance of federal investment in water
infrastructure across the United States and how that investment will
play a critical role in making clean, healthy water more accessible to
the residents of our cities and communities.
My name is Oluwole McFoy and I am the General Manager of the
Buffalo Sewer Authority and Chair of the City of Buffalo Water
Authority. I also serve on the Board of Directors for the National
Association of Clean Water Agencies, or NACWA, and am testifying on
behalf of the Association today. NACWA represents hundreds of public
wastewater and stormwater agencies nationwide that are on the front
lines of public health and environmental protection. NACWA has
advocated for greater federal investment in clean water infrastructure
for over 50 years, and while I am here today to share my experiences
from Buffalo, many of the challenges facing my city are shared by other
utilities and communities nationwide.
Buffalo is a northeastern city that has seen its share of both ups
and downs. It is a city with a proud record of innovation, individual
fortitude, and perseverance; while also having a pretty good football
team as of late. These characteristics make Buffalo feel special to me,
but I am confident that if you asked any resident, of almost any city
in the country, they would have almost the same exact feeling about
their hometowns. That mutual feeling of shared experience also extends
to the challenges water system managers are facing across the nation.
Historically, cities like Buffalo had a partner in the federal
government when it came to building critical infrastructure like water
and sewer systems. That partnership was vital to helping Buffalo, and
other communities around the United States, develop their economies,
provide working class families the opportunity to have a good home in a
stable neighborhood, and sustain a healthy pace of development.
However, over the last several decades, the nature of that
partnership has changed as the federal government's investment grew
smaller--now estimated below 5 percent of total water and wastewater
infrastructure \i\--and localities had to take on a greater share of
infrastructure costs, in addition to operations and maintenance. That
shift to a greater local cost share had an unintended, but especially
pernicious, consequence because it came at a time when local
governments were losing their ability to raise revenues sufficient to
cover the high-cost of these types of capital projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\i\ Congressional Budget Office, https://www.cbo.gov/publication/
54539
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beginning in the early nineteen sixties, Buffalo's tax-base, like
that of other medium and small-sized cities, changed rapidly. Suburban
development, which relied on the utilities infrastructure that had
already been built to support their region's actual urban cores, drew a
greater number of middle-class homeowners away. This began to deprive
Buffalo of the solid economic base it had relied on to fund services,
maintain property values, and attract employers with.
The residents who remained were often lower-income Black people who
had faced various types of housing and employment discrimination, or
others who were still committed to enjoying the benefits of city-living
but did not have incomes sufficiently large enough to cover the gaps
created by suburban migration. These migration patterns, along with a
significant drop over time in federal infrastructure support, in many
ways helped lay the foundation for the current environmental justice
challenges facing our urban areas today around delivery of water and
sewer services.
As a result, our drinking water and wastewater infrastructure
deteriorated, with the work being done on it relegated to mostly
maintenance, repairs, and necessary replacements. This has proven to be
an unsustainable approach. The costs of this work are being borne by a
segment of rate payers who cannot afford to pay it while at the same
time the funding required for even this bare minimum approach is still
growing, creating a situation where rate payers are being forced to pay
more for less relative service.
The key to ending this cycle and restoring a sense of equity to our
water utility system is having a re-engaged federal partner that is
willing to help fund the infrastructure work that will allow cities to
modernize their systems, employ innovative technologies that reduce
maintenance costs, build systems that will be more resilient against
the effects of global climate change, and then pass those savings on to
ratepayers in a restorative way.
The recent commitment by Congress of six-hundred and thirty-eight
million dollars towards Low Income Drinking Water and Wastewater
Assistance is a critical stop-gap policy that can help meet the
immediate needs of residents for whom water is becoming increasingly
inaccessible. However, only long-term and sustained infrastructure
investment by and partnership with the federal government will ever
achieve the kind of water affordability that we all want to see become
a reality. This can be accomplished through significant increased
funding to existing programs like the Clean Water SRF, the WIFIA loan
program, the Water Workforce grant program and the Sewer Overflow/
Stormwater grant program. This can also be accomplished by establishing
a permanent federal Low Income Water Assistance Program as well as
through a strong jobs and infrastructure-based stimulus package with a
significant water component. NACWA is pleased to strongly support all
of these approaches through our new Affordable Water, Resilient Cities
campaign, and you can learn more about our efforts online at
www.affordableh2o.org.
Water is not only a requisite for life, but also an important
contributor to our economic development, green infrastructure planning,
protecting our public health, and the revitalization of our
neighborhoods. That is why any federal investment will be leveraged to
increase the return on investment. We are not asking for just an
infusion of funding but instead for a recommitment to the idea that
people who live in cities like Buffalo have a future where they can
raise a family, find a good job, and live a healthier life.
Finally, it is important that local policymakers have the
flexibility necessary to use any federal funds in the manner that will
result in the greatest good for the greatest number of people in their
jurisdiction. In Buffalo, we are committed to balancing the imperative
calls for racial equity, environmental justice, climate change, and
economic development in every policy and program we develop and
undertake. That same commitment applies to improvements we are making
to our water infrastructure.
Any solutions developed in accordance with these principles must be
dynamic if they are going to be successfully implemented. And while
every community working on these problems likely shares these goals,
they will also have to be able to adapt to their own set of changing
circumstances. Every city across this country has different water
infrastructure needs; in Buffalo we are not looking to just replace our
existing waterlines but to modernize our water quality monitoring
systems, use predictive technologies to improve maintenance, keep our
water clean and reduce costs to our customers in a way that is
restorative, environmentally sensitive, and development friendly.
Accomplishing this will require creativity, flexibility, and a
commitment to the principles I have already outlined above. I hope that
the subcommittee will consider these factors as it continues its work
to develop legislation that will help improve water infrastructure
system funding in Buffalo and other cities and communities across the
nation.
I would like to thank the members of the subcommittee for their
time and the opportunity to present my thoughts on the present need for
increased federal investment in water infrastructure. I would be happy
to answer any questions you may have.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. McFoy. That is very kind of
you.
And we will proceed with Mr. Teske. Mr. Teske, you may go.
Mr. Teske. Good morning. My name is Tom Teske, and I am
vice president and general manager of EJ Americas, formerly
known as East Jordan Ironworks. EJ is a global leader in the
design, manufacture, and distribution of products critical to
our Nation's water and wastewater infrastructure such as fire
hydrants, valves, valve boxes, access covers and frames, curb
inlets and frames, and drainage grates. These products are all
made from recycled scrap metals that are melted, poured,
finished, machined, coated, and assembled in the United States.
EJ is a family-owned company that has a long history of
investing in American workers and communities. The EJ legacy
dates back five generations to 1883, when our first
manufacturing facility was built in East Jordan, Michigan.
While we are now a global enterprise, we remain dedicated to
the U.S. marketplace. U.S. employees remain the heart and soul
of our company.
Today I would like to make three points. Robust, long-term
investments in our Nation's water infrastructure are absolutely
necessary, and when coupled with a strong ``Buy American''
policy, can help drive our economic recovery. Increased funding
is crucial. Congress must also ensure that such public
investments have the maximum possible impact on the American
economy, creating and preserving U.S. manufacturing jobs.
These investments are maximized when they are tied to ``Buy
American'' preferences for U.S.-produced products such as the
American Iron and Steel preference policy applicable to the
Clean Water State Revolving Fund projects. When these laws
apply, there is increased demand for EJ's products and a
corresponding increase in demand of our suppliers and service
providers.
As for our hourly team workers, this means more take-home
pay to support their families and spend in their communities.
The absence of ``Buy American'' laws applied to Federal-aid
infrastructure spending diminishes the effectiveness of U.S.
regulatory policy. We must compete against foreign, state-
owned, or subsidized foundries that regularly flout
international trade laws, have no regard for worker safety, the
environment, or public health, and are not required to operate
by comparable regulatory standards.
This creates a significant competitive disadvantage for
American producers that has led to lost sales, closed plants,
lost tax revenues, and lost jobs. The American foundries that
have survived utilize state-of-the-art, energy-efficient
processes and pollution control systems. As a result, our
plants are among the safest and most environmentally sound in
the world.
American companies deserve a commonsense preference for
meeting, not avoiding, these standards, and for keeping jobs
here in the U.S. ``Buy America'' incentivizes companies like EJ
to make long-term investments in communities and workers across
the United States.
In the last two decades, EJ has made a number of
acquisitions and significant capital investments to reinvest in
our business and modernize our manufacturing capabilities.
Among our three largest capital investments in the U.S. are two
brandnew foundries.
In 2001, we commenced operations in the Ardmore, Oklahoma,
foundry. The $70 million greenfield investment was constructed
on a former U.S. military site and features state-of-the-art
environmental control technologies.
In 2019, we made another significant capital investment
when we constructed a new fabrication facility in Schroeppel,
New York. The $11 million facility was constructed using steel
produced by Nucor in New York State, and was built a short
distance from the site of a fabrication facility we acquired in
2012, allowing for the retention of all its skilled workforce.
After 135 years at its original location, in 2018, EJ
started operations at a new flagship foundry in East Jordan,
Michigan. A $140 million capital investment, the new foundry
features four electric melt furnaces, two molding lines, and
advanced automation and technology, and significantly reduced
our carbon footprint.
The existence of ``Buy America'' applied to Federal-aid
infrastructure spending was an important factor in our
decisions to proceed with these capital investments. I am here
to tell you that ``Buy America'' policies work, and EJ
investments in its U.S. manufacturing capacity are demonstrable
proof.
Thank you very much again for having me, giving me the
opportunity to testify today.
[Mr. Teske's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Tom Teske, Vice President and General Manager, EJ
Americas
Chairman DeFazio, Ranking Member Graves, Chairwoman Napolitano,
Ranking Member Rouzer and members of the subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about an issue vital to
our nation's health, economy and security. As we work to rebuild from
the COVID-19 pandemic, we must make long-overdue investments to
modernize and repair our nation's clean water infrastructure. If done
right, such investments can provide a much needed stimulus for the
American economy, truly building back better to the benefit of U.S.
workers, U.S. manufacturers and their supply chains, and communities
across the country.
My name is Tom Teske and I am Vice President and General Manager at
EJ Americas. EJ is the global leader in the design, manufacture, and
distribution of access solutions for the world's growing
infrastructure. Municipal castings produced by EJ Americas include
products critical to our nation's water and wastewater infrastructure,
such as hydrants, valves, manhole covers, ring and frames, curb inlets
and frames, and drainage gates. These products are all made from
recycled scrap metals that are melted, poured, finished, machined,
coated, and assembled exclusively in the United States.
EJ is a family owned company that has a long history of investing
in American workers and communities. The EJ legacy dates back five
generations to 1883 when our first manufacturing facility was built in
East Jordan, Michigan. Decades later, we are now a global enterprise
that spans six continents--promoting innovation, quality, and a
commitment to customer service. While our operations span the globe, we
remain dedicated to the U.S. market, and our U.S. employees remain the
heart and soul of our company. Notably, over the past two decades, EJ
has built three new manufacturing facilities in the United States,
including two modern iron foundries. These investments are major
commitments to our workers and communities that will endure for
generations to come. We are particularly proud of our new state-of-the-
art Syracuse Fabrication facility in Congressman Katko's district.
I would also like to highlight our employees' dedication during the
ongoing public health emergency. As an essential business, our
facilities have continued to produce and distribute products that are
critical to the infrastructure of our country, working closely with
public works departments nationwide to keep our water and sewer systems
running during this difficult time. We look forward to turning the
corner in the months ahead.
Today, as we discuss the importance of making long overdue
investments in our nation's water infrastructure, I will make three
main points:
1.  Robust and long-term investments in our nation's water
infrastructure are absolutely necessary and, when coupled with a strong
Buy America policy, can help drive our economic recovery.
2.  In addition to supporting our economy, Buy America helps ensure
that the products used in our nation's infrastructure are produced in
the safest and most environmentally-sound facilities in the world; in
short, it reaffirms our nation's commitment to public health, safety
and environmental safeguards.
3.  A strong Buy America preference applied to our nation's
infrastructure policy incentivizes companies like EJ to undertake major
and long-term capital investments in communities across the United
States; major R&D investments that drive the development state-of-the-
art manufacturing technology, processes and facilities; and major human
capital investments for generations to come.
Strong Buy America Policies Maximize the Economic Effects of
Infrastructure Investments
At the outset, I'd like to commend the Committee for proposing a
robust and long-term reauthorization of the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund (CWSRF) in its discussion draft of the Water Quality Protection
and Job Creation Act of 2021. In addition to addressing the tremendous
backlog of water infrastructure needs nationwide, enactment of a multi-
year bill will have a targeted economic stimulus impact, informing
manufacturers' forecasted demand, triggering investments in
manufacturing capacity, and spurring production and increased labor
hours. Building water infrastructure requires manufacturing capacity,
and manufacturers need market and funding certainty to support new
investments. These investments, in turn, create and preserve the good,
high-wage, family-supporting jobs necessary to manufacture these
products.
While increased funding is crucial, Congress should also seek to
ensure that these investments have the maximum possible impact on the
American economy, and that the hard-earned tax dollars paid by American
workers support the creation and preservation of American jobs.
Specifically, the economic impact of these investments in our nation's
clean water infrastructure is maximized when they are tied to
procurement preferences for U.S.-produced waterworks products. Such Buy
America policies include the ``American Iron and Steel'' preference
policy applicable to projects financed with capitalization grants
awarded through the CWSRF. These policies afford a commonsense
preference in taxpayer-financed procurements for iron and steel
products produced in the United States by U.S. workers.
But these Buy America policies are not universal. In fact, they are
limited to specific programs, like the CWSRF and to a limited scope of
waterworks infrastructure products, which in the case of the American
Iron and Steel policy, is a finite list of primarily iron or steel
products and construction materials, a mere fraction of the products
and materials incorporated into the nation's clean water
infrastructure. Where these laws are not expressly applied, foreign
suppliers have unfettered access to U.S. taxpayer spending and are able
to leverage their state subsidies, low labor costs, and unfair trading
practices to seize ever-greater shares of the U.S. market.
Unfortunately, such is the case for a number of programs proposed
to be reauthorized at significantly increased spending levels in the
Committee's discussion draft of the Water Quality Protection and Job
Creation Act. Under current law and the discussion draft, a project
receiving a federal grant from EPA to decouple a municipality's
combined stormwater and waste water system has no obligation to procure
U.S. produced waterworks products or even to consider them. Likewise, a
municipality receiving a grant for an alternative water source project
or a project to make their system more resilient need not comply with
any Buy America policies. EJ and other U.S. manufacturers are
disappointed that the Committee did not include in the discussion draft
the critical Buy America policy measures included in the version of the
bill reported by the Committee in the last Congress.
U.S. manufacturers and workers are accustomed to hearing broad
support for Buy America policies from policymakers. In fact, the policy
has figured prominently in each of the last two presidential campaigns.
In his pledge to ``Build Back Better,'' President Biden made ``Buy
America'' a core component of his economic recovery and revitalization
plan, stating that ``when we spend taxpayer money, we should buy
American products and support American jobs.'' President Biden recently
issued Executive Order 14005, Ensuring the Future is Made In All of
America by All of America's Workforce (Jan. 25, 2021), affirming his
administration's policy to ``use terms and conditions of Federal
financial assistance awards . . . to maximize the use of goods,
products, and materials produced in, and services offered in, the
United States,'' contemplating the manner in which Buy America
requirements are applied to federal assistance infrastructure spending
such as the programs proposed for reauthorized in the Committee's
discussion draft.
Likewise, the prior administration issued three executive orders
communicating support for and encouraging the application of Buy
America preferences in taxpayer spending on infrastructure, including
federal assistance infrastructure awards.
Yet for all of the public support from our policymakers, U.S.
manufacturers and workers are routinely forced to advocate for the
inclusion of ad hoc Buy America policies each and every time Congress
authorizes a new infrastructure program or reauthorizes one of the
litany of existing programs to which no domestic procurement preference
applies. Given their overwhelming support with policymakers and U.S.
voters, Buy America policies should be applied to federal assistance
infrastructure spending without exception, not as the exception.
Unfortunately, that is not the case. We look forward to working with
the Committee to ensure that the billions of U.S. tax dollars
authorized for these programs is expended prudently.
Government Procurement Policy Should Reflect Regulatory Policies
In the context of clean water infrastructure investments, the
absence of Buy America laws applied to federal-aid infrastructure
spending diminishes the effectiveness of U.S. regulatory policy,
particularly our environmental safeguards.
As discussed, Buy America laws create demand for domestically
produced goods, helping to sustain and grow domestic manufacturing and
the millions of jobs it supports. Significantly, domestic preference
programs also protect the environment. American foundries like EJ make
their products with state-of-the-art, energy-efficient processes and
pollution control systems. They invest significantly, at great cost, to
meet U.S. regulatory requirements. In meeting, and in many cases
exceeding, arguably the world's most exacting and effective
environmental, health and safety regulatory standards, our plants are
among the safest and most environmentally sound in the world.
By contrast, every day, U.S. producers must compete against foreign
foundries that do not comply with environmental protection laws
comparable to those with which U.S. manufacturers must comply. In fact,
the foreign-origin producers with whom U.S. foundries most often
compete are also the most polluting. Past analyses have found that a
typical foundry in China emits more than 20 times the particulate (9.4
lbs per ton versus 0.4 lbs per ton) and nearly 35 times the carbon
monoxide (149.4 lbs per ton versus 4.4 lbs per ton) than are emitted by
a typical U.S. foundry.
Further, China is the largest source of both sulfur dioxide (SO2)
and carbon dioxide (CO2) in the world. According to the Union of
Concerned Scientists, China accounts for more than a quarter of the
world's CO2 emissions.\1\ China's iron and steel industry now accounts
for as much CO2 emissions as the rest of the global iron and steel
industry combined. Each ton of iron castings produced in a Chinese
foundry generates two to three times more GHGs than a U.S. iron
foundry, and probably four to five times more if the additional GHG
impacts of producing iron from iron ore are considered. China's
pollution is so severe that it can affect communities thousands of
miles away. As one example, on smoggy days as much as 25% of the
particulate matter in the air over Los Angeles can be traced back to
China.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/each-countrys-share-co2-
emissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notably, the iron foundry industry is one of the largest recyclers
in North America. Approximately 85 percent of all materials used in
iron foundries is recycled. Annually, U.S. foundries melt millions of
tons of post-consumer scrap metal to make new, high-quality and long-
lasting finished castings. Moreover, ferrous scrap can be recovered
repeatedly--so in addition to containing as much as 98 percent recycled
content, the products themselves are 100 percent recyclable at the end
of their extensive useful lives.
In addition to the sustainability benefits of utilizing recycled
ferrous scrap, the U.S. foundry industry's modern and efficient
production processes result in dramatically lower greenhouse gas
emissions per ton when compared to many of our foreign competitors. For
instance, many ferrous foundries in other producing countries still use
pig iron as their primary raw material, resulting in up to 200% higher
greenhouse gas emissions per ton than castings produced using recycled
scrap metal.
Further, even when they do utilize recycled scrap, foundries in
countries such as China and India often use labor-intensive production
methods that result in higher scrap rates compared to U.S. plants.
Scrap rates measure the amount of cast product that is unsuitable for
market and destined for recycling as ferrous scrap feedstock to foundry
melting operations. Higher scrap rates translate to wasted energy and
increased emissions as production facilities must re-melt unused scrap.
With scrap rates as much as two-times higher, these foreign foundries
may emit 5% more greenhouse gases per ton than domestic foundries.
We must compete every day against foreign, state-owned or
subsidized foundries that regularly flout international trade laws,
have no regard for worker safety (or even age), the environment, or
public health, and are not required to operate by comparable regulatory
standards. This creates a significant cost and competitive disadvantage
for American producers, that has led to lost sales, closed plants, lost
tax revenues, and lost jobs.
U.S. environmental protection laws do not have extraterritorial
application. It does not further the intent of these laws to encourage
the off-shoring of manufacturing to the world's most polluting nations.
Strong domestic preference policies, on the other hand, can help reduce
the pollution associated with the manufacture of products necessary for
U.S. infrastructure projects and can ensure taxpayer dollars are
reinvested in America's companies and workers. American companies have
invested significantly to modernize their U.S. operations to meet
federal environmental and worker safety regulations. They deserve a
commonsense preference for meeting--not avoiding--these standards and
for keeping jobs here in the United States.
BA Laws Should Require a Strong Origin Standard
Buy America laws encourage capital investment, research and
development, and job retention and creation in the United States. These
benefits are maximized when strong standards are set for determining a
product's origin. When Buy American laws apply to upstream inputs they
ensures that the economic benefits of government spending are reaped by
an entire supply chain, not merely at the final stage of manufacturing.
In recent years, opponents of Buy America policies have sought,
where these laws apply, to weaken their origin standards, urging a
standard based on the final state of processing. Such standards
eviscerate the benefits of Buy America laws for upstream domestic
material inputs and the manufacturers and workers that produce them.
They also would rob the communities in which these business operate of
the indirect economic impact of the taxpayer finance spending on public
works.
To synthesize the value of Buy America laws with robust origin
standards consider: When these laws apply EJ must source all of its
inputs from U.S. manufacturers, be it EJ itself, another iron foundry
or a steel mill. When there is increased demand for EJ's products,
there is a corresponding increase in demand of our suppliers and
service providers. As our productivity increases, so too does our
capacity utilization, meaning, among other things, that we consume more
labor hours.
And for EJ's hourly team members, that means more take home pay to
support their families and spend in their communities.
Weakened or simply no Buy American origin requirements miss the
multiplier effect of taxpayer-financed spending, resulting in lost
opportunity and forsaken economic return.
The EJ Story: A Commitment to the United States
In the last two decades, EJ has made a number of acquisitions and,
importantly, significant capital investments, to reinvest in our
business and modernize our manufacturing capabilities. Among our three
largest capital investments in the United States during that time, two
were brand new foundries.
In 2001, EJ commenced operations at its Ardmore, Oklahoma foundry.
The $70,000,000 greenfield investment was constructed on a former
military site and features state-of-the-art environmental control
technology. Its 190,000 square feet of manufacturing space is dedicated
to the production of EJ's municipal castings.
After acquiring the assets of Syracuse Castings in 2012, EJ made
another significant capital investment when it constructed a wholly new
fabrication facility in Schroeppel, New York, which opened 2019. The
new fabrication facility, an $11 million capital investment, was
constructed utilizing steel produced by Nucor in New York State which
it also uses as the feedstock for its fabricated products, such as
access hatches. The new facility was constructed a short distance from
the original Syracuse Castings operation, allowing for the retention of
all of its skilled workforce.
After 135 years at its original location, in 2018 EJ commenced
operations at its new flagship foundry in Northern Michigan. The new
state-of-the-art foundry spans more than 7.5 acres under one roof and
sits on a 200 acres site. A capital investment in excess of $140
million dollars, the new foundry features four electric melt furnaces,
two molding lines, and advanced automation and technology. Constructed
a mere 14 miles from EJ's original East Jordan, Michigan location, the
proximity of the new foundry allowed EJ to retain all of its employees
and its commitment to manufacturing in Northern Michigan.
As members of the Committee contemplate the reauthorization of the
clean water programs, it is important you understand that the existence
of ``Buy America'' applied to federal-aid infrastructure spending was
an important factor in EJ's decisions to proceed with these capital
investments in the United States. I'm here to tell you that Buy America
policies work and EJ's investments in its U.S. manufacturing capacity
is demonstrable proof.
On behalf of EJ and our employees, thank you for giving me the
opportunity to testify today and thank you for your continued
commitment to the U.S. manufacturing sector.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much, Mr. Teske, for your
testimony.
We will proceed on to Ms. Coley. You may proceed.
Ms. Coley. Thank you, Madam Chair Napolitano and the
ranking members and Chairman DeFazio for inviting me to testify
to this committee. My name is Brenda Coley, and I am the co-
executive director of Milwaukee Water Commons, a cross-city
network that fosters connection, collaboration, and broad
community leadership on behalf of our common waters. We promote
stewardship of equitable access to and shared decisionmaking
regarding water.
In our view, people will value water infrastructure when
they do not have to think about it. But for many Milwaukeeans,
water infrastructure comes to their attention when it poses
risks to their health and environment. There is an urgent need
for infrastructure investments across the Nation and for
Federal leadership to equitably fund the repair of water
infrastructure. Our delay in addressing the need to replace
aging water infrastructure contributes to ongoing economic,
environmental, and public health crises.
Milwaukee's Kinnickinnic River watershed is an example
where historic approaches on managing water have fostered
community vulnerability. In Milwaukee's South Side, a
predominately Latinx community, historical decisions to move
stormwater out of dense, low-lying neighborhoods have resulted
in land cover that is mostly impervious, including large
sections of the river that flow through underground tunnels or
concrete channels.
Infiltration between wastewater and stormwater systems in
the KK River watershed leaks human sewage directly into the
river and ultimately into the Great Lakes. The removal of
concrete, river naturalization, and installation of green
infrastructure could benefit public health by reducing the
urban heat island effect, preventing neighborhood flooding and
flash floods, restoring natural ecosystems, and filtering water
where it falls to reduce the load of bacteria and other
contaminants in the river. Despite this urgent need and local
expertise to develop these solutions, the cost of concrete
removal is so great that it is unrealistic to expect locally
funded action to remediate this blatant environment injustice.
Racial and economic inequities are embedded in the history
of how we funded water infrastructure in this country. Let me
trace a portion of that history for you.
Drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater systems were
built in major cities like Milwaukee during the early to mid-
1900s. Over the latter half of the 20th century, there was a
massive buildout of water infrastructure into the suburbs. This
was paid for by, number one, substantial Federal funding via
grants and urban water ratepayers.
At the same time that the expansion of water infrastructure
supported the flight of White residents to the suburbs,
redlining and other racist housing policies limited where Black
families could live. Living-wage jobs spread to the suburbs as
well.
Today the water infrastructure for Metropolitan Milwaukee
is built on a backbone of Milwaukee's water systems.
Milwaukee's water purification system provides drinkable water
for the suburbs, and its water treatment plants process their
wastewater.
But the pipes and other infrastructure connecting these
systems is newer in the suburbs and older in the city. In the
city, our water systems are 50 to 100 years old. Following
these demographics and economic shifts, the system for
financing water infrastructure changed, too.
The share of infrastructure needs covered by Federal
funding has gone way down, from 63 percent in 1977 to 9 percent
in 2014. Most of the Federal funds provided today are as loans,
and the money to repay these loans comes from water ratepayers.
Because water utilities are reluctant to raise rates to
unaffordable levels, infrastructure needs go unmet.
It is not enough to write a check funding water
infrastructure challenges, but should also hold recipients to
be intentional about workforce equity and community benefits.
In 2018, Milwaukee Water Commons facilitated one of seven water
equity task force groups piloted by the U.S. Water Alliance
across the country. In Milwaukee, the task force is a cross-
section of the partnership between water utilities,
environmental nonprofits, and educational and workforce
development organizations.
Based on that process, we recommend that legislation to
fund water infrastructure investments should require recipients
to track and report on the diversity of the workforce and of
contractors and subcontractors, report on policies and
practices aimed at workforce equity, and report how funded
programs address environmental justice.
We also recommend Federal investments in water
infrastructure should include procurement preferences and
projects with an additional commitment to establishing
community benefits.
In closing, your legislation appropriation funding for
water should achieve three things: shift away from loans
towards Federal grants, restore the amount of Federal funding
for water infrastructure to levels provided in the mid-20th
century, and prioritize grant funding for utilities serving
racially and economically segregated urban communities to
redress racial and economic inequalities embedded in the
history.
Lastly, my hope, from a community perspective, is that
public water systems be understood as a public good and service
that assures safe, clean, affordable water for all; protects
our natural waters; and protects us against the threats from
climate change, and that they must be paid for accordingly as a
shared public good. Thank you very much.
[Ms. Coley's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Brenda Coley, Co-Executive Director, Milwaukee
Water Commons
Milwaukee Water Commons is a cross-city network that fosters
connection, collaboration and broad community leadership on behalf of
our common waters. We promote stewardship of, equitable access to and
shared decision-making for our common waters. We advocate on
environmental justice, climate justice, economic justice and social
justice locally in Milwaukee, in Wisconsin and the Great Lakes region,
and nationally. Milwaukee Water Commons works under four organizing
frameworks: collective impact, the commons, environmental justice, and
community engagement. We believe environmental work--and, more broadly,
work to support healthy communities--has the greatest impact when it
adopts an intersectional approach. By that we mean that we must
inclusively consider the connections between social and environmental
systems, recognizing that vulnerability is often experienced as
multiple compounding challenges that cannot be separated. To arrive at
justice these challenges must be addressed simultaneously.
Water Infrastructure is an Environmental Justice Issue
``Milwaukee'' is a settler variation of the Anishinaabemowin word
minowaki, which means ``good land.'' The city of Milwaukee sits at the
confluence of the Milwaukee, Menomonee, and Kinnickinnic rivers and
along the shores of Lake Michigan. Water is foundational to the city,
and the lives of the many people who have lived here have been rooted
in water. Indeed, Milwaukee is globally recognized as a water-centric
city.
Milwaukee also has the unwanted reputation of being America's most
segregated city, and one of the worst places to live as an African
American. In Milwaukee we suffer from compounding systemic disparities
in incarceration, educational attainment, income and employment, public
health, access to transportation, and access to a healthy environment.
Segregation is a prominent part of Milwaukee's history and, through
systemic marginalization, segregation actively produces barriers that
prevent vulnerable communities from fully accessing and enjoying the
opportunities Milwaukee has to offer, including in relation to its
waters and its water sector.
The US Water Alliance defines vulnerable communities as communities
that face, ``historical and/or contemporary barriers to economic and
social opportunities and a healthy environment, with some key factors
being income, race or ethnicity, age, language ability, and geographic
location. Vulnerable communities may include low-income persons,
certain communities of color, immigrants, seniors, children, persons
with disabilities, persons living in public housing, and currently or
formerly incarcerated persons.
Often it is Milwaukee's vulnerable communities that bear the brunt
of environmental risks through no fault of their own. Rather, these
risks are rooted in compounding systemic disparities that have
marginalized these communities from the benefits of a healthy
environment. Environmental Justice is an outcome, where a healthy
environment and wellness are respected as a human right for all people
and future generations regardless of identity. Ethical issues of
justice arise when people, communities, or regions are subject to
greater environmental degradation, excluded from a healthy environment,
or disconnected from the process of shaping their environment.
Environmental justice links environmental sustainability with social
justice, to ensure that no population, community, or individual is
subjected to bear a disproportionate burden of environmental risks.
Milwaukee Water Commons describes environmental justice as having two
parts: (1) creating access to the benefits of the environment and (2)
overcoming the risks associated with an unhealthy environment.
People value water infrastructure when they don't have to think
about water infrastructure. But for many Milwaukeeans, water
infrastructure comes to their attention when it poses risks to their
health and environment. For example, despite historical efforts to
manage stormwater, many Milwaukeeans associate major storm events with
basement backups and combined sewage overflows that dump wastewater
into Lake Michigan. Due to Milwaukee's extreme segregation, and a
legacy of negative water experiences connected to drinking water, storm
water, waste water, and public water spaces it is not uncommon for
residents in this ``water-centric city'' to have a negative
relationship or no relationship with Milwaukee's three rivers or Lake
Michigan.
Milwaukee Water Commons offers the following written testimony to
the House Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment to bring an environmental justice lens to the
water infrastructure funding decisions being considered for in relation
to the Water Quality Protection and Job Creation Act of 2021. These
comments are deeply rooted in our experience in Milwaukee over the past
nine years working closely with community-based organizations
representing vulnerable communities as well as with institutions and
organizations focused on workforce development, other environmental and
equity advocates, local water utilities, and state and local
policymakers and community leaders.
In the sections that follow, we describe the urgent need for
federal funding for water infrastructure; trace the history of how
water infrastructure has been funded over past decades, and the racial
and economic inequities embedded in this history and consequent
inequitable burdens placed on vulnerable urban communities in dire need
of extensive repair and upgrades to aging wastewater and stormwater
management systems to protect their health and their environment. We
call for a substantial shift away from funding through loans that would
ultimately need to be repaid by residential water ratepayers in these
communities towards a return to the levels of federal grant support for
water infrastructure provided during the mid-20th century. Federal
grant funds should be prioritized for vulnerable communities to redress
historic inequities in how the burden of financing water infrastructure
has been distributed. We also point to inequities in the water sector
workforce, and suggest concrete ways in which federal leadership can
spur local actions to ensure that the living-wage jobs generated by
federal investments in water infrastructure are equitably distributed.
Equitable Investment in Water Infrastructure is Urgently Needed
Across the nation there is an urgent need for federal leadership to
equitably fund the repair and enhancement of water infrastructure. Our
delay in addressing the need to replace aging water infrastructure with
more adaptive and resilient water management contributes to ongoing
economic and public health crises around our nation. In Wisconsin, the
climate crisis has been hard hitting: major storms have washed out
bridges cutting off transportation around the Chequamegon Bay, caused
floods and basement backups on Milwaukee's northwest side, and all
around the state have led to major sewage overflows into the Great
Lakes (the source of drinking water for millions of Americans).
According to the Governor's Task Force on Climate Change, between the
year 2000 and 2020 there were 19 severe storms along with two flood-
related and six drought-related disasters resulting in around $100
billion in impacts. Water infrastructure repair and enhancement is
getting more expensive by the day, and the cost for communities is
immeasurable.
Utilities and institutions in Wisconsin are struggling to
adaptively manage water infrastructure in the face of the climate
crisis and new emerging contaminants such as PFAS. These challenges
require consistent modeling and monitoring of existing infrastructure,
transitions to more sustainable green infrastructure, and investments
in innovative technologies and training to prepare workers to manage
emerging threats to public and environmental health.
Milwaukee's deteriorating grey stormwater and wastewater
infrastructure have a direct impact on water quality and community
health. For example, it has been verified that infiltration between
leaks in these systems results in human sewage entering our river
systems at a majority of stormwater outfalls in the Kinnickinnic and
Menomonee River Watersheds. These infiltrations along with sewage
overflows caused during major rain events, can make days on the river
or beach unappealing, and make swimming in Milwaukee's water ways an
unheard of extreme. Though Milwaukeeans used to frequently swim in
Milwaukee's rivers before the 1930's, due to legacy contamination,
swimming in the Milwaukee river was unheard of until Milwaukee Water
Commons piloted the Cream City Classic in 2018, an open water swim
event that advocates for safe water spaces for all of Milwaukee's
residents. Despite generations of investments put into river
restoration, with remarkable impact, safely swimming in the Milwaukee
River requires at least two full weeks of no precipitation, constant
water quality monitoring, and a swimming location near the mouth of the
river that is diluted by water from Lake Michigan.
On Milwaukee's south side, a predominately Latinx community,
historical decisions to move stormwater out of dense, low-lying
neighborhoods have resulted in land cover that is mostly impervious,
including large sections of the Kinnickinnic River that flow through
underground tunnels or concrete channels. During low flow, the river
has almost no current, no habitat for natural ecosystems, and extremely
high levels of fecal coliform. During large storms, the river moves
faster than whitewater rapids, resulting in multiple drownings and near
drownings over the years. Green infrastructure could have profound
benefits on neighborhood health, stormwater retention and flooding.
Because of the required concrete removal, however, the re-
naturalization of Milwaukee's channelized Kinnickinnic River has a high
price tag.
Investments in green infrastructure can yield community benefits
that are multidimensional. For example, stormwater trees are a unique
infrastructure that can be utilized in smaller green spaces to manage
precipitation where it falls over a large area. When strategically
planted and maintained, trees can also contribute to other economic and
public health priorities. Trees impact respiratory and cardiovascular
health, can eliminate urban heat islands, create access to fresh food,
create habitat for wildlife, reduce energy costs, and their maintenance
can create long term employment opportunities. In addition, tree
planting and other green infrastructure implementation can support
local environmental priorities while also fostering neighborhood
placemaking. These needs and benefits are analyzed and documented in
the Branch Out Milwaukee Master Plan, which also outlines the steps
needed for a broad campaign to equitably replenish Milwaukee's tree
canopy, led by Milwaukee Water Commons together with a partnership of
30+ municipal and community organizations. The inequitable distribution
of tree canopy in urban areas, and the lack of resources to manage
trees and other green infrastructure, is an often-overlooked
environmental justice crisis.
Water has a profound potential to connect communities around
Milwaukee, and equitable investments in addressing water challenges
provide substantial, valuable impacts. We have seen this play out
through federal grant programs like the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative which has bipartisan support in communities throughout
Wisconsin and the Great Lakes region. In Milwaukee, these funding
opportunities don't only produce environmental benefits; when done well
they build relationships across communities, benefit public health, and
generate employment opportunities.
The story of water infrastructure funding reflects broader patterns of
racial and socioeconomic inequity that must be recognized and
remedied.
During the mid-20th century, a period of substantial development
and expansion of water infrastructure systems in the United States,
federal grants provided the major source of funding for water
infrastructure. In 1977, federal funding provided 63 percent of funding
for water infrastructure; by 2014 this had fallen to nine percent. To
the extent that federal taxpayers still pay for wastewater and
stormwater infrastructure, a major portion of these funds flow through
the Clean Water State Revolving Loan Fund (CWSRF) program created in
1987.
Federal funding for state CWSRFs provides only a very small portion
of the investment needed to address the country's water infrastructure
needs, however. For example, according to the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's latest Clean Water Needs Survey, the EPA estimated
that Wisconsin needed approximately $316.5 million per year over the
next 20 years to meet the state's clean water infrastructure needs, but
Congressional appropriations to Wisconsin's CWSRF have averaged around
$39.5 million per year during 2013-2020--about 12.5 percent of
Wisconsin's assessed need. Nevertheless, SRFs are currently one of the
primary tools available for financing water infrastructure.
Because the vast majority of these funds are provided to local
communities as loans rather than grants, local water ratepayers
ultimately bear the burden of repaying these loans. Raising rates to
levels required to repay all of the funds necessary to address existing
water infrastructure needs would render water rates unaffordable.
Reluctant to raise water rates and without other funding options,
utilities instead postpone making urgent water infrastructure repairs
and upgrades. As noted above, however, continued failure to repair and
enhance failing and outdated water infrastructure strains the public
health of our communities as well as the environmental health of our
waterways and ultimately leads to compounding problems resulting in
even greater expense. This is particularly true for vulnerable
communities that typically face the most urgent infrastructure needs
but have the least ability to bear their cost. One example is in the
Kinnickinnic River Watershed, as referenced earlier, where the removal
of concrete, river naturalization, and installation of green
infrastructure could benefit public health by reducing the urban heat
island effect, preventing neighborhood flooding and flash floods,
restoring natural ecosystems, and filtering water where it falls to
reduce the loading of bacteria and other contaminants cited in Total
Maximum Daily Load requirements of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources. Despite the urgent need, and local expertise, to develop
these solutions, the cost of concrete removal is so great that it is
unrealistic to expect urgent changes or locally funded action to
remediate this blatant environmental injustice.
The inequities of current water infrastructure funding and
financing mechanisms become even more apparent when we look more
closely at the history of how water infrastructure has been funded--and
how the costs of funding water infrastructure have been distributed--
over the past century. During the 20th century, small and large cities
and towns benefited from extensive federal investments in public water
systems. The late 20th century push for disinvestment in urban centers
in support of suburban sprawl (later extended to exurban sprawl), and
the tendency to construe collectively created problems as the fault of
individuals and communities who are, in fact, victims rather than
perpetrators of structural problems, are central to understanding the
current water infrastructure funding crisis. This scapegoating is a
hallmark of how power obscures the structures through which it serves
and perpetuates itself, and it is the rhetorical and political linchpin
that hampers broad public understanding of this decades-long crisis.
The fiscal pressures created by deindustrialization, regressive tax
policy, and federal disinvestment, risky debt financing, mass
incarceration, and drastic cuts to revenue sharing at the state level
shifted the financial burden of maintaining aging water systems in
major urban centers to the water ratepayers that remained in these
centers following the white flight facilitated by systemically racist
housing and employment factors. These factors include the racial
inequality of labor unions and racially disparate federal financial
support for home mortgages and opportunities to move to areas with
richer opportunity networks. In short, racial discrimination in hiring
practices and housing policies locked Black residents into specific
neighborhoods and cities.
At the same time as Black and lower-income residents were left
behind in older parts of cities suffering the devastating economic
downturn of deindustrialization, city water systems were extended to
serve the expanding suburbs and exurbs. Not only was this expansion key
to enabling white flight, but it was paid for not only by federal
grants for water infrastructure (which remained at high levels through
the 70s, 80s, and 90s when these economic and demographic shifts
transpired) but also by the urban water ratepayers who were themselves
left behind with water systems built several decades earlier and
increasingly in need of repair and upgrades. Even as these needs grew
more pressing, however, the mechanisms through which water
infrastructure is funded and financed also shifted dramatically, from
federal grants and state cost-sharing to placing responsibility for
maintaining, repairing, and upgrading water infrastructure on each
locality's water rate payers. As explained above, even to the extent
that federal funds were still expended towards water infrastructure,
this was increasing in the form of loans issued through the state
revolving funds and ultimately repaid by local ratepayers.
Thus, urban (largely Black and low-income) water rate payers
essentially subsidized white flight during an era of cost-sharing
across states and metropolitan regional water systems, and then were
subsequently stuck with the bill for upgrading failing, outdated water
systems that severely threaten their public and environmental health
and economic security. Detroit provides one of the starkest and best-
documented examples of this narrative, but it is a story that is
replicated in most major American cities, particularly in the post-
industrial Midwest.
Although racism may not be the explicitly stated driver of state
and municipal policies today, racist inequity is baked into the way the
system functions. Without directly recognizing and remedying these
lingering legacies, we will continue to see racially and economically
disparate outcomes.
Today, it is local ratepayers who, for the most part, bear the
burden of financing the assessment, operation, and maintenance of water
infrastructure with far fewer state and federal subsidies. This
overreliance on ratepayers compounds other existing inequities. The
inability of vulnerable communities to pay for much-needed
infrastructure maintenance and upgrades means their needs remain unmet,
subjecting these already-vulnerable communities to greater risks of
water insecurity and related health, social, and economic impacts.
The current approach is also unsustainable for water utilities who
are forced to increase water rates to pay for water infrastructure
projects. The COVID 19 crisis and its economic fallout have cast a
spotlight on the tragic circumstances of households whose water has
been shut off due to inability to pay soaring water bills. Water rates
may still be manageable for a majority of ratepayers, including in
Milwaukee where, thankfully, utility policies do not favor shutting off
water to vulnerable households. Under a business-as-usual trajectory,
however, water rates are expected to increase sharply throughout the
country, driven in large part by the need to maintain and upgrade water
infrastructure which has fallen into disrepair.
We rely on water infrastructure--drinking water, wastewater, and
stormwater management systems--to protect our natural waters and ensure
access to clean, safe water for drinking, bathing, and recreation. But
the vulnerability of our aging and outdated infrastructure, compounded
by additional strains on these systems due to climate change, means
that even in water-abundant places like the Great Lakes region,
communities face the threat of water insecurity.
To address this threat, we need to recalibrate our approach to
paying for water infrastructure, to ease the burden currently placed on
residential ratepayers and municipal water utilities. Financing and
funding wastewater and stormwater management systems must shift from
primary reliance on overburdened residential ratepayers to an
integrated approach that includes sources of revenues that are more
equitable and reliable. As was the case in the mid-20th century, when
much of the state's water infrastructure systems were built, federal
grants are needed to support these needs. This transition is essential
not only to ensure equitable outcomes for vulnerable communities, but
also to enable public water systems to become financially,
structurally, and operationally resilient, reliable, and sustainable.
Solving the complex, challenging, intrinsically connected problems
of inequity, water insecurity, and water infrastructure funding will
entail more than throwing more money at the dual problems of
deteriorating water infrastructure and water affordability. We also
need to critique and reform how we think about water infrastructure and
the essential role it plays in supporting our individual and collective
public health and wellbeing, social coherence and social stability, and
our shared prosperity. How we pay for water infrastructure should be
guided by these key principles:

Public water systems must be understood as a public good
and service that assures safe, clean, and affordable water for all.
Water infrastructure is more than an assemblage of pipes, treatment
plants, bioswales, cisterns, and other physical assets. These assets
must be understood in terms of the water services they are meant to
provide, and the communities of people they are meant to serve.

Inequity, infrastructure funding problems, and the threat
of water insecurity are intrinsically linked. The failure to adequately
fund water infrastructure as well as the social, health, environmental,
and economic inequities experienced by vulnerable communities' stem
from the decoupling of water infrastructure and equity values.

Public Trust principles provide a framework to reorient
our understanding of human-built water systems, and how we should pay
for them, by recoupling water infrastructure and equity. Water is a
public commons. Our drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater
management systems exist to protect and deliver safe, clean water for
hydration, sustenance, bathing, and health--the same uses that are
protected under the deeply rooted principles of Wisconsin common law
and the common law of all the States, as well as the common nature of
water under the public trust doctrine that underpins our water
governance. We should understand that our human-built water
infrastructure exists to fulfill the public trust in water by making
water available for our needs in our 21st century context--in other
words, a modern-day iteration of the classic, public-trust duty to
safely steward waters for the benefit of communities' sustenance,
health, and livelihoods.

In line with these principles and the need to recognize and redress
the inequities demonstrated by current water infrastructure funding
mechanisms, we recommend that federal funding for water infrastructure
be dramatically increased to approximate the levels of federal grant
funding provided in the mid-20th century and, moreover, that federal
funding shift away from the provision of rate-payer reimbursed loans
toward greater provision of grants, particularly for vulnerable
communities.
Federal Leadership Can Spur Local Partnerships to Address Inequities in
the Water Sector Workforce
In 2018 Milwaukee Water Commons began facilitating one of seven
Water Equity Task Force groups piloted by the US Water Alliance in
cities across the country. In Milwaukee, the Water Equity Task Force is
a cross-sector partnership between water utilities, environmental
nonprofits and community-based organizations, educational institutions,
and workforce development organizations. The Task Force focused on
establishing greater access to living wage employment in Milwaukee's
water sector, recognizing that even with fewer requirements for
advanced degrees and the promise of jobs, Milwaukee's water sector did
not represent the diversity of our city despite Milwaukee's employment
disparities. The outcomes of our work lead to the production of two
reports: (1) the UWM Center for Economic Development's, Water Needs
Assessment: Pathways to Employment in a Water Centric City, which
assessed the employment in Milwaukee's existing water sector and
barriers/pathways to employment for Milwaukee residents and (2) the
Milwaukee Water Equity Roadmap, which makes recommendations on how
stakeholders from around Milwaukee can lean into establishing a more
equitable water workforce.
In a 2018 report, Renewing the Water Workforce, the Brookings
Institute determined that in 2016 around 1.7 million workers in 212
different occupations were directly involved in designing,
constructing, operating and governing US water infrastructure. We
generally think of the water sector--including stormwater, wastewater,
natural, and drinking water infrastructure--as a catalyst for
supporting our country's water economy, which includes a larger set of
industries such as tourism, service, recreation, and fishing. All of
these industries rely on benefits from sustainably managed water
systems and stewardship of our communities' relationships with water.
Notably, the Healing Our Waters Coalition projected that for every
dollar spent on Great Lakes restoration there is a three-dollar
economic return in the Great Lakes region.
Water jobs are also more likely to be living-wage jobs, relative to
the economy as a whole. The Brookings Institute also determined that
water occupations around the country pay more on average compared to
all national occupations, and also pay up to 50 percent more to workers
at the lower 10th-25th percentile of the income scale. Most employment
opportunities in Milwaukee's water sector provide living wages and tend
to have minimal educational barriers to entry because many incorporate
on-the-job trainings. In Milwaukee in 2017, average wages for entry-
level positions across the water sector were $22,140 but could range as
high as $51,220. Median wages for all occupations averaged at $38,670,
but could range as high as $81,700 for specific professions.
Investments in resilient and sustainable water infrastructure also
have profound benefits for public and environmental health, in addition
to spurring employment opportunities and developing more economically
sustainable communities. In particular, the need or skilled maintenance
of green infrastructure to address stormwater concerns establishes
long-term employment opportunities as a critical component of resilient
water management, trades such as green infrastructure construction and
maintenance should demand larger wages.
Milwaukee's Water Equity Task Force found that water sector
employers around the Greater Milwaukee Area expressed growing concern
about the age of the water workforce and looming retirements, technical
training needs associated with increasing technology in water-related
occupations, and decreases in federal funding for infrastructure. Water
sector employers and members of the Milwaukee Water Equity Task Force
also expressed concerns about the lack of visibility for water sector
employment, and a lack of diversity in water sector professions. These
concerns are echoed nationally in the Brookings Institute's 2018 study
which found that on average water workers are older than the national
median, and that in 2016 nearly 85% of water workers were male and two-
thirds were white. In some cases, in Milwaukee and surrounding
counties, among professions associated with Milwaukee's Water Sector
such as pipelayers, plumbers, pipefitters, and steamfitters, 85-100%
dominated by white males.
At the same time, in Milwaukee the unemployment rate for African
Americans is more than three times that of white residents. The average
household income in Milwaukee was approximately $28,000 for African
American residents, $34,000 for Latinx residents, and $53,000 for white
residents in 2019. Barriers to employment such as transportation
challenges disproportionately impact communities of color, 27 percent
of African American household's lack access to a car, compared with 11
percent of white households. In Milwaukee, slightly more than one-fifth
of Latinx households are considered ``limited English speaking.'' In
2020, 38 percent of jobs in the city of Milwaukee require at least a
high school diploma, 62 percent require some level of training after
high school, and 39 percent require an associate degree or higher.
Among Milwaukee residents aged 25 or older, 18 percent have less than a
high school diploma, but their distribution is not uniform across
racial and ethnic groups. In 2015, six percent of the city's white
population had less than a high school diploma, as compared to 18
percent of the African American population, 28 percent of the Latinx
US-born population, and 55 percent of the Latinx immigrant population.
Residents with some level of training after high school comprised 67
percent of the city's white population, 48 percent of the African
American population, 42 percent of the Latinx US-born population, and
15 percent of the Latinx immigrant population.
The challenges creating vulnerability in Milwaukee's communities
are systemic, and require intention to decipher and dismantle. It is
not enough to advertise employment opportunities to a more diverse
group of individuals recognizing that communities of color in Milwaukee
do not have the same access to education and training, to reliable
transportation, and to other services that make these jobs accessible
to white residents. Through collaboration, and with time, the Milwaukee
Water Equity Task Force was able to build trust and understanding to
form recommendations that begin to interrupt these challenges. What we
learned is that our approaches need to address compounding, complex
problems experienced by vulnerable communities, and they need to be
informed and supported by community leadership. Folks living in
neighborhoods around Milwaukee understood these challenges before we
measured the employment statistics, and it is likely that many
solutions to community vulnerability around the country will be found
through collaboration between water sector employers and local
communities.
Funding to address water infrastructure challenges should hold
recipients accountable to forge positive change, and to be intentional
about workforce equity and community benefits. It is important that the
decision makers leading on infrastructure repair in our communities are
considering the impact of their existing workplace policies and
practices, and financing community benefits through their procurements
with contractors. These elements should not be construed as add-ons to
infrastructure financing. Rather, they must be understood as
investments in overcoming nationwide segregation and marginalization
from wealth building, environmental health, and public health. Urging
this approach at a federal level will influence innovation among water
sector employers, and change the way that our communities relate with
the water sector.
We recommend that legislation to fund water infrastructure
investments should require recipients to track and report the impact
that this funding is having on vulnerable communities around the
nation. This means tracking and reporting on workforce diversity and
the diversity of contractors/subcontractors, policies and practices
aimed at fostering workforce equity, and how funded programs address
environmental injustice. This reporting could be done through the
Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Environmental Justice and
should show measured contributions to both federal and local plans to
address environmental and economic justice concerns. To establish more
institutional accountability and coordination, the Milwaukee Water
Equity Roadmap has made specific recommendations regarding the
importance of tracking water jobs under a singular employment sector
recognized by regional workforce centers. To the extent that tracking
employment statistics for water infrastructure investments might aid in
developing an understanding of positions that fall within our nation's
water sector, and ways to leverage additional programs to increase the
economic impact of investing in the growth of this sector, we recommend
that the US EPA should work with the Bureau of Labor Statistics to
establish specific tracking of America's water sector.
We recommend that guidance on federal infrastructure funding
strongly advocate for local cross-sector coalition building, especially
with neighborhood organizations, nonprofit organizations, workforce
development organizations, and community resource organizations.
Overcoming the barriers of segregation to ensure equitable impact of
these funds will require intersectional analysis and cross-sector
leadership. Further leveraging work happening locally and across
sectors to address compounding systemic challenges, will deepen the
impact of these funds on our nation's most vulnerable communities.
We also recommend that federal investments in water infrastructure
should include procurement preferences for projects with an additional
commitment to establishing community benefits agreements. Community
benefits models have been piloted with great success by utilities
around the country such as in Louisville KY and San Francisco CA.
Community benefit agreements deepen relationships between water
utilities and the communities they serve, while also bolstering the
impact that infrastructure investments have on priorities at a
neighborhood level. Community benefits could take the form of
investments in wrap around services, working with community resource
organizations and workforce development organizations to leverage
existing federal, state and local programs to support job seekers that
face additional barriers to employment. Other possibilities include
support for transitional jobs programs and young/emerging entrepreneurs
without the wealth or experience to navigate existing procurement
policies or set-aside financing to support the development of community
spaces establishing access to a healthy environment and building on the
social determinants of health in neighborhoods struggling to overcome
legacy pollution.
The examples and recommendations in this report are meant to make a
case for the urgent need for federal infrastructure funding, and the
key role that infrastructure financing must play in addressing
environmental justice concerns around the country. Though many
communities, including those in Milwaukee, are increasingly dealing
with vulnerability caused by outdated infrastructure, there is a lack
of urgency and equity demonstrated by both the insufficient levels of
federal funding appropriated and how federal funding has been used to
alleviate this vulnerability. Here we offer three key takeaways on how
increased federal funding for the Clean Water State Revolving Fund
could have an impact on these issues:
1.  Funding for water infrastructure must prioritize and greatly
increase the amounts of infrastructure funding that is received as
grant funding and prioritize water infrastructure grants for vulnerable
communities.
2.  To stimulate equitable economic impacts from these investments,
there is a need for more equitable workforce policies and practices.
Improved policies and practices should be encouraged by federal
guidelines for tracking workforce diversity, strategies for developing
a more equitable workforce, and how dollars are contributing to
alleviating environmental injustice.
3.  To spur local collaboration and maximize impacts, federal
investments in water infrastructure should be tied to procurement
requirements that include community benefits agreements.

Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Ms. Coley.
And now we will proceed to Mr. Mallino. Mr. Mallino, you
may go.
Mr. Mallino. Thank you, Chairwoman Napolitano, Ranking
Member Rouzer, and members of the committee for inviting me to
testify before you today. My name is David Mallino, and I am
here on behalf of the Laborers' International Union of North
America, LIUNA.
LIUNA members are engaged daily in efforts to build and
maintain our Nation's vital physical infrastructure, the things
that we use so often that we do not pay any attention to them
until something fails--a bridge, a tunnel, the electricity
grid, water systems. The programs under this committee's
jurisdiction provide family-sustaining work for LIUNA members,
who are actually building the infrastructure systems that make
our daily lives possible and keep the wheels of commerce
moving.
The topic of today's hearing is both timely and important.
Properly constructed and maintained wastewater treatment
systems are the most basic and critical infrastructure systems
for protecting public health and the environment. According to
EPA's most recent needs survey, which was released nearly 10
years ago, communities have documented at least $271 billion of
investment over the next 20 years to bring their systems to a
state of good repair. I imagine the current need is likely
higher.
Existing infrastructure is aging, and critical failures are
increasing at a rapid rate, and in desperate need of repair and
replacement. Wastewater infrastructure must also become more
resilient to the impacts of climate change, including sea level
rise, stronger and more frequent storms, and flooding. Much of
our Nation's water infrastructure piping was put in the ground
over 50 years ago, and many communities have failing pipes that
are over 100 years old.
Additional funding dedicated specifically to the
replacement of failing wastewater and drinking water pipes
should be authorized. LIUNA supports increasing the
authorization levels for the Clean Water SRF to help ensure a
stable funding source, particularly for wastewater
infrastructure needs.
Unfortunately, America's infrastructure needs
disproportionately impact economically disadvantaged
communities across the Nation. More than 2 million people do
not have access to high-quality drinking water and wastewater
services. According to the Indian Health Service, whose workers
LIUNA proudly represents, sanitation deficiencies on Tribal
lands include more than 1,800 projects with an estimated cost
of $2.78 billion. Federal legislation is urgently needed.
Last Congress the committee unanimously reported H.R. 1497,
the Water Quality Protection and Job Creation Act of 2019,
which sought to authorize Federal appropriations for major
Clean Water Act infrastructure programs, including the Clean
Water SRF.
The legislation being considered should build on that
bipartisan effort and increase the authorization levels for
clean water. The fund is the primary source of Federal support
for wastewater infrastructure and has proven to be one of the
most effective environmental infrastructure funding tools in
our Nation's history.
Thousands of wastewater treatment facilities and stormwater
management projects have been constructed with SRF dollars over
the past 30 years, contributing directly to improved water
quality in lakes, rivers, and estuaries across the Nation.
Congress must renew the Federal commitment to clean water
infrastructure and set authorization levels at the appropriate
level to address the documented project backlog and provide
funds for critical resiliency upgrades and other future needs.
LIUNA and our partners in the Water Infrastructure Network,
an organization that includes other unions, contractors,
elected officials, drinking and wastewater service providers,
and engineers, are pleased to continue to support the current
effort.
We commend the committee's bipartisanship on these issues
and we support increasing authorization levels to support the
adequate investment into wastewater infrastructure. The need is
there, the workforce is available, and the benefits
unquestionable.
Water infrastructure investments have interrelated benefits
that are so broadly shared that failure to make them is
unreasonable, bordering on the absurd: direct job creation for
LIUNA members, indirect job creation that results from those
workers having money in their pockets, improved public safety,
and improved environmental health, which in and of itself
creates another stream of job creation and economic benefits.
Few, if any, Federal investments have such a beneficial
impact on the American people it is incomprehensible that we
delay in making them. Estimates vary a bit, but it is projected
that every $1 billion invested in our Nation's water
infrastructure creates over 20,000 jobs in communities across
America while improving public health and the environment at
the same time.
By including domestic and local sourcing of labor and
material requirements, Congress can spread the benefit of these
investments across wider segments of the economy and help local
communities reap even greater economic benefits.
I will wrap up and just say I am happy to take any
questions, and we look forward to working with the members of
the committee to enact this important legislation. Thank you
for the time, and I look forward to taking any questions.
[Mr. Mallino's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of David Mallino, Legislative Director, Laborers'
International Union of North America
Thank you Chairman Napolitano, Ranking Member Rouzer, and members
of the Committee for inviting me to testify before you today. My name
is David Mallino and I am here of behalf of the Laborers' International
Union of North America, LIUNA.
LIUNA members are engaged daily in efforts to build and maintain
our Nation's vital physical infrastructure, the things that most
Americans use so often that we do not pay any attention to them until
something fails . . . a bridge, a tunnel, the electricity grid, water
systems. This subcommittee and the full Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee are job creators for the plurality, if not the
majority, of our union's members. Many of the programs under your
jurisdiction provide family sustaining work for LIUNA members who are
actually building the infrastructure systems that make our daily lives
possible and keep the wheels of commerce moving.
The topic of today's hearing: ``Building Back Better: The Urgent
Need for Investment in America's Wastewater Infrastructure'' is both
timely and important. Our friends at the American Society of Civil
Engineers have most recently given the Nation's wastewater
infrastructure a grade of D+ . . . which is woefully inadequate and
something that Congress should urgently address. Properly constructed
and maintained wastewater treatment systems are the most basic and
critical infrastructure systems for protecting public health and the
environment.
The Need
An estimated 10 trillion gallons of untreated runoff flows into
America's streams and rivers annually, and combined sewage overflows
discharge 850 billion tons of raw sewage and storm runoff into nearby
bodies of water each year. Additionally, it is projected that more than
56 million new users will be connected to centralized treatment systems
over the next two decades. According to EPA's most recent needs survey,
which was released nearly 10 years ago, communities have documented at
least $271 billion of investment over the next 20 years to bring their
systems to a state of good repair. I imagine the current need is likely
higher.
Communities face growing challenges in managing the water resources
necessary to support growing and shifting populations coupled with
complex affordability challenges. Some are forced to contend with
diminishing rate bases, while others contend with growing populations,
often with consumers unable to afford the rising costs of clean water.
Drought, floods, and pollution contamination require the creation of
multi-benefit projects such as water recycling, storm-water management,
and groundwater replenishment.
Nationwide, water utilities and communities of all sizes seek to
ensure clean, safe, accessible, and affordable water, all the while
dealing with the challenges of extreme weather events and mounting
concerns regarding water quality and quantity. Existing infrastructure
is aging and critical failures are increasing at a rapid rate and
desperately needed repair and replacement and wastewater infrastructure
must also become more resilient to the impacts of climate change,
including sea level rise, stronger and more frequent storms, and
flooding.
Communities across our nation now face the daunting challenge of
replacing thousands of miles of water and wastewater pipes that pose
growing threats to public health and the environment. Much of our
nation's water infrastructure piping was put in the ground over 50
years ago and many communities have failing pipes that are over 100
years old. As we look to make historic investments in our nation's
water infrastructure, we should consider providing additional funding
dedicated specifically to the replacement of failing wastewater and
drinking water pipes.
As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, many households and
communities across the nation are under financial strain. Accordingly,
wastewater utilities are facing a decrease in revenue. While there is
state and local relief contained in the current Covid relief package
being considered by Congress, LIUNA supports increasing the
authorization levels as a part of the Water Quality Protection and Job
Creation Act as a means to help insure a stable funding source,
particularly for wastewater infrastructure needs.
There are also additional costs to communities to come into
compliance with the Clean Water Act. In a 2017 report, the National
Academy of Public Administration examined the challenges local
communities face in providing affordable water and wastewater services.
This report concluded that the governmental responsibility to assure
clean water that is also affordable to both communities and individuals
has become an increasing challenge.
It is an unfortunate fact that America's infrastructure needs
disproportionately impact economically disadvantaged communities across
the country. While the majority of people living in the United States
have access to high-quality drinking water and wastewater services,
more than two million do not have access to adequate drinking water and
sanitation. According to the Indian Health Service, whose workers LIUNA
proudly represents, sanitation deficiencies on tribal lands include
more than 1,800 projects with a total estimated cost of $2.78 billion.
Federal legislative action is urgently needed.
Last Congress, the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee
unanimously reported H.R. 1497--the Water Quality Protection and Job
Creation Act of 2019, which sought to authorize Federal appropriations
for major Clean Water Act infrastructure programs administered by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), including the Clean Water
State Revolving Fund (SRF). The fund is the primary source of Federal
support for wastewater infrastructure, and was last reauthorized by
Congress in 1987, and its authorization expired in 1994. The CWA SRF
has proven to be one of the most effective environmental infrastructure
funding tools in our Nation's history. Thousands of wastewater
treatment facilities and storm water management projects have been
constructed with SRF dollars over the past 30 years, contributing
directly to improved water quality in lakes, rivers and estuaries
across the nation. However, these critical water quality improvements
will be lost if we fail to make needed investments in America's
wastewater and storm water infrastructure.
Despite widespread support, the authorization levels for the Clean
Water SRF have not been adjusted since their enactment over 30 years
ago. Congress must renew the Federal commitment to clean water
infrastructure and set authorization levels at the appropriate level to
address the documented project backlog and provide funds for critical
resiliency upgrades and other future needs. Legislation being
considered now should build on that bipartisan effort and increase the
Authorization levels for the Clean Water SRF.
LIUNA and our partners in the Water Infrastructure Network (WIN),
an organization that includes other unions, contractors, elected
officials, drinking water and wastewater service providers and
engineers, are pleased to continue our support for the current effort.
Through our partnership with WIN, LIUNA and our allies have worked
collaboratively to try and address the Nation's critical water
infrastructure deficit, including important investments to meet local
community's wastewater need. We commend the committee's bipartisanship
on these issues, and we support increasing the authorization levels to
support adequate investment into wastewater infrastructure. The need is
there . . . the workforce is available . . . and the benefits
unquestionable.
Water infrastructure investments have interrelated benefits that
are so broadly shared that failure to make them is unreasonable . . .
bordering on absurd: direct job creation for LIUNA members and others,
indirect job creation that results from those workers having money in
their pockets, improved public safety, and improved environmental
health, which in itself creates another stream of job-creation and
economic benefits.
Few if any federal investments have such a beneficial impact on the
American people that it is incomprehensible we delay making them.
Job Creation and economic activity
Investing in clean water creates thousands of domestic jobs in the
construction industry and has additional induced economic benefits.
According to US Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) estimates, for every dollar spent on water infrastructure,
approximately $2.62 is generated in the private economy, and for every
job added in the water workforce, the BEA estimates 3.68 jobs are added
to the national economy. Estimates can vary a bit, but it is projected
that every $1 billion invested in our Nation's water infrastructure
creates or sustains over 20,000 jobs in communities across America
while improving public health and the environment at the same time.
Wastewater infrastructure improvements also support healthy
economies. Construction projects create good-paying jobs, and, where
new facilities are built, workers are needed to operate and maintain
them. Upgraded infrastructure results in cleaner water, which is
essential for many businesses and sectors of the economy.
Clean water infrastructure helps prevent contamination of our
Nation's waters that are relied upon by the recreational industry.
People spend approximately $70 billion per year on recreational boating
and fishing; that industry employs more than 150,000 people.
By including domestic and local sourcing of labor and materials
requirements, Congress can spread the benefit of these investments
across wider segments of the economy and help local communities reap
even greater economic benefits. Utilization of project labor agreements
(PLAs), community benefit agreements, local hire, and other provisions
and practices that prioritize improving training, working conditions,
and project benefits, including respect for collective bargaining
agreements and workers' organizing rights, will help ensure that the
jobs created provide good wages and benefits. This will also enhance
workforce training and development programs to expand the number of
skilled workers in disadvantaged populations.
Conclusion
It is time for Congress to renew the Federal commitment to invest
in our Nation's wastewater infrastructure and, in doing so, ensure that
affordable assistance is available to all communities, regardless of
location, demographics, or economic situation. Investing in our
Nation's wastewater and storm water infrastructure makes eminent near-
term and long-term economic sense.
LIUNA stands fully committed to working with the bipartisan
leadership of the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee to enact
the Water Quality Protection and Job Creation Act as soon as possible.

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Mallino. And all the
testimony is very, very enlightening to a lot of us. Thank you.
We will now proceed to our question period, and again, we
will use the timer to allow 5 minutes for questions from each
Member. If there are additional questions, we may have a second
round, maybe. I will begin the questioning by allowing Mr.
DeFazio to proceed. Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate the
opportunity to ask questions first.
Mr. Mallino, you just said over 20,000 jobs. So you are in
substantial agreement with the utility contractors; they said
28,000 jobs created per $1 billion invested in wastewater. So
it is somewhere between 20,000 and 28,000 would you say?
Mr. Mallino. I have seen the numbers range between 23,000
and 28,000 and I like to hedge my bets. So I went broad.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. And you said--you repeated, which I think
reinforced Mr. Teske, that domestic sourcing is critical
because that also creates more jobs in the United States. Is
that correct?
Mr. Mallino. Absolutely. The laborers support ``Buy
America'' strongly as well as a host of other labor standards
to make sure the job creation is quality job creation.
Mr. DeFazio. Right. Mr. Teske, you talked about expanding
your plants in the U.S. That was impressive. What if the
Federal Government was making more investment? How are we going
to source--and we have a strong ``Buy America.'' What is going
to happen? Do you think you would be building, potentially,
more plants or otherwise expanding your capacity?
Mr. Teske. Well, I think first we are going to grow our
capacity and make sure that our plants are running closer to
100 percent capacity. And beyond that, I would say we continue
to look and grow, and then grow manufacturing capacity.
And I am also involved with the Municipal Casting
Association, which is a number of different domestic foundries
who are all committed to growth and meeting demand. We look
forward to the opportunity, sir.
Mr. DeFazio. So if the investment were made in the near
future, you're pretty confident at least by expanding, perhaps,
your shifts or other things within the capacity of your plants,
you could meet demand, an increased demand short term?
Mr. Teske. Yes, sir. I am very confident that we can.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Great.
To anyone: The SRF was created back in the Reagan era
instead of direct grants to municipalities or counties or sewer
districts.
This puts the State in the driver's seat. Are there issues
with the fact that the State chooses the priorities? I know
that this has been a particular problem with Tribes in the
past, and that's why I did a Tribal self-determination on
transportation a number of years ago.
But it also seems to me it could be creating issues for
local districts or communities. Some State governments or
agencies tend to favor certain areas of the State and neglect
others, I think.
Anybody have thoughts on if there are problems at that
level, and how we can deal with them?
[No response.]
Mr. DeFazio. Well, it's a thought. You can get back to me
later.
OK, Madam Chair, with that, I would yield back, but I would
urge people to think about the role of the States here, and how
they prioritize things and whether or not we need to be more
directive. We're proposing to be more directive, in terms of
funds to low-income communities with forgivable loans with a
certain percentage and to Tribal Governments and other
underserved areas. I'd just like to see people get back to us
later if they have further thoughts.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
I would ask all witnesses to consider, and respond in
writing to the committee. Thank you very much.
Next we have Ranking Member Rouzer.
Mr. Rouzer, you may proceed.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I greatly
appreciate the benefit of the testimony of our witnesses today.
There is no question there is a tremendous amount of need.
The question is what we can afford and how can we pay for it,
and what I really want to focus on is how do we get the most
value for the taxpayer dollar. How do we get the biggest bang
for the buck?
You know, Mayor Berger, you had focused in on and had
specifically mentioned that we need to have a change in how we
handle mandates. Would you mind expanding on that a little bit?
And as a followup to that, how can regulations be smarter
and implemented more efficiently to reduce that regulatory
burden in those unfunded mandates and yet still provide the
environmental protection that we need?
Mr. Berger. Thank you, Congressman.
My sense about this is that we continuously see mandates
kind of rolling down the hill at us all the time, and
consequently, it was very welcome news to, as I mentioned in my
testimony, to understand that this authorization bill that you
are considering has no additional mandates.
So I think the first issue is not to act on additional
mandates for local government unless and until there really are
resources made available on the scale that can address the
mandates that are being given to us.
What our sense is is that the affordability for local
communities is truly pricing water and wastewater beyond the
households of the poor and the middle income, and as a result,
that simply will over time force people off of our systems,
force them to consider options that perhaps are not healthy,
and consequently, I think they become self-defeating.
So my first option is not to invent additional mandates,
again, without a scale of resources that allows us to deal with
that.
And certainly, you know, we could point to recent action on
the lead and copper rule. We could point to the kinds of
concerns that obviously are there around phosphorus and
nitrogen levels. All of those kinds of things have real dollar
impacts that we need resources from the Federal Government to
help us address, if we are going to be expected to address
them.
Mr. Rouzer. You also talk a lot about integrated planning.
There are some that believe that integrated planning uses
affordability as an excuse to roll back Clean Water Act
protections.
In your opinion, does integrated planning weaken water
quality protections under the Clean Water Act?
Mr. Berger. I absolutely believe it does not. We were the
first community in the Nation to actually base our long-term
control plan on integrated planning and to get it approved
through both the Federal Government and our State government,
and that was in 2014.
That process worked for us because we were able to get, as
a result of the involvement with the various stakeholders,
consideration of an extended term. We did not get relief on
what the objective is. We got a term of 27 years for our
consent decree.
That was the longest period allowed to a community to
address these issues. So on the front end of that process, we
had what were called early action projects, which committed us
to spending about $60 million out of a $150 million commitment.
After we are done with those early action projects, which
we are beginning to wrap up now, we will have a period where we
get to pay down debt that we have taken on in order to deal
with prior projects, but also with some of the early action
projects.
And by virtue of that pay-down period, we then positioned
ourselves in the next phase, for the balance of the projects
that we commit to, to be able to afford those with additional
future debt.
We are not being relieved of any of the Clean Water Act
responsibilities that we have under the law, but we are being
given time to be able to structure the way in which those
projects are done and thereby keep the rates more affordable
than would have otherwise been possible if everything had been
expected as when this process began. It was all supposed to be
done in 10 to 12 years.
That would have bankrupted us, and so integrated planning
is not about relief from the obligations for clean water.
Instead it is about how do we get it done in an affordable way.
Mr. Rouzer. Madam Chair, my time has expired.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Rouzer. I appreciate that.
The next question period will be mine, and I am addressing
to Mr. Sterud.
Besides providing more Federal investment to the Tribal
lands, what can come [interruption to audio] and insofar as the
discussion draft for the Clean Water State Revolving Fund, what
did we get right?
What issue should we address as we move this through the
committee process?
And what can Congress do to make sure individual households
can pay their water bills if rates increase due to
improvements?
And I will go ahead and let you answer, sir.
Mr. Sterud. I am sorry. You cut out halfway through and
then you came back on for the----
Mrs. Napolitano. Beyond providing more Federal investment
in Clean Water SRF, what can we do to help troubled communities
to ensure they have adequate water infrastructure and
sanitation services?
And what can we get right? What issue should we address?
And then what can we do to make the individual household
make it more affordable in case the rates are increased because
of improvements?
Mr. Sterud. Well, that covers a large area, but I can
safely say that Indian Country in a lot of ways is like Third
World conditions. Across the country, all Native communities
are sometimes isolated, are the last on the list to get Federal
or State funding, and they need to work together to help us
out.
And for these Tribal communities, being able to speak on
this subject is very important.
The impacts on our health and our environment, we just need
more funding. Speaking for resources must be a priority. We
have a treaty that allows us to catch salmon, that allows us to
go [interruption to audio] diving, shellfish harvesting, and
those are all impacted by wastewater, and they are dying.
Water sanitation infrastructure is a big cause. We have
lived on these foods since time immemorial. We need to protect
them. They are our health food. They are our medicine.
Mrs. Napolitano. All right, sir. Well, given the list of
infrastructure needs, we rank water infrastructure the most
important. What does investment in water infrastructure mean to
the Native American community?
Mr. Sterud. Well, it means living a healthier lifestyle. It
means growing good, growing in a good way. It means our treaty-
protected resources are protected, and that is our lifeblood.
And we need help. And we are doing the best that we can.
And we are also working with our State people, our local
governments.
You know, it is a big issue that we all have to put our
hands around.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, are your local agents prepared to
provide the operations and maintenance on the improvements?
Mr. Sterud. I would say yes. You know, we have a good
working relationship with the different governments.
But we are kind of left out of the argument.
Mrs. Napolitano. [Inaudible] inclusion?
Mr. Sterud. Yes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Understood. Well, sir, thank you very much
for your time.
And I will proceed to the next witness. I mean to the next
question. Representative Johnson, you are on.
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Well, thank you very much.
And let me thank all of our witnesses.
Let me just preface any questions I might have by calling
your attention to the major situation we find ourselves in in
Texas. I represent Dallas, Texas, and I listened very closely
to Mr. McFoy.
Mr. McFoy, if you were in Texas at this time, how would you
advise us on the infrastructure services that we need to look
at?
Because what has happened there and what is going on there
is likely to happen anywhere. With the climate change, we get
predictions about weather changes and things that are going to
happen.
In general, and I do not want to put too much of a burden
on you to know about what is going on in other places, but what
do we need to do in this country to be more prepared for what
we are obviously looking forward to doing?
Because we are not going to be able to do whatever it takes
to completely address climate change in any time that I can
foresee in the future. We can work on it a little at a time,
but I suspect that most major cities can be caught off guard
when we have incidents like we are going through in Texas right
now.
What do you see as we go forward that we need to do in this
country, especially with our water systems, to be somewhat a
step ahead?
Mr. McFoy. That is an excellent question.
One of the things that we are focusing in here in Buffalo
is just having a resilient system, and that goes around with
everything that we do.
So whether that is capital improvements or our operation
and management of our facilities, it is critical that you look
at the risks associated with climate. So here in Buffalo we are
on the shores of Lake Erie, and what we have been seeing is
high water, and that has had an effect on where we have our
facilities located. So that is our issue.
Of course, you know, it snows here all the time. So we are
used to this snow end of it, but other places have to see with
climate change what are the different aspects that are coming
their way, and then focus in on the resiliency of all of their
platforms.
So while I do not have specifics on what is going down in
Dallas and in the Texas area, that would be my advice to all of
our peers, is that we really focus in on the resiliency
especially in the face of these climate realities.
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Well, thank you very much.
Are there any other witnesses who would like to comment on
that?
[No response.]
Ms. Johnson of Texas. I can certainly understand why.
What then can we--and I guess this is basically to Mr.
Mallino.
You outlined the need for investment in America's
wastewater infrastructure, and you note that an estimated 10
trillion gallons of untreated runoff flow into America's
streams and rivers annually, and that it is projected that more
than 56 million new users will be connected to centralized
treatment systems over the next two decades.
Every major city, of course, needs to be thinking of this.
What do you believe would be the best general policy that
would allow for immediate action in providing for these changes
that we need to start to address?
Mr. Mallino. First and foremost, more money. I mean this
was a problem of lack of resources. And we need a renewed
Federal commitment to additional resources to allow communities
and States across the country to build out their infrastructure
needs.
You know, one of my colleagues once said it is not a
problem if money can solve it. This is a lack of resources
issue and getting money to actually do infrastructure projects
is the best way to improve people's lives.
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Ms. Johnson.
And because I skipped over our Republican colleagues, I
will call on Mr. Babin, followed by Mr. Weber.
Mr. Babin, proceed.
Dr. Babin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate you. Thank
you, Ranking Member Rouzer.
We also thank our witnesses for being here with us today.
I represent southeast Texas, which is home to many rural
constituents that often find themselves lacking easy access to
municipal infrastructure that most urban areas do already
provide.
I, a former mayor myself, along with countless other
neighbors of mine, rely on onsite decentralized wastewater
systems, also known as septic tanks. And now according to the
State Onsite Regulators Alliance, or SORA, roughly 25 percent
of the population, or about 85 million Americans, rely on
decentralized systems to handle their wastewater.
The National Association of Home Builders estimates that 30
percent of all new residential construction will utilize
decentralized systems going forward. However, less than 1
percent of all Clean Water State Revolving Funds allocated over
the last 40 years has actually gone towards these decentralized
systems.
And to me these numbers just simply do not add up when
millions of Americans, including Texans, rely on these systems.
So, Mayor Berger, or any other witness who might want to
address this, what role do you see decentralized systems
playing in your wastewater infrastructure needs going forward?
Mayor.
Mr. Berger. Congressman, actually for us the city and the
townships that are connected to us, the entire city is sewer
and a good portion of the contiguous townships. So I personally
have no expertise relative to the approach of decentralized
systems.
I do know that the State of Ohio has begun to more
intensively regulate that approach because the failure of
systems seems to be increasing, and so inspection regimes, as
well as the amount of acreage that home builders are required
to take to install systems.
All of that, I think, is going to continue to happen in
order to adequately treat those wastewater concerns.
Dr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much.
Is there anyone else on the panel that would like to
address this septic tank question I have?
There are millions of Americans that have to utilize these.
[No response.]
Dr. Babin. OK. One other question then, Mayor Berger. How
can the Environmental Protection Agency or any other Federal
agency, for that matter, better serve these systems and the
people that rely on them?
And hopefully I have got enough time for someone else to
answer that and take a shot at it as well.
Thank you.
Mr. Berger. Again, sir, I have no personal experience with
the systems, and I would hesitate to offer some advice.
Dr. Babin. OK. Is there anyone here on this panel who might
want to address this?
Less than 1 percent of all of our Clean Water State
Revolving Funds have been allocated over a 40-year period to
these decentralized systems, when millions, 85 million
Americans rely on these septic tanks.
Does anyone else want to take a stab at that?
[No response.]
Dr. Babin. Madam Chair, I will yield back then.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, thank you, Mr. Babin.
I think some might have input later. I would suggest that
you write those comments back to the committee so that we may
review them.
Next we have Mr. Weber. Mr. Weber, you may proceed.
Mr. Weber. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
I am not going to have any questions at this time, but I am
staying tuned if you want to check with me a little later.
Mrs. Napolitano. All right, sir. Thank you very much.
We will proceed to Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Garamendi, you are
on.
May I ask that everybody who is not scheduled to speak
mute?
Mr. Garamendi?
[No response.]
Mrs. Napolitano. Is he available?
If not, we will skip to Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Chair.
This subcommittee on, you know, wastewater infrastructure
and the needs and the importance of especially the SRF and the
clean water is so, so important.
But one of the things that stuck me, and I do not know if
any of you can help me out, when I was doing my reading to plan
for the subcommittee and my questions, and that is, you know,
we talk about antiquated systems that need to be done, but I am
also concerned about systems that were not prepared or should
not be prepared, were not planned for what has been put into
them.
For example, I was just struck with the flushing of
nonflushable wipes that have had tremendous impacts upon
systems. People flush these down, and then it impacts our sewer
pipes and our treatment facility.
And I am most concerned about a sentence that I read, and I
am not sure that any of you can help me, and that is that they
contain microplastics that do not break down. So we are now
talking about microplastics, and those clog the system.
I am also concerned about the public health crisis. We are
ingesting all of those microplastics.
Have your systems had problems? I guess I will ask Mr.
McFoy about nonflushable wipes.
What should we be doing about it?
And has anybody studied or seen the impact of these
microplastics that clog the system? But they also clog the
human body, too. So I am very, very concerned about that issue
of microplastics that get into us and get into our systems and
clog the systems themselves.
So should we be doing something about that?
You know, it is not just old systems. It is the fact that
these systems were never designed to deal with some of these
issues. So I am wondering if anybody has had to deal with any
of those issues.
Maybe Mr. McFoy?
Mr. McFoy. Congressman, I can take that one.
As far as the first one, which we talked about, flushable
wipes, you know, to many of us in the utility industry, that is
a misnomer.
What we have found is in most cases, they are not meant to
go down into our systems because they simply do not break down
by the time that they reach our treatment facility and hence,
they cause havoc not only in our sewer systems but when they
reach our treatment facilities, as with our screening
facilities and things of that nature.
And microplastics here in western New York, we typically
have a microplastics ban in place because of the health
concerns with many of those microplastics making their way.
What we have been pushing for from a State level here and
nationally has really been to push that back onto the
manufacturers of these microplastics to make sure that they
deal with their waste, and the same way with the flushable
wipes.
That responsibility is placed on them before it becomes a
problem in our systems and for our residents and customers.
Mr. Lowenthal. You know, I have a bill, which is very
similar, in a little different concept but very similar to what
you are saying, is to push it back to the producers. I have a
bill on plastics in general, and instead of asking the cities
and counties to do all the work in terms of recycling and
cleaning up of plastics, to put it back on the extended
responsibility on the producers of the plastics.
So I agree with you that really it is the producer. They
should not be putting these microplastics in, and it really
should be their responsibility to help clean up or to prevent
all this from happening, and they are not being responsible.
My bill is called Break Free from Plastic Pollution Act,
and in the Senate, Senator Merkley and myself are reintroducing
that bill this year.
But it really deals with the same concept as you are
saying, it is the producers of the plastic that really have to
deal with this issue, and they are not.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Lowenthal.
It is very interesting to note those ideas. We also must
consider all the contaminants in the water because of COVID and
what are the future contaminants that we have to deal with in
our water? We have to clean that water.
We move on to Mr. Mast. Mr. Mast, you may proceed.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here to
discuss how wastewater treatment infrastructure has impacted
the economy, how it has impacted the environment, how it has
impacted the public health of our communities.
And I want to talk about this issue that is incredibly
personal to me and a solution that is readily available.
Now, first, I would be hopeful that we could all agree that
everybody, no matter how much money they have, where they live,
or anything else, that something that the Government should be
tasked with providing above everything is access to clean
environment, clean air to breathe, clean water to drink, clean
water to swim in, clean land to live on, to work and play on,
and I am going to circle this back to a problem in my
community.
We have been plagued not just by dirty water. That word
does not do justice to it, but by toxic, literally toxic water,
labeled that way by the EPA, by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, toxic, too toxic for human beings to touch,
according to the EPA. Water testing as much as 495 times more
toxic than what the EPA has said human beings should come in
contact with.
This happens regularly, decimating ecosystems, as many of
my colleagues have spoken about, public health, the economy,
and this happens, as I said, in my community basically every
year, every summer.
Now, in my opinion, nobody should be forced to live like
this, especially when the solution is so readily apparent, and
I want to talk about just one part of that today.
It was mentioned in many of the comments that were given
here, many of the written testimonies, the Clean Water State
Revolving Fund. It is due for an upgrade to reflect the needs
that States are facing due to aging infrastructure and also due
to population changes. That has to be taken into account as
well.
So while changes to how the fund's money is disbursed have
been mentioned, I think we need to discuss and focus to some
degree on the need for adjusting the allotment formula, which
has not been changed since 1987.
So in Florida, my State, as an example, since 1987 our
population has approximately doubled, making us the third
largest State in the country. However, with the current
allotment formula, we rank 10th in the amount of funding that
we are receiving.
Madam Chair, Madam Napolitano, your State is the most
populous State in the U.S. Yet under the current formula, your
allotment does not reflect the growth of your State's
population since 1987 relative to what other States have seen.
Mr. Ranking Member, Mr. Rouzer, the same is true for your
State. North Carolina is the 9th most populous State, yet it is
16th in allotment for the Revolving Fund.
So the Clean Water State Revolving Fund gives States the
flexibility to address the really diverse water infrastructure
needs that we see across the country, but it is not keeping up
with the way different States are changing.
So as I have said, in Florida, the fund has been used for
some great projects, to assist with, as my last colleague spoke
about, converting aging septic systems to more sound sewer
water systems; addressing nonpoint source pollution that is
hurting our State's water quality. It has been used for a lot
of different things, but that calculus needs to change.
I do have here a letter. I ask unanimous consent to submit
this for the record. It is from the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection and their secretary, Noah Valenstein,
that states reforms that could be used for exactly these
purposes.
I ask unanimous consent to submit that, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Napolitano. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

Letter of February 22, 2021, from Noah Valenstein, Secretary, Florida
Department of Environmental Protection, Submitted for the Record by
Hon. Brian J. Mast
Florida Department of Environmental Protection,
Marjory Stoneman Douglas Building,
3900 Commonwealth Boulevard,
Tallahassee, FL 32399, February 22, 2021.
Hon. Grace Napolitano,
Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure, U.S. House of
Representatives, 2251 Rayburn House Office Building,
Washington, DC.
Hon. David Rouzer,
Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure, U.S. House of
Representatives, 2164 Rayburn House Office Building,
Washington, DC.
Dear Chairwoman Napolitano and Ranking Member Rouzer:
In considering ``The Urgent Need for Investment in America's
Wastewater Infrastructure,'' I urge you to extend your attention to
important reforms that can increase the reach, efficacy, and impact of
much-needed federal investments in the Clean Water State Revolving Fund
(CWSRF) program. Specifically, the Subcommittee should seek to
concurrently modernize the Clean Watershed Needs Survey and the CWSRF
allotment to ensure that federal investments that support state and
local efforts to build, replace, or enhance wastewater infrastructure
are delivered where they are most needed.
As identified in the Environmental Protection Agency's 2016 Report
to Congress: Review of the Allotment of the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund, the true wastewater infrastructure need across the nation may be
underreported by states. The Florida Department of Environmental
Protection supports the recommendations of the Council of
Infrastructure Financing Authorities to modernize the Clean Watersheds
Needs Survey in a way that yields an accurate assessment of needs
within the scope of the Clean Water Act and without overly burdening
limited state and municipal resources. Efforts to fix chronic problems
associated with the Clean Watershed Needs Survey must also be
accompanied by the modernization of the CWSRF allotment.
The 2016 Report to Congress demonstrates that the current CWSRF
allotment misallocates federal investments based on decades-old
assumptions that no longer apply. To better illustrate the flaws in the
current allotment, consider that in 2020 the fourth-most populous state
in the nation (New York) was awarded more CWSRF funding than the
combined sum received by the first- and third-most populous states
(California and Florida).
Florida, in particular, is home to some of the nation's most
economically and environmentally valuable watersheds, yet our state's
per capita CWSRF funding has shrunk to one of the lowest in the nation
even as the state's impressive population growth has generated
unprecedented demand for new and improved wastewater infrastructure.
The Florida Department of Environmental Protection endorses the
bipartisan efforts of Senators Rubio and Scott, Congressman Waltz, and
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee members Brown, Mast, and
Webster to address these disparities by passing the Clean Water
Allotment Modernization Act.
To best identify and fulfill the urgent wastewater infrastructure
needs around the country now and into the future, it is imperative that
Congress links the provision of new federal investments in wastewater
infrastructure to a modernized Clean Watershed Needs Survey and Clean
Water State Revolving Fund allotment.
Sincerely,
Noah Valenstein,
Secretary.

cc:  Florida's congressional delegation

Mr. Mast. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And in that I would urge the committee to look at updating
how this revolving fund is being disbursed so that it is
disbursed in a more equitable way based upon a State's
population and its needs accordingly.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Mast.
That is a great point, and we will look at it further.
Mr. Pappas, you are recognized. You may proceed.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And I want to echo the comments of Mr. Mast and so many
other colleagues who are calling for reauthorization and
modernization of the Clean Water State Revolving Fund, and that
is something I hope we can accomplish in a bipartisan fashion
in this Congress.
Today I want to focus my comments on an issue that is so
critical to the public health concerns in my district, to our
environment, to the availability of clean water, and that is
the issue of these toxic ``forever chemicals'' known as PFAS
and the need to regulate them under the Clean Water Act.
Ms. Coley, I thought you offered some powerful testimony
about the downshifting we have seen of the financial burden
from the Federal level to local ratepayers to deal with water
infrastructure needs and as this pertains to emerging
contaminants that you are seeing in Wisconsin and the need to
adapt our water infrastructure to address issues such as PFAS.
I wonder if you could comment on the financial and
operational strain that is placed on local utilities in meeting
this growing and urgent health crisis [inaudible].
Ms. Coley. Thank you for the question.
You know, PFAS is a host of contaminants. It is more than
one that is affecting our water, and in many ways, we do not
know exactly what they are. So we really need to have some
money to research to find out what is exactly in water.
And our waste treatment facilities need to have systems in
place where they can filter these PFASs out, which means really
where did they come from. They really came from corporations
knowingly or unknowingly polluting our water, dumping
contaminants and poisons, toxins in our water.
And so we have to form a partnership really with these
corporations to have some responsibility to mediate the harm
that they gave to the environment.
So we need resources to really do research on this PFAS, to
find out what they are, where they are, and how we can get rid
of them, and then to give waste treatment facilities the
resources to be able to ferret them out, to be able to look for
them.
And this is part of it. We do better when we know better,
right? And so we have to find out what we need to do.
It is the same thing really with these wipes that are
unflushable. We have to first tell the community, educate the
community on these issues, but also hold these corporations
responsible for this.
Because these are issues and problems that only the
Government and only really the corporations can deal with.
Individuals or communities cannot deal with this kind of thing.
So it is really more of a partnership between wastewater
management, between education and research, and then the
corporations and the States really looking at this issue
holistically.
Mr. Pappas. Well, I appreciate those comments, and I know
that your counterparts in my district feel the same way. I
think our States need additional Federal support to understand
the problem, to test for it, and to ensure that contaminants
like PFAS do not get out into the environment where they
persist for decades and centuries.
That is why a bill that passed the House in the last
session that I am really looking forward to reintroducing it
this term; it is the Clean Water Standards for PFAS Act, and it
would require EPA to review PFAS discharges under the Clean
Water Act and issue regulations to address harmful discharges
into our Nation's waterways and into the environment.
This is important because it would allow EPA to hold these
corporations, to hold polluters accountable in ensuring that
they are not just sending these harmful PFAS chemicals directly
to publicly owned treatment works and passing along the burden
to our local ratepayers.
Additionally, this bill would also authorize a grant
program to assist these publicly owned treatment works to make
sure that they can comply and that ultimately we are not just
perpetuating this type of contamination.
So I really look forward to building some support in a
bipartisan fashion for that legislation. I hope it can be taken
up as part of reauthorization, and I think this could really
help a lot of our water treatment facilities around the country
deal with this persistent issue.
Ms. Coley. Congressman.
Mr. Pappas. Go ahead, Ms. Coley. I just have a few seconds
left.
Ms. Coley. I would just we say really need to work with the
EPA as well, to really give them the robust resources they need
to provide oversight.
Mr. Pappas. Absolutely.
I yield back my time, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. That is a good
point you have made.
We turn now to Miss Gonzalez-Colon. You may proceed.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon? Are you on?
We will come back to her later.
Ms. Wilson, you are own. Frederica Wilson?
Ms. Wilson of Florida. I am on. Thank you, Chairman. Thank
you.
Can you hear me?
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes, ma'am. You may proceed.
Ms. Wilson of Florida. OK. Great. Thank you, Chairman
Napolitano and Ranking Member Rouzer, for calling this very
important hearing.
As the Representative of a district on the front lines of
climate change, this is an all Miami-Dade economics fight,
critical infrastructure needs. This hearing literally hits
home.
The Federal Government's decreasing support over the past
few decades has left our local communities in a dangerous and
precarious position, which has disproportionately affected
communities of color like mine.
After we recover from this coronavirus pandemic, we must
support our local governments and invest in the Nation's
wastewater infrastructure to increase much needed jobs, bring
equitable change to ignored and underserved communities, and
upgrade and fortify our systems to coexist within the
inevitable impacts of climate change.
With Congress and the administration's focus on significant
infrastructure investment, I am hopeful we can effectively
address these challenges.
With that I have a few questions. Mr. David Mallino,
legislative and political. I want to thank you for your
testimony. You highlighted the tens of thousands of jobs
infrastructure investments would create, including expanding
the number of skilled workers among disadvantaged populations.
In your opinion, what should Congress do to ensure that
disadvantaged populations get the training they need to fill
these jobs?
Mr. Mallino. There is no one easy answer for that. You
know, our union, as well as many of the unions, well, all of
the unions in the building construction trades, have
apprenticeship programs and training programs, outreach to
local communities.
But really it starts with creating the jobs. Without the
investment into the job creation, there are no jobs to train
for.
So it is a holistic approach. We can work with union
groups, local groups to establish training programs, to bring
people from the community into our apprenticeship programs,
train them for the work, and then refer them out not just to
the job as it is going on, but then they have a career pathway
to go forward into other construction jobs once the water
project or whatever they are working on ends.
Community workforce agreements--project labor agreements we
also call them--can establish training and local hire numbers
where we can fold in with the developer or the contractor
targets to reach into the community and bring people from the
community into the training programs and put those in those
jobs.
So again, we have a lot of different sorts of--I refer to
them as labor standards--a number of different programs
designed to outreach and train local community partners.
Ms. Wilson of Florida. Thank you.
Yesterday we mourned the loss of half a million COVID
lives, and Congress has to work to protect essential workers.
Do you consider major infrastructure investments in the age of
COVID and what else can we do to protect our frontline workers
other than the vaccine and [interruption to audio]?
Mr. Mallino. You broke up part of the way through there,
Congresswoman. So I assume that is still directed to me.
You know, the construction industry can expand to bring in
displaced workers into the industry, and with the overwhelming
infrastructure need that there is, we are expandable, only
limited by the lack of resources.
The construction economy has continued through COVID. We
have seen some local and regional job displacements, but many
projects have continued forward. We really think of ourselves
as a way to solve the underemployment issues that are
exacerbated by COVID.
And, again, it is resources. We can build out a workforce,
but we need investment into the projects to create those jobs.
Ms. Wilson of Florida. Well, thank you so much.
Ms. Coley----
Mrs. Napolitano. Ms. Wilson, your time is up.
Ms. Wilson of Florida. Oh, I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, ma'am.
We seem to be having a little bit of feedback on Mr.
Mallino's and Ms. Wilson's line. Hopefully that will not happen
on the next one.
Mr. Carbajal, you are next. Proceed.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. McFoy, thank you for participating today and coming
here. We know that the climate crisis is here and has been
negatively impacting our communities, particularly in terms of
access to clean water.
We are seeing it in Texas now, and we have seen it in
countless other disasters as well. Unfortunately, these
disasters are becoming all too common.
I sponsored legislation, the Clean Water Infrastructure
Resilience and Sustainability Act, last Congress to establish a
grant program within the EPA to ensure that our Nation's water
infrastructure can withstand the threats posed by extreme
weather events.
Can you talk about how additional resources from the
Federal Government can help local communities provide access to
clean water for their residents?
And would legislation like my legislation help in these
efforts?
Mr. McFoy. Thank you very much, Congressman.
While I have not fully read your legislation, I will do
that. But any legislation that focuses in on funding of
capital, which is what we need to more readily make our system
as resilient as they can be, especially in the face of climate
change.
That is one of the things that we are focusing in on here
in Buffalo, as well as many of the other States. So with us
being right here on the shores of Lake Erie, every piece of
legislation that focuses in on developing climate resiliency
plans, on developing hardened infrastructure that will allow us
to make sure that we can stand up against these storms that are
coming our way and more and more frequently; so anything like
that we would definitely be in favor of.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. McFoy.
Mr. Mallino, I found your testimony very compelling as you
discussed the challenge of maintaining access to water at an
affordable rate while dealing with the unpredictability of
extreme weather events.
As you discuss, we have a backlog of water infrastructure
needs, and I know this question is similar to the one that was
asked before, but you came across with a lot of feedback. So I
am going to ask the essence of that question again.
Can you elaborate how this backlog is impacting
disadvantaged communities?
And as infrastructure is, in essence, a jobs bill, how will
investing in water infrastructure help create more jobs and how
can we make sure these are good-paying jobs?
Mr. Mallino. I am going to hope that my microphone problem
is fixed. If not, I will have to log out and log back in.
Again, there are a suite of labor standards that help
assure that these jobs created are high-rate jobs. We do not
want to see Federal investment be used to drive down wages and
labor standards.
Things like Davis-Bacon protections against community
workforce or project labor agreements, local hire requirements
can all be built into projects to help spread the benefits
across a broad segment of the population.
And, again, this is an issue that can be solved by more
investment. What we need first and foremost is more money into
projects, a big infrastructure bill, across-the-board
investments into roads, bridges, water systems, the grid, you
name it. We can expand the workforce to fill that need.
Does that answer your question, Congressman? I am not sure
I----
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much, Mr. Mallino. It
certainly did. I appreciate you being here, and I appreciate
your answer.
So thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Carbajal.
And I will take the prerogative of the chair to recognize
Mr. Rouzer for one more statement.
Mr. Rouzer.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I have a copy of a document here from the city of
Pleasantville, and I ask unanimous consent to insert in the
record on behalf of Representative Van Drew, who sits on the
full committee, the ``City of Pleasantville Sanitary Sewer
System Evaluation,'' if you do not mind.
Mrs. Napolitano. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

Report, ``City of Pleasantville Sanitary Sewer System Evaluation,''
April 22, 2019, Prepared by CME Associates, Submitted for the Record by
Hon. David Rouzer on behalf of Hon. Jefferson Van Drew
[Editor's note: The introduction to the report follows. The 39-page
report is retained in committee files in its entirety.]
1. Introduction
CME Associates has been contracted to evaluate and provide an
assessment of the sanitary sewer system owned and maintained by the
City of Pleasantville. In order to prepare an accurate evaluation of
the system, a thorough understanding of the collection system and
related appurtenances was required. In general, although the City has
undergone some upgrades to the infrastructure, the overall system is
aging and specific areas are in need of rehabilitation or replacement
to prevent interruption of service due to potential pipe and
infrastructure failure.
The City of Pleasantville owns, operates, and maintains its own
sanitary sewerage collection system. The total population served by
this system is approximately 20,250 people, which equates to
approximately 4,650 users. The boundary of the collection system is
generally defined by the municipal limits of the City. A sanitary sewer
infrastructure map of the system is enclosed and provided as Figure 2
of this report. In general, the system consists of gravity sewer mains,
laterals, manholes, pump stations, and force mains. Sewage flows from
individual properties through lateral pipes into the mainline pipes,
through pump stations, force mains, and finally to large diameter
trunkline sewer pipes, that discharge to the Atlantic County Utilities
Authority (ACUA) pump station located along Old Turnpike. Wastewater is
then ultimately pumped to the ACUA Wastewater Treatment Plant located
in Atlantic City.
The City's collection system contains approximately 57 miles of
gravity sanitary sewer, as well as more than 2 miles of force mains.
The collection system is comprised of asbestos cement, vitrified clay,
cast iron, and polyvinyl chloride pipes, primarily ranging in size from
8 inches to 12 inches in diameter. The largest sewer pipes in the
collection system are 42 inch diameter, whereas the largest force main
is a 20 inch force main transmitting wastewater from Northfield towards
the ACUA treatment plant.
Wastewater flows via gravity through the Pleasantville collection
system until the depth of the gravity sewer mains were cost prohibitive
and pump stations were installed to lift and transmit the sewage via
force main to higher gravity mains. Currently, the City owns and
maintains twelve pump stations which are located at various low lying
areas throughout the City.
The intent of this report is to perform a limited evaluation and
inventory assessment of the referenced sanitary sewer collection
system, as well as the pumping stations. The inventory assessment will
quantify the age, size, and composition of the collection system, as
well as include details associated with each of the pump stations. The
evaluation will include recommendations concerning improvements to the
sanitary sewer collection system, and its pump stations, as well as
quantify approximate costs of same.

Mr. Rouzer. Thank you much.
I have a quick followup, if I can, for Mayor Berger and
also Mr. McFoy if he has any thoughts on this.
But I wanted to get your thoughts on changes to permitting.
What benefits would local communities have with changing the
current Clean Water Act law to allow cities to have a 10-year,
for example, rather than a 5-year treatment works permit?
I just wanted to get your thoughts on that and drill down a
little bit.
Mr. Berger. Well, thank you, Congressman.
I guess I have two reactions to that. One is the fact that
a 10-year permit would give more predictability to a community.
I think it would be really important for the long-range
planning for a local system.
I also think that there are real economies that result and
savings that result for permits that are 10 years in length
rather than a local team having to gear up every 5 years in
order to negotiate, and that team can be multiple outside
attorneys, multiple outside engineering firms, along with the
internal staff.
That marshalling of human resources to deal with a 5-year
permit cycle is expensive.
So, again, I think that the two benefits are savings that
would result from that expense, but also the predictability of
a 10-year permit allows, particularly for the kinds of
improvements that are required by consent decrees and other
orders. A 10-year permit lines up much more for achieving that
long-term set of objectives.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. McFoy, do you have any opinion based on
your experience?
Mr. McFoy. Congressman, I would love to simply piggyback on
what Mayor Berger has said.
The stability that a long-term permit provides is
wonderful. It allows us really to plan out our capital
investment, to reduce those human resources that we do every
time it is time for permit review, and it really allows us to
right our ship in the direction that needs to happen for
everything that we must do as utilities.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, thank you.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, again.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much.
Madam Norton, Representative Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you.
I hope you can hear me.
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes, we can.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
I want to thank you for this hearing on America's
wastewater infrastructure because it occurs to me that we can
deal with some of this even during a pandemic because of the
distancing that construction usually involves.
I want to begin with Mr. Teske because he emphasizes the
need to ``Buy America.'' You would think we would need that,
particularly at a time of job loss here.
So what do you see as the biggest benefit of including
``Buy America'' provisions in our infrastructure projects, Mr.
Teske?
Mr. Teske. Well, I think the biggest benefit is the
increase of manufacturing jobs here in the U.S. I think we need
to refocus on manufacturing jobs.
You know, for years we promoted the service economy. I
think that a return to manufacturing jobs is also a return to
better paying jobs.
And if I could just respond to one thing. I think education
is necessary, in response to a question earlier. I think as a
group it would be good to include funds to increase people's
knowledge of the need for clean water.
And one thing, too, unfunded mandates----
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, but I have not got a lot
of time.
Mr. Teske. OK.
Ms. Norton. So I need to go on.
Mr. Teske. Sorry. I apologize.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Mallino of LIUNA, I was intrigued by your
testimony because of the loss of jobs we have had in the United
States during a pandemic.
And I know that there are estimates that $1 billion could
be invested. At least your testimony was that for every $1
billion invested, 20,000 jobs in communities are created.
So I would like you to elaborate on that at a time of job
loss and can't this be done with distancing among workers?
Mr. Mallino. Congresswoman, I understand my technology
might be failing. So I apologize.
Yes, those estimates, the chairman corrected me. His
estimates are 28,000 jobs per $1 billion. I have seen between
23,000 and 28,000, so I just try to err on the side of safety.
We have had challenges in the construction industry, but a
lot of the construction that the laborers do is done outside.
When you have a union and a collective bargaining agreement
that has safety and health experience and protocols that we
have all worked on, we have worked on providing our members,
well, the contractors, providing our members with handwashing
stations and personal protective equipment.
When possible we socially distance. We cannot always do
that on a construction project, but we believe that creating
the correct safety and health protocols can clearly be done in
the time of the pandemic, and we have been rather pleased that
our industry has been able to continue to work through the
pandemic with these safety and health protocols.
Ms. Norton. Yes, that is why your industry is so important
for our economy.
Mr. Berger of the United States Conference of Mayors,
climate change is one of my great priority issues. So I would
like to know what effect do you think climate change has had on
the infrastructure?
Do you think we need to build more resiliency into the
system because of climate change?
Mr. Berger. Congresswoman, yes. The short answer is
absolutely. Climate change represents an enormous challenge.
I can just speak for my community. When we modeled for our
consent decree and we based our planning on a $150 million
investment over the next 27 years, that was done with the
expectation that we were going to be able to have a certain
number of 100-year and 500-year storms, and the capacity of our
system would be X amount of gallons of material.
Well, in the year following the consent decree, we had
three of those storms, 100-year storms. Well, when you do long-
range planning for infrastructure and it changes on you that
quickly, it means you have either underspent or you have to
redesign.
So I think climate change represents enormous problems for
communities for that reason. The unpredictability is enormous.
Ms. Norton. Thank you for that testimony.
And, Madam Chair, that testimony concerning climate change
should be of utmost importance to our own subcommittee, and I
very much thank you for allowing me the time to get answers to
my questions.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Ms. Norton. You make quite a
point. I agree with you.
Next we have Mr. Stanton.
Mr. Stanton, you are on the line.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Before I begin my comments, let me just say to my friend,
Mayor Berger, who I served with in the U.S. Conference of
Mayors, congratulations on 32 years of service. The citizens of
Lima have been well served.
Mayor Berger taught the rest of the mayors around the
country more about wastewater than any other source during my
time, and so, Mayor Berger, congratulations, and if you do get
bored in retirement, you can always run for Congress.
Mr. Berger. Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Stanton. As a new member of this subcommittee, I
appreciate our immediate focus on renewing the Federal
commitment to this vital infrastructure that supports our urban
and rural communities and Tribal nations, and that is
wastewater infrastructure investment.
The Southwest is rapidly changing and growing, and Arizona
is no exception. We are the fastest growing State in the
country. Since 1970, Arizona's population has ballooned from
1.8 million residents now to over 7.5 million people, a 315-
percent increase, 115,000 new Arizonans per year, 300 per day.
In 2019, Arizona ranked third in population, a growth of
many of our communities growing faster and faster than the
national average.
To sustainably welcome and provide for the millions of
people who will call our region and our great State home in the
years to come, we must invest in our infrastructure and secure
our water future.
Last year, the Arizona section of the American Society of
Civil Engineers released its 2020 infrastructure report card,
which reflected the condition of our infrastructure across
Arizona. We received a C-minus for drinking water and
wastewater.
This requires immediate attention. In fact, over the next 5
years, we will have a shortfall of almost $1.5 billion in
wastewater alone in the State of Arizona.
As the former mayor of Phoenix, I know firsthand that local
leaders must be innovative when it comes to addressing our
aging infrastructure and planning for our water future, and
frankly, we cannot afford the alternative.
We know the future of our residents and of our economy
depends on how well we anticipate, plan, and respond to our
water-related challenges. Investing and supporting our State's
water growth goes hand in hand with taking care of our most
precious resource.
We have to make sure that Federal dollars flow to areas
throughout the State of Arizona, like those provided through
the Clean Water State Revolving Fund, so that we can continue
addressing these needs in our communities across the State,
whether rural, Tribal, or urban.
I have questions for Mr. Mallino of LIUNA and OJ McFoy.
Mr. McFoy, in the interest of providing the Federal
investment necessary to meet these infrastructure needs, we
also must make sure that we have a trained workforce necessary
to operate these facilities today and well into the future.
The GAO projects that 30 to 50 percent of the municipal
water workforce will be retiring just in the next decade,
taking with them decades of experience and knowledge. As we
witnessed through the pandemic, the women and men working in
municipal drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater are
essential workers who provide public health and provide
community economic stability.
Last Congress I proposed language that was included as part
of the reauthorization of the Clean Water SRF to allow States
to reserve up to 1 percent of the funds they are allocated each
fiscal year for workforce development and training.
This could equal tens of millions of dollars a year for
local water workforce development efforts.
Mr. Mallino and Mr. McFoy, can you talk about how dedicated
funding like this assistance would be helpful in addressing
workforce needs and how it might benefit small and rural
communities, in particular?
Mr. McFoy. Congressman Stanton, I would like to say thank
you. There are many Buffalonians that now call themselves
Arizonans.
But when we look at the workforce end of this, that is a
critical piece that we need in our utilities. As you had
mentioned, our workforce has completely changed over the years,
and when you look at the report ``Renewing the Water
Workforce'' that was done in recent years, it focuses in on how
that workforce is going to look going forward.
Our workforce needs to reflect the communities in which we
come from. We really are focusing in here on the water side in
Buffalo on equity. We really need our workforce to better
reflect our communities and also to make sure that they receive
all of the training and development needs that they have to get
these good-paying jobs that we are here to offer going forward.
Mr. Stanton. That is great.
And then how about Mr. Mallino representing our friends at
LIUNA?
Mr. Mallino. Well, Congressman, first and foremost, the
laborers have and have for generations had a very mature
training program. Our members do not pay for their training.
The training is provided through joint labor-management
committees, through contributions that go into our training
programs as a result of the hours worked by every member.
That money is pooled, and the training is, again, provided
to our members free of charge, and that can go for basic
skills, skills upgrades, and continued professional development
into our sector.
As a rule of thumb, we would prefer to not see a lot of
Federal money be thrown out to the nonunion, low-road
construction contracting community who are not making those
investments that our contractors do.
Again, I understand that there is need out there, and not
every community is the same, but we would prefer to see
resources go into actual projects that create the jobs that
create the demand that allows us to train for those.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you so much; I yield back.
Mrs. Napolitano. Mr. Stanton, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Stanton.
I would like to go to Mr. Garamendi next.
Mr. Garamendi, you may proceed.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I appreciate this hearing. It is an extremely important
hearing, and one of the advantages of being last is I have
learned a lot about issues.
I am going to really limit my questions. The EPA Clean
Water State Revolving Fund, the WIFIA Fund, the Drinking Water
State Revolving Fund, all of these programs require that
American steel and iron be used, but there is a lot more that
goes into projects than just steel and iron. Mr. Teske spoke to
the issue of the other things.
So what I am really looking at here is whether we should or
should not include in any legislation, Tammy Baldwin's and my
legislation from last year, that would require ``Buy America''
provisions be written into the programs that we are discussing
today, the Clean Water State Revolving Fund specifically, and
then also WIFIA, as well as the Safe Drinking Water State
Revolving Fund.
So my question goes to, first of all Mr. Teske. Thank you
so very much for your testimony where you spoke directly to
this.
Why do you not take another 30, 40 seconds and hit this
theme one more time?
Mr. Teske. Thank you, sir.
Yes, I think it is very important that all of the products
that are used be made in America. These are major capital
expenditures that all of these facilities need, and it is best
if they are made in the USA. They employ U.S. workers, and they
have a ripple effect throughout the economy and throughout the
supply chain where the products are made.
So thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. I really appreciate your testimony where you
spoke to the capital investment that your company has made in
anticipation of ``Buy America'' provisions in the upcoming
legislation.
I know, Mr. Mallino, you are well on this. We have worked
with you last year on these issues--not just last year, but the
last decade--and we continue to work on these issues.
So I am going to move to a different subject here in my
remaining 2 minutes.
Mr. Rouzer raised this issue in his last question, and that
is what are we going to do about the discharge requirements.
The national pollution discharge elimination systems, the NPDES
requirement is presently 5 years. By the time an agency knows
that it has a problem, figures out what to do about it, deals
with all of the litigation, 5 years is gone.
And so the move to a 10-year period of time is, in my view,
very, very important, and that is why last year we introduced a
bipartisan piece of legislation, H.R. 1764.
I just had a discussion with Mr. Rouzer about this. Perhaps
we will reintroduce that bill, taking advantage of his ranking
membership on this committee, and get the job done this year.
With that I have covered most of my issues that were
covered by other Members, and I am going to yield back my
remaining 1 minute and 40 seconds in just a second as I drive
home once again the need for make it in America, ``Buy
America'' legislation.
It does us little good to spend billions and billions of
dollars and then see that money go offshore to manufacturing
facilities in China or other places around the world, where
American dollars, American taxpayer dollars are being used to
support other economies and not our own.
So with that, Madam Chair, thank you so very much for an
extraordinarily important hearing. I look forward to working
with you and the other members of the committee to make all of
this happen so that we can have a Build Back Better legislation
that includes clean water.
Thank you so very much.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi. You make some
great points, and you know I support your ``Buy America''
totally.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon, you may proceed.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman. I am happy to be here, and thank you for putting me
in this hearing.
I think it is an important matter, and in the case of
Puerto Rico, actually we've got hurricanes, and the issue of
the safety and the future of economic recovery of our
communities was impacted as well as the foundation of public
health, and actually that is wastewater.
And there is no community that can grow without managing
wastewater, and that infrastructure is one of the critical
services as defined by the Stafford Act, and that is the reason
during the last Congress we actually submitted a bill to manage
those definitions.
I think that it should be a priority in any kind of
disaster recovery.
In the case of Puerto Rico, and just to share with the
panelists here, our main water utility, PRASA, in the aftermath
of the disasters, the wastewater suffered more than $600
million in immediate damage under FEMA emergency categories.
An additional $3.7 billion allocation for all water and
wastewater operations has been announced by FEMA early this
year, and as we can see the legislation on water
infrastructure, the securing of proper priorities of funding of
the wastewater sector, especially for those economically
disadvantaged areas, needs the attention of this committee.
And especially any proposal must consider those communities
that may not have the cash or the resources to match grants,
either financially or in kind, and provide the means for these
communities to be able to benefit from any infrastructure to
rebuild initiative. And we can attest to that.
In our disaster relief bills in the past two Congresses, we
included provisions to allow what Mr. Garamendi just said,
Build Back Better process. This must be part of any program,
since by building to improve the standards, we can have an
infrastructure that is more resilient and that can handle
emerging situations better.
So I look forward to having hearings with EPA, the Corps of
Engineers, and other agencies that oversee this important
infrastructure.
So having said that, having the panel here, I think I have
got a question to Mayor Berger.
First, what are the greatest challenges in terms of those
matching funds?
You suggest in your testimony increasing the current total
funding commitments. Do you find that the commitments have
failed to keep up with the real cost increases?
In your suggestion for funding for Army Corps authority for
water and wastewater works, does the organization have a
suggestion to the types of infrastructure that should be a
priority to have in their attention?
Mr. Berger. Well, every community is facing different
challenges. For us it was a combined sewer system and sanitary
sewer.
Communities in California, for example, are facing enormous
TMDL requirements, stormwater related.
I mean there truly is a massive set of expectations and
demands, and geology; the rivers, the streams, the lakes that
make up a place all have differing requirements for protection.
So I do think the resources need to be at a scale that
matters, and then there has to be flexibility to be able to
address the unique needs that every community has because of
the environment that it occupies.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. A question to you and to Mr. McFoy. Do
you both consider that stormwater management should be included
along with wastewater under the definition of critical
infrastructure for the Stafford Act purposes after disasters?
Mr. McFoy. Yes.
Mayor Berger?
Mr. Berger. Go ahead.
Mr. McFoy. Just an emphatic yes. It is critical. That is
the situation here in Buffalo. It is our stormwater challenge
in dealing with that, and that is we count that as critical
infrastructure.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you.
Mr. Berger. The other thing that I would add is that
integrated planning as it has currently been codified only
deals with wastewater and stormwater. It does not yet include
drinking water issues.
And I think that one change that the Congress should also
be teeing up is the opportunity to actually break down the
silos for communities so they can create integrated planning
for all their water-related needs.
They can then establish priorities, and with those
priorities, long-range plans for being able to ultimately
afford those over time.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Miss Gonzalez-Colon.
I understand that Mr. Katko has arrived. We will proceed to
let him speak.
Mr. Katko, you may proceed.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Chairwoman Napolitano. It is good to
see you again, my friend.
I literally just got back in the office, and I wanted to be
able to have an opportunity to speak on this important issue.
The community that I represent in central New York,
Syracuse and the central New York area, understands the
importance of clean water infrastructure all too well. Whether
our community is working to replace aging pipes in Syracuse or
responding to harmful algae blooms on Owasco Lake or the other
tributaries, the need for further investment is clear.
Here's why Federal support is essential to help State and
local governments finance essential drinking water and
wastewater projects: Ensuring the affordability of clean water
for all of our communities is critical in supporting innovative
research that will expand the availability of modernized water
infrastructure systems.
I look forward to working towards these goals with my
colleagues on this subcommittee and to discussing these efforts
with today's witnesses.
I have got a question for Mr. McFoy. In your testimony you
touch upon the importance of employing innovative clean water
technologies. Last year the House passed as part of the Moving
Forward Act a program that this committee supported to help
clean water agencies adopt innovative technology solutions to
address water treatment improvements.
Do you support an innovative technology adoption program
that help modernize our Nation's water infrastructure to
address water quality needs and to help bridge a funding gap?
Mr. McFoy. Congressman Katko, absolutely. We know just
being on the Route 90 from each other. Cost effective,
innovative technologies are truly key to how we are going to
bridge the gap not only in funding, but in the efforts that we
have to do in respect to climate change.
So we are a big supporter of that, and in fact, here in
Buffalo, we have been able to focus in on our smart sewers,
which have saved us to date, as far as our plan is concerned,
over $145 million, and that is by utilizing artificial
intelligence and simply sensors to make sure that we can manage
our stormwater challenge most effectively.
Mr. Katko. Well, look. I appreciate that. I was going to
ask you about some of the technologies.
Are there any other technologies that you are employing
other than what you just mentioned in the Buffalo area?
Mr. McFoy. Yes, sir. Everything that we can get our hands
on, that is what we are trying. From our treatment facility,
you know, where we are working on our DL probes and
establishing things that will allow us to better manage our
energy concerns to out in our collection systems, we are always
focused in on that innovative, cost effective technology.
Mr. Katko. So what policies and resources can we in the
Federal Government provide to become a more engaged partner in
advancing the use of this technology and increasing the
potential long-term cost savings in utilities?
Mr. McFoy. One of the major things that the Federal
Government can definitely provide is really having allocations
that are focused in on new technologies and smart water, and I
know that that has been out there, and that has been kind of
pushed through.
But in advanced research projects as well, those are very
critical to how we are going to accomplish the next 21st-
century utility.
Mr. Katko. OK. Very well. I thank you very much.
Listen. I went to college right up the road at Niagara
University. So I know Buffalo well, and it is good to see the
renaissance it is undergoing, and the renaissance will be
complete when the Bills win the Super Bowl.
Mr. McFoy. Absolutely, sir, absolutely.
Mr. Katko. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Katko. I appreciate your
coming on.
I tell you that there are many facets to water. From
climate change to training, manufacturing, ``Buy America'',
education; the list goes on.
We must ensure as the money goes to the States that the
States use it for the intended purpose, number one.
And I certainly want to thank all of the witnesses. You
were fabulous, and most of you on time, not really bad, and
thank you very much for being with us.
You may have given us food for thought with your insights.
Thank you very much for all of your testimony.
I ask unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing
remain open until such time as our witnesses have provided
answers to any questions that may be submitted to them in
writing.
And I ask unanimous consent that the record remain open for
15 days for any additional comments and information submitted
by Members or witnesses to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I would like to thank our witnesses again very much. You
have been great, the witnesses, and I thank you very much.
If no other Members have anything to add, the committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

Submissions for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of Hon. Sam Graves, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Missouri, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure
Thank you, Chair Napolitano, for holding this important hearing.
Since this is our first hearing for the Subcommittee I want to
congratulate and recognize our new Ranking Member--David Rouzer from
North Carolina.
This Subcommittee is known for getting bipartisan legislation not
just passed, but signed in to law every Congress.
I know the Ranking Member is up to the task and I look forward to
working with him along with the Full Committee and Subcommittee Chairs
to get things done to improve our water infrastructure in this country.
As for our hearing topic today, clean and reliable water and
wastewater infrastructure is essential to protecting the public health,
growing local economies, and conserving the environment.
However, our water infrastructure is aging and in need of repair.
In Missouri alone, the total documented needs are over 9 billion
dollars.
Communities across my district from St. Joseph to Hannibal,
Missouri face many wastewater infrastructure issues.
I am acutely aware of the stress placed on local governments,
especially those serving rural communities, to meet the water needs of
their constituents.
And they have to do so in a responsible and reasonable way that
doesn't financially cripple the people they serve.
If we want our communities to thrive, especially our rural
communities, then we must address this critical part of our
infrastructure in a timely and cost-effective manner.
There is a Federal role in water infrastructure, and this Committee
has supported and passed legislation demonstrating our bipartisan
commitment to this issue.
At the same time, the Federal government must avoid placing
unfunded mandates and burdensome regulations that drive up the costs
for communities to provide clean water to their constituents.
I'm confident we can continue to work together on these important
issues.
I look forward to hearing some of the challenges and solutions our
witnesses have in improving our water infrastructure.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Texas
I would like to thank Chairwoman Napolitano and my fellow
colleagues on the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee for
their diligent work to address the urgent need for immediate investment
in our wastewater infrastructure. Everyone is the U.S. is impacted by
the need for wastewater improvements and clean water.
The Dallas area falls within the Southwestern Division of the Army
Corps of Engineers. Flooding and flood control continue to be issues
that are ever-present on the minds of residents along the Trinity
River. I have held several meetings on flooding in the Dallas area to
address this issue and hope to continue to work with the Corp to combat
flooding in Dallas as well as making our wastewater systems more
resilient.
Our recent weather in Texas has highlighted the immediate need for
municipal water and sewer infrastructure investments and
weatherization. We must not allow the mistakes of the past to continue
to impact us in the future.
Within my district, The City of Dallas is appreciative to the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) for their funding of the Dallas
Floodway, Dallas Floodway Extension flood risk management projects and
Lewisville Dam repairs and their continued efforts to complete these
projects quickly. The projects addressing pump stations and levy
heights in Dallas, along with bridge projects in Ft. Worth would not be
where they are today without the work of the Corps and our commitment
to our residents in Dallas.
Madam Chair, the Clean Water State Revolving Fund (SRF) has not
been reauthorized since 1987. This is the primary source for federal
funding for domestic wastewater and storm water infrastructure. The
Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex is growing at a quite rapid pace and this
updated legislation will help to provide adequate water and wastewater
infrastructure to meet the demands, given the rapid pace of growth and
development in our area.
Furthermore, updating the SRF will help in addressing maintenance
needs, replacing aging infrastructure, and help in accounting for human
behavior in all aspects of our water system--from sewer overflows, to
promoting water conservation through drought tolerant outdoor
landscaping, and making our wastewater systems more resilient.
Madam Chair, I will continue to work to address the many water
needs of the residents of the City of Dallas and the U.S. Every
American is impacted by the need for clean water and our investments in
wastewater infrastructure.

Letter of February 24, 2021, from Adam D. Link, Executive Director,
California Association of Sanitation Agencies, Submitted for the Record
by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano
California Association of Sanitation Agencies,
1225 8th Street, Suite 595,
Sacramento, CA 95814, February 24, 2021.
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano,
Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure, U.S. House of
Representatives Washington, DC.
Dear Chairwoman Napolitano:
On behalf of the California Association of Sanitation Agencies
(CASA), I write in support of the Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment's ongoing efforts to address the vital need for clean water
infrastructure investments. CASA supports the draft proposal entitled
Water Quality Protection and Job Creation Act of 2021 and requests that
this letter be included in the formal record of the subcommittee
hearing held February 23, 2021.
CASA represents more than 125 local public agencies engaged in the
collection, treatment and recycling of wastewater to protect public
health and the environment. Our mission is to provide trusted
information and advocacy on behalf of California clean water agencies,
and to be a leader in sustainability and utilization of renewable
resources. We believe the draft's provisions to address the well
documented funding needs of our nation's wastewater infrastructure
depend upon a robust federal partnership with local clean water
agencies. CASA is encouraged that the subcommittee is building upon the
progress of last Congress's efforts embodied by the Moving Forward Act
(H.R. 2). As this legislation progresses, we also encourage the
subcommittee to include specific funding for disadvantaged communities,
innovative monitoring and treatment technologies that could reduce
treatment costs, and alternative financing tools to help stretch
limited resources.
The reality of our clean water infrastructure being systematically
underfunded is not new. In the 2012 Clean Water Needs Survey, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) estimated that $271 billion is
required to support the nation's wastewater infrastructure. This
estimation is now a decade old and does not account for the severe
economic impacts on state and local governments and individual
utilities as a result of the pandemic. As we grapple with the pandemic
and the importance of safe and reliable water supplies, the need to
redouble our commitment to improving water quality and modernizing the
nation's clean water infrastructure could not be clearer. We appreciate
the opportunity to provide our comments to the subcommittee on the
discussion draft.
Section 3. Watershed Pilot Projects
CASA supports the authorization of $200,000,000 for each of the
fiscal years 2022-2026 to support watershed pilot projects. This
investment will help support healthier watersheds by funding innovative
approaches to address water quality impairments. Watershed protection
efforts that address impacts originating within a watershed are a vital
approach to achieving significant water quality improvements. The use
of integrated partnerships between municipalities and property owners,
establishing best practices for stormwater and wastewater management,
and enhancing resiliency of treatment works facilities can deliver
improvements through a watershed approach, and the funding provided in
this section will help to advance such programs.
Section 4. Pilot Program for Alternative Water Source Projects
We strongly support the authorization of $1,000,000,000 to support
alternative water source projects. CASA is pleased that the draft
includes ``wastewater, or stormwater or by treating wastewater or
stormwater'' in the definition of alternative water source projects. In
California, and across the West, the security of our water supplies is
constantly in flux due to extreme weather events as a result of climate
change, such as drought, wildfires, and reduced snowpack. The need to
think innovatively to identify alternative water sources that can help
enhance the resiliency of our water supplies during extreme weather
events is critical. Section 4 of this draft recognizes this and makes
the necessary federal investment to help states create resilient water
supply portfolios.
Section 6. Grants for the Treatment of Emerging Contaminants
CASA strongly supports the draft's federal investment to help
owners and operators of publicly owned treatment works implement future
pretreatment standards for perfluoroalkyl or polyfluoroalkyl substance
(PFAS) and other emerging contaminants of concern. Any effort to rely
upon the wastewater treatment process to monitor and treat for PFAS
contamination puts additional financial burden on already financially
stressed utilities. CASA recommends the authorization of federal
assistance to support clean water agencies implement new measures that
might be mandated. CASA notes that the presence of such ``forever''
chemicals are a function of industrial production and public agencies
are simply receivers of these wastewater discharges. We should not ask
our ratepayers to pay the costs of such treatment and monitoring when
the source of the discharge is known and can be addressed similar to
other pollution reduction management programs.
Section 7. State Water Pollution Control Revolving Funds
CASA strongly supports the authorization of $40 billion over five
years for the Clean Water State Revolving Loan Fund (CWSRF). The
authorization addresses two important matters.
First, it would establish certainty that federal government will
maintain a strong partnership with states local agencies for years to
come. According to the American Society of Civil Engineers' 2019
infrastructure report card, California's clean water agencies have more
than $26 billion in needs over the next two decades. This type of
sustained commitment to the Clean Water SRF program, which serves as
the backbone of clean water infrastructure financing in our state, is
essential. Second, it reaffirms that the nation needs to address the
documented funding gap that will only continue to grow as climate
impacts such as sea level rise, flooding, drought and population
migrations take a toll on our clean water infrastructure.
While increased funding is vital to assist in our longterm response
to improve public health and the environment, we also believe the
mechanism to allocate funding to states needs to be addressed. CASA
recognizes that this can be the third rail of clean water funding.
However, the challenges that our agencies confront have changed
dramatically since 1987 when the CWSRF allocation formula was last
updated. USEPA conducted a study on the allocation formula and found
that the existing approach is fundamentally failing to deliver
equitable assistance to states based upon needs and other factors. In
order for the CWSRF to meet the needs of the nation's clean water
infrastructure, the allocation formula must be updated to reflect
current and future population and treatment demands.
Section 8. Indian Tribes
CASA supports the draft's provisions of the clean water needs of
tribal communities. The priority to address communities that lack
adequate and reliable water quality infrastructure is vividly
illustrated by such communities. A dedicated $2.5 billion in wastewater
infrastructure assistance to tribal communities is vital to improving
the health and economic conditions of some of the most disadvantaged
regions of the nation.
Again, thank you for your continued attention to the needs of the
nation's clean water infrastructure and the desire to provide strong
federal investment to address the challenges facing our systems and
create new systems capable of meeting the environmental and public
health protections of the future. If CASA can be a resource for you or
the subcommittee in the future, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Adam D. Link,
Executive Director.
