- OBAMACARE IMPLEMENTATION AND THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES FY16 BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OBAMACARE IMPLEMENTATION AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES FY16 BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 10, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-FC05

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-184                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
DEVIN NUNES, California              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  XAVIER BECERRA, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

Joyce Myer, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of June 10, 2015 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESS

The Honorable Sylvia Burwell, Secretary, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services......................................     5

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

A Submission of The Honorable Earl Blumenauer....................   120
Act No. 2015-279.................................................   123
Foster Family-based Treatment Association (FFTA).................   130
William Jefferson Terry, Sr., M.D., Member, American Urological
Association, American Medical Association, and Medical
Association of the State of Alabama............................   138

OBAMACARE IMPLEMENTATION AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES FY16 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 10, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Ryan [Chairman
of the Committee] presiding.

[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Wednesday, June 3, 2015
No. FC-05

Chairman Ryan Announces Hearing on

Obamacare Implementation and the

Department of Health and Human

Services FY16 Budget Request

Chairman of the House Committee on Ways and Means Paul Ryan (R-WI)
today announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on Obamacare
Implementation and the Department of Health and Human Services FY16
Budget Request. The hearing will take place Wednesday, June 10, 2015,
in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:00
a.m.

Oral testimony at this hearing will be from the invited witness
only. However, any individual or organization may submit a written
statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the
printed record of the hearing.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to make a submission, and click on the link
entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once
you have followed the online instructions, submit all requested
information. ATTACH your submission as a Word document, in compliance
with the formatting requirements listed below, by the close of business
on Wednesday, June 24, 2015. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record,
and any written comments in response to a request for written comments
must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in
compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be
maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in
a single document via email, provided in Word format and must not
exceed a total of 10 pages. Witnesses and submitters are advised that
the Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record.

2. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name,
company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be
included in the body of the email. Please exclude any personal
identifiable information in the attached submission.

3. Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the
exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available
online at
http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman RYAN. The Committee will come to order. We know
that the Secretary is on a tight timeline today with a hard
deadline at noon. That is why the Ranking Member and I just
discussed that we will limit Members' questions to 4 minutes so
as to accommodate as many Members as possible in the
questioning. But first let me start off by thanking our
witness, Secretary Burwell.
I understand that you have to get going, so we are going to
move this as quickly as we can. We were supposed to have this
hearing earlier in the year, but events overtook us. So here we
are today. I understand that the majority of your remarks are
going to be about the budget. That is all well and good. But it
shouldn't surprise you, Secretary Burwell, that we are a little
more interested in talking about ObamaCare, especially given
the President's remarks this week.
I hope he gives you a medal for this job, because defending
this healthcare law is no easy task. I think any objective
observer would say that this law is on the fritz, by the law's
own standards. The whole point of ObamaCare was to make health
care more affordable. But premiums aren't going down, they are
going up, way up all over the country. Insurers are proposing
double-digit premium increases. In Maryland it is close to 30
percent; Tennessee, 36 percent; South Dakota, 42 percent.
Tax season was like a bad dream before. Now it is a total
nightmare. People could never afford these plans on their own,
so the law gave subsidies to some people. Well, now two-thirds
of the people who got them had to pay the IRS back, on average
over $700. That is not the kind of money that people just have
laying around.
And for all of this hassle, for all of this, what are we
getting for it? The argument was that if people had insurance
they would go to the doctor instead of the emergency room. But
now even more people are going to the emergency room.
So whatever the Supreme Court decides later this month, I
think the lesson is absolutely clear: ObamaCare is just flat
busted. It just doesn't work. And no fix can change that fact.
We are not talking about a ding or a dent or a fender-bender or
a flat tire. The whole law is a lemon. Its very linchpin, its
central principle, is government control. That means higher
prices, fewer choices, and lower quality.
So the answer isn't just to tighten a few screws and
everything will be fine. The answer isn't just to tweak it here
and tweak it there and we will all be okay. The answer is to
repeal and replace this law with patient-centered reforms.
And the truth is, I don't have to convince this
Administration that the law is broken. I know that you know it
is broken, because you keep trying to fix it. For several years
now, HHS has delayed parts of the law, and sometimes, in some
cases, they have rewritten it on the fly.
We know the most egregious example, the subsidies. The law
says that people who buy plans on State exchanges can get
subsidies. It doesn't say anything about Federal exchanges. And
yet, HHS has sent millions of subsidies out the door, putting
millions of people at risk.
More and more it seems the Administration isn't so much
implementing the law as they are improvising it. We have
already seen the evidence of the Administration using one
account to pay for multiple programs--programs that Congress
never funded. That is one of the main reasons that we are
holding this hearing today. It is Congress that wields the
power of the purse. And more and more the Administration is
acting like a purse snatcher.
So again, my kudos to you, Secretary Burwell, on a very
difficult assignment. But the American people, they deserve
better. They deserve a healthcare system that puts the patient
first. They deserve lower prices. They deserve more choices.
They deserve higher quality. And the Committee is going to do
all it can to make those things happen.
And with that, I would like to yield to the Ranking Member.
Mr. LEVIN. Welcome.
You know, I am glad we are having this hearing. And
obviously the Republicans want to focus on ACA, and I think
that is a good idea, because what is busted is not ACA, but
your attacks on it, endless attacks, never coming up with a
single comprehensive alternative in all these years.
So you sit as armchair critics while millions of people
have insurance who never had it before. Millions of kids have
insurance who would not otherwise have had it. People who have
preexisting conditions no longer are canceled or can't even get
insurance. The doughnut hole is gone. Millions of people in
lower income categories are now insured through Medicare,
millions and millions and millions. Cost containment is
beginning to work. It is beginning to work. The increase in
costs, that rate is going down.
And so you are livid because it is getting better. That is
why you are livid. And I am not surprised at your fervor. We
will be glad to take it on. We will be glad to take it on.
And I think you just need to understand what this
experiment is all about. It was combining increased access to
Medicare, to Medicaid, with an increased reliance on the
private insurance sector. That is really what this is all
about, an experiment.
And you talk about government control? More and more people
are getting insurance through the private sector. And the
States that are denying their citizens further coverage under
Medicaid are essentially telling people: Well, get lost when it
comes to health coverage. Get lost.
And you have a governor, Mr. Chairman, who is running
around this country talking about the evils of health care,
when millions of people are benefiting from what happened.
So you decided to turn this from budget to ACA. Welcome.
Welcome. Your frustration is millions and millions and millions
of people are benefiting, have health care when they did not
before.
So, Madam Secretary, I think they have thrown down the
gauntlet. I don't feel sorry for you. I think you love this job
and you like being the person who is administering this
experiment in greater health coverage after 70, 80 years of
nothing being done in this town or throughout this country. So
I happily welcome you because I think you are a very happy
warrior.
I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. I would like to recognize the happy warrior
now for your opening statement. The floor is yours, Secretary
Burwell.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SYLVIA BURWELL, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Secretary BURWELL. Thank you. Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member
Levin, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the President's budget for the
Department of Health and Human Services.
I believe firmly that we all share common interests and
therefore we have a number of opportunities to find common
ground. And we saw the power of common ground in the recent
bipartisan SGR fix, and I appreciate all of your efforts to get
that work done.
The President's budget proposes to end sequestration, fully
reversing it for domestic priorities in 2016, matched by equal-
dollar increases for defense funding. Without further
congressional action the sequestration will return in full in
2016, bringing discretionary funding to its lowest level in a
decade, adjusted for inflation. We need a whole-of-government
solution, and I hope both parties can work together to achieve
a balanced and commonsense agreement.
The budget before you makes critical investments in health
care, science, innovation, and human services. It maintains our
responsible stewardship of the taxpayer's dollar. It
strengthens our work, together with Congress, to prepare our
Nation for key challenges both at home and abroad.
For HHS, the budget proposes $83.8 billion in discretionary
budget authority. This is a $4.8 billion increase, which will
allow our Department to deliver impact today and lay a strong
foundation for tomorrow. It is fiscally responsible, which in
tandem with accompanying legislative proposals would save
taxpayers a net $250 billion over 10 years. In addition, it is
projected to continue slowing the growth of Medicare by
securing $423 billion in savings as we build a better, smarter,
healthier delivery system.
In terms of providing all Americans with access to quality,
affordable health care, it builds upon our historic progress in
reducing the number of uninsured and improving coverage for
families who already had insurance. A recent example of this
progress is the 10.2 million Americans who are currently
enrolled in health insurance through the marketplaces in 2015.
The budget covers newly eligible adults in 28 States, plus
D.C., with expanded Medicaid, and an improved access to health
care for Native Americans. To support communities throughout
the country, the budget makes critical investments in health
centers
and our Nation's health workforce, particularly in high-need
areas.
To advance our common interests in building a smarter, better,
healthier delivery system, it supports improvements to the way
care is delivered, providers are paid, and information is used.
To advance our shared vision for leading the world in
science and innovation, the budget increases funding for NIH by
$1 billion to advance biomedical and behavioral research, among
other priorities. It invests $215 million for the Precision
Medicine Initiative, which will focus on developing treatments,
diagnostics, and prevention strategies tailored to the
individual genetic characteristics of individual patients.
To further our common interests in providing Americans with
the building blocks of healthy and productive lives, this
budget outlines an ambitious plan to make affordable, quality
childcare available for working families. To keep Americans
healthy, the budget strengthens our public health
infrastructure with $975 million for domestic and international
preparedness, including critical funds to implement the Global
Health Security Agenda. It also invests in behavioral health
services, including more than $99 million in new funding to
combat prescription opioid and heroin abuse, dependence, and
overdose.
Finally, as we look to leave our Department stronger, the
budget invests in our shared priorities of addressing waste,
fraud, and abuse, initiatives that are projected to yield $22
billion in gross savings for Medicare over the next decade.
We are also addressing our Medicare appeals backlog with a
coordinated approach. We are pleased that the Senate Finance
Committee last week passed bipartisan legislation, and we look
forward to working with this Committee on it. I also want to
assure you I am personally committed to responding promptly and
thoroughly to the concerns of Members of the Committee.
I want to close by taking a moment to say how proud I am of
the HHS employees, from their work combating Ebola, to
assisting unaccompanied children at the border, the commitment
that they show day to day, day in and day out, as they work to
help their fellow Americans have those building blocks of
healthy and productive lives.
I look forward to working closely with you to advance our
common interests on behalf of the American people. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Burwell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Let me first start off by saying where we agree with the
Administration we work with the Administration. This week's
action on trade is a perfect example. But on this healthcare
law we could not be more opposed to what the Administration is
doing. We really think this is doing a great harm to the
healthcare system and to the people we all represent.
So let me start by just addressing the big elephant in the
room. Any day now the Supreme Court, as you well know, because
your name is Burwell in King v. Burwell, is about to rule, and
if the Court rules against the Administration then millions of
people will be stuck with a government-designed health
insurance that they cannot afford.
So, I mean, the big question is, then what? What about the
people who are going to lose their subsidies and possibly their
coverage? Is the President going to dictate to us how to fix
this flawed law or is the President, is the Administration
going to be willing to work with us to give families greater
freedom in choosing the health care that works best for them?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the question of the
courts, I think you know we believe that we are implementing
the law as it was written, as the statute is written, as it was
intended, as CBO has scored it for all these years, as recent
articles have reflected, that those who were part of writing
the law indicate that it should be. The idea that citizens in
the State of New York should receive Federal subsidies that
taxpayers contribute to and citizens in the State of Texas
should not is not what we think the law intended----
Chairman RYAN. I understand your opinion on what the Court
ought to do, but it stands to reason that there is a pretty
decent chance that they may not go your way. So the question
then is, then what?
Secretary BURWELL. So if the Court does decide and if the
Court would decide for the plaintiffs, and the idea that the
Court would say that subsidies in the Federal marketplace are
not eligible, those States that are part of the Federal
marketplace, that those citizens can't have those subsidies, if
the Court makes that decision we are going to do everything we
can, and we are working to make sure we are ready to
communicate, to work with States, and do everything we can. But
the critical decisions, if the Court says that we do not have
the authority to give subsidies, the critical decisions will
sit with the Congress and States and Governors to determine if
those subsidies are available.
Chairman RYAN. So here is the question I am trying to get
at. Is the President going to stand up and wave, I have a one-
page bill, I have a one-sentence fix, take it my way or the
highway, is that going to be the Administration's position? Or
is the Administration going to be willing to work with Congress
to find a way to give people more healthcare freedom? That is
the question I am trying to get at.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the question of
healthcare freedom, I think it is important to reflect, the
marketplace is a market. It uses private insurers. People that
sign up in the marketplace are not on, so they have many
choices. As a matter of fact, in the marketplace this year
there were 25 percent more plans. That is more choice. That is
more competition. That is why 8 in 10----
Chairman RYAN. Let me ask it this way, because I want to be
kind to everybody's time. Let me ask it this way. If the
plaintiffs prevail, if the King side wins, and then the
exchanges are deemed unconstitutional, not legal in the
Federal-exchange States, and the individual mandate is
effectively struck down for those taxpayers in those States, is
the President going to say reinstate the individual mandate? I
have to tell you; it is not real popular. And we here, at least
on this side of the aisle, aren't eager to reinstate the
individual mandate. We would like to free people from some of
these mandates.
I would say that the Administration has kind of been a
little two-sided on this particular issue, mandates, where you
have delayed the employer mandate twice. That goes away as
well.
So is the Administration going to take the position
Congress must just reinstate this thing in all these 37 States,
reinstate the individual mandate, reinstate the employer
mandate, my way or the highway, or is the President going to be
willing and flexible to work with Congress to fix this mess and
negotiate with Congress? That is what I am trying to get at.
Secretary BURWELL. So I think it is actually very
important, though, with regard to the decision before the
Court, the decision before the Court is who receives subsidies
and whether or not those subsidies can be given in States that
have a Federal marketplace versus a State marketplace.
Chairman RYAN. Yes, we understand that.
Secretary BURWELL. That is the decision, and that is the
only decision before the Court right now.
Chairman RYAN. Okay, so should----
Secretary BURWELL. And with regard to what happens if that
decision occurs----
Chairman RYAN. Yes.
Secretary BURWELL [continuing]. Three things occur. The
first thing that occurs is, for the people----
Chairman RYAN. Secretary Burwell, we know what will occur.
We all know this. The question is, what will the Administration
do? Will they stand up with one piece of paper and say, ``My
way or the highway,'' or will they work with Congress to
address the situation?
Secretary BURWELL. The problem that occurs if the Court
decides against us is that they have made a decision that the
subsidy isn't available.
Chairman RYAN. You are not going to answer the question,
are you?
Secretary BURWELL. No, the answer is, the problem that gets
created is subsidies aren't available. They aren't available
for millions of Americans. They lose their insurance. It drives
up costs in the individual market. To solve that problem the
critical decisions are going to sit with the Congress or
States.
Chairman RYAN. Okay. Right. So for a bill to become a law,
it goes through the House, the Senate, then the person at the
other end of Pennsylvania Avenue, the President, signs that
bill into law. Is the President going to come out and say,
``Only my way or the highway,'' one-sentence, one-page fix, or
is that President of the United States going to be thinking
less about digging in and defending his law as exactly written,
or is he going to be willing to actually deal with the issue,
which is affordable health care for millions of people who are
losing their health insurance? Is he going to work with
Congress to address this situation or is he going to put
concrete around his ankles and say, ``It is my law or
nothing?'' That is the question I am trying to get at.
Secretary BURWELL. So the President and we have said, the
Administration has said all along, with regard to improvements,
and we believe that there are improvements that can be made, we
look at three things and a fourth underlying: Affordability,
access, quality, and the issue of how it affects the deficit
and our economy. We will look at anything and have that
conversation.
Chairman RYAN. Okay.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the specifics that you
raised, I do think it is important, the issue of the individual
mandate. That is related to a very fundamental part of the
system, which is preexisting conditions. And it is our
experience, at least in my conversations across the country,
that most Americans believe that you shouldn't be kept out of
insurance or banned. If I have a child that has a condition,
that is born with a particular condition, that I shouldn't
spend my time worrying that that child will never get insurance
once they go off mine.
Chairman RYAN. You are kind of going off topic. I am going
to cut you off there. We both know that there are ways of
dealing with those problems without having to impose an
individual mandate.
Let me leave it there, in the interest of everybody's time.
Mr. Levin.
Mr. LEVIN. Well, I am not surprised at the tone, but I
really think it is so counterproductive. Chairman, you talk
about two-sidedness. The two sides, when you say you worry
about the millions who will lose their insurance, when it is
your allies who brought the suit that would deprive them of
insurance. You talk about concrete, having feet in concrete?
That is exactly where you have been in terms of ACA. Your feet
have been in concrete while you have brought up bill after bill
to try to destroy ACA. And when you say will the President be
my way or the highway, that is precisely what has been your
approach to ACA. Precisely. You have never sat down with us to
say, how could we make some changes? Instead, you have been out
to destroy ACA. And you say, where is the President's plan,
when the President believes the Court will and should uphold
the law. All you have done is issue op-eds.
Chairman RYAN. And bills.
Mr. LEVIN. And bills, contrary, contradictory bills. So you
don't have any plan. Like you haven't had a plan for 60 years.
So you can keep going after the Secretary and she will keep
trying to spell out.
I will ask you, and I finish, how many people have been
receiving subsidies, Madam Secretary?
Secretary BURWELL. Some 7.3 million people have received
subsidies that are in the marketplace right now.
Mr. LEVIN. So when you shed tears about 7.3 million,
remember--or about the law--it is 7.3 million.
What has been the average subsidy?
Secretary BURWELL. Two hundred and seventy-two dollars per
month is the average subsidy in terms of those that are in the
marketplace that are subsidized. That is the 7.3 million. So
10.2 million people are currently in the marketplace overall.
About 85 percent of those receive subsidies. The average
subsidy is $272 per month, which is what results in the
affordability.
Mr. LEVIN. And just quickly tell us, how many people have
received additional care through expansion of Medicaid?
Secretary BURWELL. The question of the total number,
because there are people in terms of the expansion itself,
about 10 million people are the estimates in terms of those
States that have expanded.
Mr. LEVIN. So add those two together and we are talking
about individuals with families, and the Republicans come here
and castigate you and this President. The shoe should really be
on the other foot.
I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hardly know how to
follow that.
I guess I am supposed to thank you for being here. But I
have to tell you, I am not in agreement with much of what you
are saying. And let me just ask you, we are trying to get the
health care back in shape, and it sounds to me like you want to
go your way and not try to work with us. And let me just ask
you if there are any proposals that HHS supports that will
reduce costs for consumers without setting price controls or
imposing other restrictions that will reduce access to care?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, there are a number of things that
are part of our budget and that we are currently implementing
that are reducing costs. We know that since the passage of the
Act, the trajectory of Medicare----
Mr. JOHNSON. But it looks to me like everything is going
up.
Secretary BURWELL. Well, Medicare spending, if we look at
what it was projected to be in terms of the previous 10 years
up to 2008 to where it has been since 2009 through 2014, we
saved $300 billion. With regard to per capita healthcare costs
in the country, in 2011, 2012, and 2013 the cost growth is the
lowest that it has been in 40 years. So that is taxpayer
savings. That is also savings for providers.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, the insurance rates are going up, not
down, and everybody is paying more for it.
Secretary BURWELL. So insurance rates before the Affordable
Care Act were going up often in the individual market well
above double-digit numbers. And so what we have seen since the
implementation is, while those rates are still continuing to go
up, they are going up at a much lower rate.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. Let me just change subjects for a second
and ask you about an effort that my colleague, Lloyd Doggett,
and I have been after for a number of years, and that is ending
the use of Social Security numbers on Medicare cards. As you
know, that finally became law earlier this year as part of the
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act. So let me ask
you, is HHS already implementing that, and how fast do you
think you will be able to issue cards without Social Security
numbers on them?
Secretary BURWELL. First, let me say thank you. Having put
this in the budget when I first arrived at OMB, I thought, as I
told you in our call, it would take years. So thank you for
your leadership and effort on this. We were pleased and I
personally was very excited.
So right now we are putting together the work plan to do
that. We haven't established the exact timetable, but as soon
as it was passed, the next day, we asked the team for the work
plans. We want to do it as quickly as possible in ways that
will serve the consumer. As you know, there are a lot of
Medicare consumers. We want to make sure that we are not
disrupting them or their services, but we very quickly want to
do it because, like you, we believe this is an important part
of privacy and security.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, I thank Lloyd Doggett for helping me
with that. But how easy do you think you can make it for
seniors to get a new card?
Secretary BURWELL. I think that is the part, in terms of
understanding the timing, because we want it to be easy for
seniors and we want to make sure they understand. One of the
things we don't want to do by making this improvement is create
confusion. So figuring out the way that we can enter in the new
people coming in very quickly with their cards, but we want to
carefully plan for those with the existing cards, because we
don't want to have a confusing situation. So that is what we
are working to do, and we look forward to staying in touch with
you and your office about how we do that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank my
colleague, Mr. Johnson, for not drinking all of that Kool-Aid
that you had in the back against ObamaCare, and bringing
forward something constructive that the people outside would
know that we are trying to provide health care is very healthy.
Chairman RYAN. Try the Kool-Aid.
Mr. RANGEL. I can't try that Kool-Aid, because I was a
former altar boy, and I went to school and learned all the
religions. And I just thought that the right thing for
Americans to do was to believe that health care was a part of
the pursuit of happiness. It doesn't even seem like a political
thing if a kid is sick and someone says that you can't have
health care. It should pain us as human beings if a person goes
to a doctor and finds out that the child has an illness but he
can't get insurance. Maybe we can find a Good Samaritan on the
side of the road. And we know that most people, middle class
people, have insurance, but that poverty sometimes restricts
people from getting this.
It just seems to me that instead of tearing down a system
where you know in your hearts people are getting health care,
that you would say, ``I don't like the way you have done it,
Mr. President. I don't like the way you Democrats have done it.
Let us help you to do it better.'' But to take some sense of
pride that the Supreme Court will just strike down the
opportunity for people to get just basic health care to me is
not just mean-spirited----
Chairman RYAN. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. RANGEL. I don't think so, Mr. Chairman, because you are
on a roll now, and I don't want to have you become a nice guy
at this point in time, because I am glad that you have
rehearsed the attack that you intend to do. And I don't care
who the Secretary is, if you are on the side of giving
assistance to people that can now go see a doctor, that can now
prevent going into intensive care because they have had
preventive care, that can now get insurance, that they couldn't
have insurance, from a political point of view, I wouldn't want
to be in your shoes explaining it.
Of course, those that are already covered, it is no problem
there. I have mine, Jack. You get the best that you can. But I
don't care what religion you believe in and even if you don't
believe in any, it seems like compassion should override
partisanship. And if we don't like what is before us, we should
work hard to repair and to fix it and to improve it.
And so, you know, I am 85 years old. If I have to decide
what moral side I am going to be raising issues on, I can't
find a better one than this. And it goes without saying, if you
are crippled, if you are blind, if you are disabled, if you
want help, and if money and insurance is what is keeping you
from getting it, you cannot give a better political home run
ball to the American people to decide a basic question, which
side are you on?
And so I am glad that politically my party would never put
me in this position. The only position I would rather be in is
where you are sitting, Madam Secretary, to be able to see that
you are on the right side of the issue. You can see that people
don't really want to discuss the millions of people that are
being helped and we are not talking about. We are talking about
life and death in the true sense of the word. And if someone
had a conscience that when a doctor said, ``I wish you had seen
me earlier,'' and they said, ``I wish I could have, but I
didn't have insurance to do it, Doctor,'' or how many cases we
have in intensive care saying, this woman, this man would never
have had to be here if it was detected earlier and we have a
mechanism for all of this.
Chairman RYAN. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. RANGEL. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will turn back
the balance of my time.
Chairman RYAN. Okay, that is good.
Mr. RANGEL. There was another minute there, but you cut
that off.
Chairman RYAN. We are doing 4 minutes so that we can get to
Members of the other dais here. I would just ask Members, if
you have a question, ask it earlier on so that the Secretary
has a chance to respond.
The gentleman from Texas is recognized.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Madam Secretary, health care is about patients, not
politics. So I was really pleased to hear you answer Mr. Ryan
that if the Court rules against the IRS in this case the
Administration will do everything we can. Can you give us some
guidance here? Will the President sign legislation other than
merely extending the subsidies to the Federal exchange?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the question of
legislation and the Affordable Care Act, that has been a
question and a comment. And where we have been is when there is
repeal of fundamental elements----
Mr. BRADY. But on going forward, I appreciate looking
backward, but going forward, if the Court rules for the
plaintiffs, will the President sign legislation other than
extending subsidies to the Federal exchange?
Secretary BURWELL. So the President has and I think will
continue to sign legislation that we believe improves
affordability, quality, access, and takes care of the deficit
issues of the country.
Mr. BRADY. So the answer is, and thank you for saying what
I hear you say, the President will sign legislation other than
simply extending the subsidies to the Federal exchange. Are you
saying that is correct?
Secretary BURWELL. The SGR bill that we just recently
signed includes very important provisions that actually extend
the Affordable Care Act's effort to do delivery system reforms.
Mr. BRADY. But as you know, that is not on the Supreme
Court case. Specific to that, asking your guidance, the
President will sign legislation----
Secretary BURWELL. Specific to the Supreme Court case----
Mr. BRADY [continuing]. Other than merely extending
subsidies?
Secretary BURWELL. Specific to the Supreme Court case, if
the question is the Supreme Court case, I want to return to
what the Supreme Court case is saying.
Mr. BRADY. No, we are looking for your guidance in a
bipartisan way. So your answer is, yes, the President will sign
legislation other than extending the subsidies to the Federal
exchange.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the question of the
Supreme Court case, that is an issue about subsidy. That is all
that is about.
Mr. BRADY. And your guidance to us would be----
Secretary BURWELL. If your question is, are we willing to
consider things that would improve or enhance affordability,
quality, and access, we are open to those things.
Mr. BRADY. So yes.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the Supreme Court case,
though, I think it is very important for me to be clear. That
is about one item. That is about one item.
Mr. BRADY. The subsidy. I am very well aware.
Secretary BURWELL. And that is the subsidy.
Mr. BRADY. I just want to make sure, again, as we look to
work together to put patients ahead of politics, you are
saying, yes, the President would definitely sign legislation
other than extending the subsidies to the Federal exchange. The
answer is clearly yes.
Secretary BURWELL. I want to distinguish between the
question of how one resolves the problem that gets created.
That doesn't have anything to do with any other parts of the
Affordable Care Act.
Mr. BRADY. But no, no, no. This is such an easy question.
It can be, yes, the President will sign other legislation, or,
no, he will sign only that legislation.
Secretary BURWELL. Congressman, I think it is very hard for
me to answer a question about hypothetical legislation.
Mr. BRADY. No, it is actually not hypothetical. As we know,
the Court is going to be ruling. Not hypothetical. If they rule
for the plaintiffs, guiding us, you are saying the President
would sign other legislation, he will not, as Mr. Ryan said, he
will not say, ``My way or the highway.''
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to fixing, improving the
Affordable Care Act, these are two different issues. The
subsidy issue----
Mr. BRADY. No, no, Madam Secretary, I don't mean to
interrupt. I am really seeking your guidance. So the answer,
though, to finalize it, is yes.
Secretary BURWELL. My answer, Congressman, is we will
review any legislation we get that has to do with the
Affordable Care Act based on four things.
Mr. BRADY. But I am asking about signing. So the answer is
no?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to legislation that we sign,
we will look at any piece of legislation and we will judge it
by four things: Access----
Mr. BRADY. So would the President sign legislation to
extend those subsidies temporarily while Republicans and
Democrats and the President work toward a long-term solution?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the subsidies, as I have
said, the critical decision is with Congress. If the Congress
writes legislation that makes sure that those subsidies are
available, that is something that would fix the issue.
Mr. BRADY. The answer is yes. Yes, he would sign
legislation other than extending it, correct?
Chairman RYAN. Time.
Secretary BURWELL. Congressman, I apologize, but when you
say ``other,'' I want to make sure----
Chairman RYAN. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Ms. Burwell, it is really nice out in Seattle. I am not
sure you made the right choice coming back here to work.
Secretary BURWELL. I am in the wrong Washington, is that
what you are telling me?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I listen to this, and we are all talking
about if the President does this and whatever. But let's talk a
specific, because I think that we haven't heard a specific come
out of the Republicans since the bill was passed. They have
never put anything on the table.
Now we have a bill, 1016, put in by Senator Johnson from
Wisconsin, and it is his solution if the bill fails. And as I
read it quickly, it repeals the individual mandate, it repeals
the employer mandate, and it says that the States can continue
the funding down, and the standard of benefits that people get
are not the national standards, but whatever the State of
Mississippi or Alabama or Georgia or Texas or one of these
States that has not had an exchange, whatever they set as a
benefit.
We know it will be lower, because it already is. They won't
cover people in Medicaid. So they clearly don't care about the
level of health care.
But explain to me how you would respond to 1016.
Mr. PRICE. Will the gentleman yield? Will the gentleman
yield?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. No, I am not going to yield. I am going to
let her explain.
Mr. PRICE. Will you take back the disparagement of the
citizens of the State of Georgia?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. She has the right to explain what the
President would think of a particular piece of legislation that
has been put forward as a serious thing by a Senator in the
U.S. Senate.
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to the Johnson piece of
legislation, that piece of legislation, from our perspective,
is repeal, because it gets rid of preexisting conditions, it
stops the funding for preventative services, it undoes that
people up to 26 would be covered, and it actually takes away
subsidies from all over time.
And so with regard to that particular piece of legislation,
that is a bill that, from our perspective, is repealing. And we
have spoken to the issue of something that repeals the
Affordable Care Act is something that the President will not
sign.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So in answer to Mr. Brady's question, will
the President sign a bill that we pass, if we pass this bill,
will the President sign that?
Secretary BURWELL. As I have said, this bill, in its
current form, is repeal, and the President has said that he
will not sign something that repeals the Act.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Is there any place that you see where there
is a proposal on the table by any Member of the House or Senate
that looks at this point as though it deals with protecting the
ACA in general and fixes the one specific problem?
Secretary BURWELL. We have not seen anything.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And you have looked at all the legislation
and read all of the press releases and everything else?
Secretary BURWELL. At this point we have not seen something
that addresses the specific issue of the question. Although I
think there is also the issue, I think we are all very focused
on the loss scenario. At some point I think it actually is
important to focus on the win as well in terms of how we all go
forward if there is a win.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Tell us about the costs of health care. We
hear the Chairman say the President promised that there would
be a reduction in premiums. Now, would you explain why that is
a little bit misleading in that certainly everything is going
up in the society, but they are not going up as much as was
predicted. I would like you to talk about that.
Secretary BURWELL. That is correct. And as we have seen,
the premium increases that occurred in the individual market
and even in the employer-based market, we are seeing smaller
increases in those premiums than we saw before. And so while
there are increases, the increases that we were historically
seeing that were driving costs for individuals, for employers,
and in terms of Medicare and the costs to the government, that
is what we have seen shrink and slow.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Mr. Tiberi.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Burwell.
The recent SGR repeal and Medicare reform bill that passed
a couple months ago included a bipartisan bill that I sponsored
to require binding bids from suppliers participating in the
durable medical equipment and supplies competitive bidding
program. The provision, supported by my Democrat colleagues,
removes bad actors from the program, something I don't have to,
I know, go over with you, and ensures that seniors get quality
medical equipment.
In a compromise with the Administration, the law requires
that CMS implement the provision not earlier than January 1,
2017, but not later than January 1, 2019. I think that 2019 is
a very generous timeline to implement the bill and would hope,
with your leadership, that we could move it closer to the
January 1, 2017 timeline.
Because at the end of the day, as you know, again, there is
bipartisan support for this concept. My good friend Bill
Pascrell is all over this issue as well. We think that this
will ultimately help separate the good from the bad and
ultimately help our seniors. So your leadership would be
critically important to moving that closer to the beginning
than the end.
Secretary BURWELL. So it is related to Mr. Johnson's
question too. As soon as the bill passed, which was such a very
important bill--I don't think I need to articulate to this
Committee all the important things we have worked to put
together so that we are specific and we do try to meet and beat
deadlines. We have been able to do that on some bipartisan
legislation in behavioral health that was supported both in the
House and the Senate in terms of beating deadlines we were
given, and where we can, we are going to try to. Thank you for
your support in helping to do that. If we need further support
and help I will come and ask.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Secretary BURWELL. But it is something that is a priority.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
The other issues, Madam Secretary, are intellectual
property rights, incentivizing the creation of innovative new
medicines that improve people's lives and supporting good U.S.
jobs. We are talking about trade this week.
I want to ask you specifically about India. Over the past
couple of years, India's intellectual property climate has
unfortunately deteriorated pretty significantly and the U.S.
IP-intensive industries have suffered, including
pharmaceuticals, and they have expressed significant issues
with respect to the Indian market.
Most notably, courts in India have issued compulsory
license, as well as denied or revoked several patents for
popular medicines held by U.S. companies, citing an Indian law
that many believe diverges from India's international legal and
international trade commitments.
Have the compulsory license and denial, revocation of
patents on medicines been part of any of HHS discussions with
its Indian counterparts? And I know this is kind of a question
that might have come out of left field based upon what you
prepared today, but would you agree it would be ill-advised for
any U.S. Government employee to undermine the policy of the
United States to promote strong international property rights
in foreign markets? And if you aren't prepared to answer that,
would you mind looking into it and getting back to us as we
have this trade debate this week?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, I am happy to get back to you. The
USTR would probably lead in any of those conversations that
were in that space. So I think what I will do is coordinate
with the USTR so that we get back to you together.
Mr. TIBERI. That would be great.
Secretary BURWELL. Because I think you probably know those
conversations----
Mr. TIBERI. Yep.
Secretary BURWELL [continuing]. With the governments are
being led by the USTR. We give our policy and programmatic
input to them and they lead.
Mr. TIBERI. Great.
Secretary BURWELL. So we will make sure that one of the
two, either HHS or the USTR, gets back to you.
Mr. TIBERI. Thanks so much. I appreciate your leadership.
I yield back.
Secretary BURWELL. Thank you.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Mr. Neal.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, the opioid addiction issue is pronounced
now across my congressional district, and there are all sorts
of stories now that indicate a nationwide trend. And I am
curious about the response of your Department, the agencies
that you oversee, and I would also like to ask specifically
about prescription drug misuse.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes.
Mr. NEAL. I would like to know about the evidence that you
are coming across on that basis.
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to the issue that you
have raised, thank you for raising it. In our budget there are
99 million additional dollars to implement an evidence-based
strategy on the problem.
Let's just quickly touch on the problem. When we think
about the problem, as you articulated, in your district, across
the country, opioid and overdose deaths have exceeded the
number of deaths from car accidents or any other accidental
death. In the year 2012, there were 259 million prescriptions
for opioids. That is more than one for every adult in the
country.
Mr. NEAL. Would you say that again? How many prescriptions?
Secretary BURWELL. There were over 250 million
prescriptions in 2012 for opioids. That is how many
prescriptions there were. That is more than the number of
adults in our country. So that was one prescription for every
adult in the country in terms of where we are in the magnitude
of the problem.
Let's go to the solution. We have worked and worked with
States and worked with the Congress. There are a number of
bills up on the Hill right now. There are three basic areas on
which we need to focus.
One is prescribing. A big part of the problem, as you can
see from that number, is prescribing. What we need to do there
is we need to provide new prescribing guidelines for pain and
pain medication that will help the problem. But also, in the
prescribing States, States need to do what are called
prescription drug monitoring plans. They are almost in all 50
States and they are the means by which a physician has the
opportunity to look up and see that a controlled substance was
already given to you, and control it that way. It works the
same way with pharmacists. So prescribing is number one.
Number two is the use of naloxone, which is a very
important drug that actually stops death when there is an
overdose, and making sure that first responders have access.
That is a very important part of that picture. Nick Kristof
even had a piece out about it this week.
Number three is the issue of medicated assisted treatment
combined with behavioral issues and making sure that we do
treatment for those who are addicted.
So those are the three things. The $99 million additional
funding in our budget cuts across CDC and SAMHSA as we do this.
We are doing this in conjunction with States. I have been in
Massachusetts with your Governor, doing a joint event with your
Governor. This is a bipartisan, bicameral, and statewide issue,
whether it is Governors or both sides of the legislative body
and both sides of the aisle. And certainly your colleague from
Kentucky is leading in this effort in the House.
So that is our plan. That is what we are trying to do.
Mr. NEAL. And it is noted that in some places in New
England heroin is selling for $3.50 a bag on the streets of
some of our old industrial cities. And I have House bill 1821
that I would invite Members to take a hard look at. Senator
Markey has a companion bill in the Senate.
What specific actions should Congress be taking along these
lines to assist you in noting, as you have, that there are now
more deaths from overdose than from automobiles?
Secretary BURWELL. So on the heroin point, we know that the
second two elements, the nonprescribing elements of the
strategy, we will work on.
With regard to the places where we believe we need help
from Congress to implement that strategy, one is in the area of
buprenorphine, which is another drug that helps in this, and
the question of prescribing. So we believe that that is an
important place. The second place is in making sure people are
trained with the guidelines.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Dr. Boustany.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Secretary Burwell.
Last fall the Administration proposed a child support
enforcement rule, and former Chairman Dave Camp, along with
Senator Hatch, sent a letter expressing concern about this. And
the issues that were raised were that the Administration in
this area was usurping the authority of Congress to write law
and was, in effect, writing law.
And this has been a repetitive theme. I think Chairman Ryan
raised this issue with regard to certain issues relating to
ObamaCare. But we have seen this with immigration, with
ObamaCare, other areas of the law, TANF waivers. So why,
especially in this area where this Committee in a bipartisan
way has been willing to work with the Administration on these
child support policies, why does the Administration choose to
trample on the Constitution and Article I powers in an area
where we want to work together? I just don't get it.
I mean, I understand there is always tension where we
disagree. I get it. And that is a fight that we are seeing
being played out in the courts. But why in an instance where we
do have willingness to work and cooperate on this important
issue area?
Secretary BURWELL. We would look forward to the opportunity
to work in this space. In terms of that particular rule, there
were some very important things that I know you are familiar
with, the fact that some of these things were done in the
1990s. So people have to do paper applications with regard to
child support. And so a lot of the rule was about things like
improving the ability to use technology and other things, and
improvements and simplifications to the rule.
If there are specific policy areas that are of concern, we
are listening to those comments that have come in. I think you
know we have not finalized the rule. And we would welcome the
opportunity to work on the issues and the substantive areas.
Some of the things that have been mentioned in the release
that happened yesterday are in areas where the States have
advised us--in the State of Texas--in terms of we are following
what the States have asked us to do in terms of things like
using money for people to do job training, which is an issue
that is important in a number of the States.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Well, Chairman Ryan and I introduced
legislation yesterday dealing with this in order to protect our
constitutional right to write law. I know there is companion
legislation in the Senate by Senator Hatch and Senator Cornyn.
But we want to put the Administration on notice that this body,
the legislative branch, writes law and that the executive
branch executes. And we are getting tired of it, especially in
an area where we have some agreement. Just be put on notice
that we are going to continue to assert our constitutional
prerogative.
On a different issue, the employer mandate has not been
implemented. There are a lot of complications with it. We know
how complicated it is. We have heard testimony in the past on
this. And I know it does not apply to small businesses, those
with 50 or fewer full-time equivalents. But those individuals
would still be subject to the individual mandate.
Why has the Administration been reluctant to assist these
kinds of small businesses? I questioned Secretary Lew when he
was before this Committee earlier this year with regard to
health reimbursement accounts, and there was a move, I think,
for a 6-month reprieve on really onerous penalties for small
businesses, but 6 months. I just don't get it.
I have legislation that would actually make it more
effective for small businesses to use these health
reimbursement accounts, which are completely legal under ACA,
but yet for some reason your agency and the Administration have
decided to close the door on these. I don't get it. Shouldn't
we be helping small businesses and their employees at a
troubled time?
Secretary BURWELL. We agree with you and want to try to do
more. In the budget right now, the budget proposal that is
before the Congress right now for fiscal year 2016, we actually
have proposed expanding the tax credit. It is available for
those up to 25 employees. We want to move it up to 50, to
expand the access to tax credits that they can get. It sounds
like similar kinds of ideas in terms of getting folks the
access they need to the help they need----
Mr. BOUSTANY. Well, health reimbursement accounts are very
effective, and it is a simple solution.
Chairman RYAN. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman RYAN. Mr. Doggett, are you ready?
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Burwell, for being here.
It seems to me that the focus of this hearing and the focus
of all of our work should be on how we can make this healthcare
system work better and deliver services and insure more
families instead of speculating about some Court decision.
As you know, Madam Secretary, I have a number of concerns
about the way this law has been implemented, particularly in
Texas. I am concerned about the fact that two out of three of
our Texans who are market eligible for these marketplaces are
not yet enrolled.
And I think there are things that your office can do for
more effective implementation. I would encourage you strongly
to do the same kind of cost-benefit analysis that you did at
OMB, and that is to look at these contractors and see if they
are delivering on their services. As you know, I have a number
of queries to you about those. I would hope to focus on how we
can make it better and how we can make the implementation
better.
But when I hear you accused of being a purse snatcher, it
does get my attention. You know, the easiest thing for this
Court to do, and I think the right thing, is to not ignore the
other 900 pages of the law and focus solely on four words. And
if it is necessary to have a legislative fix, deleting four
words solves the entire problem and allows this law to work the
way the Congress intended for it to work.
There are many other ways to address this problem, and in
fact, apparently, some States are beginning to look at the
possibility that the best way to fix the law, should the Court
render the wrong decision, is to simply create their own
exchange.
It is also extremely impressive to me that of all the
proposals that have come in here at the last minute of
Republicans to deal with the possibility of an adverse Court
decision, how many of those proposals attempt to include as
much of the hated ObamaCare as possible--preserving the right
of young people up to age 26 to participate in their family's
health insurance program, attempting to maintain exchanges and
so on.
If today we are asking you about how to make improvements
to reach more people in our laws, that would be a reasonable
thing, instead of the polemics that are going on here. Indeed,
I think it is probably historic. I could not find another
circumstance in which Members of the House and Senate ask a
court to deny thousands, indeed, millions of people across the
country an opportunity to get a Federal tax credit, to say
please deny--in Texas, our two Senators--please deny our
constituents $206 million every month in Federal tax relief,
but let them keep paying taxes to finance the same kind of tax
credits for people in California.
Or someone from Wisconsin--since Chairman Ryan joined the
same brief in the Court--who says, please have my constituents
continue to pay taxes to fund tax credits in Connecticut, but
deny thousands of people tax credits in Wisconsin.
It is an unusual situation, to say the least, that that
kind of approach would be taken.
I believe we need to look for improvements in the law, to
strengthen the law, but that the idea of denying relief to
people who are receiving it right now is to take away from them
Federal tax assistance and to take away from them the
opportunity to get the insurance that is working for their
family.
To say that it is a lemon to provide families the relief
with insurance for preexisting conditions that they never had
before, something that is lifesaving in many cases, is truly a
misstatement about the work of this legislation. Thank you very
much.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. The time for the gentleman has
expired. Mr. Roskam is recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary, thanks for
your time today. There are two issues that I would like to use
our couple of minutes together on. They are related. It is the
discussion around cost-sharing reduction payments and then also
the basic health program. So just to set the table, the cost-
sharing reduction payments, the issue is whether the
Administration has the authority to spend out of an account
that hasn't been appropriated.
As you know, Chairman Ryan and Chairman Upton wrote to you
and Secretary Lew on February 3. Your response back at a staff
level, look, I mean, it was sort of predictable. It restates
the obvious in terms of a number of truisms about the
Affordable Care Act. And then it says go talk to the lawyers at
the Department of Justice because there is pending litigation.
A little bit of a cute response in my view. But it is your
play. Now, where there is no litigation pending and the issue
is exactly the same is on the issue of basic health programs.
So it wouldn't be satisfactory to say you have to check with
Justice. Because they are not involved in any litigation
because there is no litigation between us at this point in
time.
So here is my question. The law is really clear that you
can't spend money that hasn't been appropriated. There is no
ambiguity about that. The Constitution is clear. The GAO states
this. Many, many, different entities say that money cannot be
spent absent an appropriation. And, yet, there are a number of
States that are announcing that, you know, Minnesota was a
State that says they are going to be implementing the program.
New York has announced that they will operate the basic
health program starting in January of 2016. New York has
estimated that they will receive $2.5 billion, B, billion. How
is this possible since the money has never been appropriated?
In other words, what extra-constitutional authority are you
invoking that allows you to spend money that has not been
appropriated?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the issue of 1311 and
where that is, I think 1311 is about States that want to choose
and try to do things in ways that seek flexibility. And that is
what we try to do is work with States when they do that.
With regard to the authority, both for the cost-sharing and
the issue of 1311, in the budget appendix, pages 1046 and 1047,
is the place where we believe these authorities lie.
Mr. ROSKAM. But there has been no appropriation, you will
acknowledge that, won't you?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the authorities there,
what we believe is the authorities for the APTC are the
authorities because that is what the money----
Mr. ROSKAM. But you are conflating two concepts. You are
conflating authorization, which I am not arguing with, and
appropriation. There has been authorization. But there has been
no appropriation. So how do you appropriate money that hasn't
been appropriated?
Secretary BURWELL. But programs that are tax credits aren't
a part of our discretionary budget every year. In terms of
discretionary programs, I mean, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
other
tax programs and tax credits are not a part of the
discretionary process.
Mr. ROSKAM. So just to follow up, would you be willing to
come in and give a briefing to me and also to Chairman Tim
Murphy, who chairs the Oversight Subcommittee at Energy and
Commerce, to clear up these things when we have more time
together?
Secretary BURWELL. Congressman, we would look forward to
the opportunity to try to clear this up and have the right
people come and discuss these issues.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thanks very much. I have just one other quick
point. You mentioned in your opening statement that there was
$22 billion in fraud savings, which is okay, not great. The
problem is, and Mr. Lewis and I found this out together, along
with all the Members of our Subcommittee, Medicare, by
Medicare's own admission, is wasting $1 billion a week, every
single week in fraudulent and erroneous payments.
So $22 billion over the decade is okay. But it is like
turning it off halfway through the year and then letting 9.5
years go by without doing anything. So I think we really need
to up the game. I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Mr. Thompson.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
the hearing. And thanks for helping to subsidize my California
constituents and their health care. I appreciate that.
Madam Secretary, thank you very much for coming out. I just
want to say that I hear a lot from my constituents as well
about the ACA. I hear from people who are pleased that the
preexisting conditions is no longer an issue for them, that
their 26-year-old can stay on their policy, that they have
access to quality preventive care, which I know for a fact will
save us all money in the long run. But I also hear them say
that they recognize there are problems with the ACA. And they
want us to work together to fix those problems.
I don't know how it could be a lot different than in other
parts of the country. My experience has been that folks want
access to quality affordable health care. And we do have a
responsibility to figure out how to make that happen. And I
appreciate your effort in that regard.
So I am all for fixing, making tweaks, making adjustments.
Congresswoman Black and I are going to introduce legislation
today, as a matter of fact, that falls into that category of
making a tweak, making a fix. And we are going to introduce a
bill that would ease the reporting requirements for employers
offering coverage for their employees. And it would require
that the exchanges use the most recent tax data to ensure that
individuals and families will not have a large tax bill at the
end of the year.
As I am sure you know, Covered California in my home State
of California, requires that the most recent tax data be used.
And it has worked well. It has been beneficial. I am just
wondering if you have any thoughts on requiring the more recent
tax data to determine eligibility for subsidies, especially for
auto renewals, and making that apply to all the exchanges?
Secretary BURWELL. I think it is in our interest. And what
we want to seek to do is get the most up-to-date information
that we can possibly have which is why we encourage people to
come in and update throughout the year. And we continue to do
that.
With regard to the specifics of this piece, I think we
would have to look at the legislation. I am not sure if it sits
with Treasury or with us. But we would work together to
understand. Because I think what we want is actually to have
the most up-to-date information. And that information for some
people is an evolving and changing piece of information. For
those who are self-employed, their incomes change throughout
the year. And we do have means by which they can come in and
update it. And we try to encourage them to do that.
So, the most up-to-date information that we can implement
is something that we do support. And so with regard to the
specifics of the legislation, we would like to have the
opportunity to look at it and understand between us and
Treasury where we could be.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you. I also had some questions
regarding the RACs and the appeal process that I understand
from your staff we are going to work together outside of the
Committee hearing to deal with. So I appreciate that
commitment. I am assuming it is shared by you.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, it is. And I would also use this
just as an opportunity again to mention the piece of bipartisan
legislation that Senate Finance just passed this past week on
this issue, in terms of the strategic approach to help us get
to a place where we can reduce that backlog of appeals. There
are administrative things we can do. But we do need some
statutory help. And Senator Hatch and Mr. Wyden have led an
effort on that side. We are hopeful we can work with all of you
too.
Mr. THOMPSON. Great. And then Mr. Boustany had some
questions about the HRAs. And we are working together on that
legislation. I hope that we can have the help of your agency in
making sure that this is the best legislation possible.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Secretary BURWELL. We will work with you.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Secretary, with
respect, many of us here and many across the land sincerely
believe that the principles that you outlined that all of us
hold dear, accessibility, and affordability, and quality are
all being harmed by the current path that we are on.
And I want to highlight some of the problems in the system
that are, I believe, we believe, harming patients and in many
cases destroying the ability of those working as hard as they
can to care for those patients. One of them is the Electronic
Health Record and Meaningful Use.
CMS is now dictating to physicians what must be documented
and how it must be documented, without regard to what is truly
important and necessary for taking care of patients. It is
wasting money. It is wasting time. It is wasting resources.
And, sadly, it is wasting the expertise of physicians, leading
to further disgust on the part of physicians, many leaving
practice. In fact, I know two individuals who said this was the
last straw and they quit, at an age where they could be able to
practice for years and years.
There are positive solutions if we allow for flexibility
and respect to those providing the care. ICD-10 is another
example of CMS making it more difficult for physicians to care
for patients. In some cases, in small and rural practices, as
we have discussed, it will drive physicians out of business. So
access is destroyed for those patients in those areas.
The United States inappropriately combines and confuses
clinical data, that is what is happening medically with a
patient, with billing data, under the guise of wanting more
information and saying that everybody else in the world is
doing it. Well, the fact is that the United States will be the
only country to use all 87,000 codes, the only country to use
it in an outpatient setting, the only country to use it in a
billing process, and the only country to put the cost on the
shoulders of the physicians and those providing the care. This
happens on October 1. If past is prologue, sadly, it holds real
potential to be a significant disaster, further harming doctors
and patients. I urge, I urge CMS to delay any penalty for
coding errors for at least 2 years. It is only reasonable given
the magnitude of the change coming.
Durable medical equipment and a caring provider is
oftentimes the only thing that stands between a patient's
quality of life and hospitalization or illness, exacerbation,
or even death in the instance of the provision of oxygen. Yet,
CMS has put in place a system of what they call competitive
bidding, what you call competitive bidding. It doesn't work. It
is harming patients. And it is driving folks who have been
wonderfully providing care and service in communities all
across this Nation out of business, further harming those
patients. I urge, I plead with CMS to allow, at least allow a
pilot demonstration to show there is a much better way to save
money and also provide services to patients.
Sadly, Madam Secretary, the President continues to
shamelessly condemn and attack those standing up for patient-
centered health care. As recently as yesterday, he ignored
reality and cynically mocked those striving for positive
solutions. We know that he has a pen and a phone. What he
doesn't seem to have is the knowledge or the humility or the
concern or the desire to work together on behalf of those
struggling to provide care and those receiving the care.
Madam Secretary, I urge you, I urge you and your team to
join with us in an open-minded way to end the oppression of
meaningful use, to provide for flexibility with ICD-10 so that
more practices aren't destroyed, to allow for a pilot program
to demonstrate that competitive bidding is hurting patients and
that there is a much better way, and to give physicians the
freedom to care for patients.
If you are sincere in your desire for accessibility and
affordability and quality, that would lead to your action
working with us. And I look forward to that and hope that we
will be able to move in a positive direction. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Mr. Larson.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, thank you for your service. Hailing from the great
State of Connecticut, we are so proud of the advances of the
Affordable Care Act. And it is great to have a Governor that is
hands on in terms of its implementation and all the progress
that we know that has been made and will continue to be made
under this Act.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record a 28-
page report entitled ``The Language of Healthcare 2009,'' by
Frank Luntz. Mr. Chairman, is there an objection?
Chairman RYAN. No objection.
[The submission of The Honorable John Larson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LARSON. No objection. And I think that, I have a great
deal of respect for Mr. Luntz as well. He and Stan Greenberg,
another pollster and someone who spends an awful lot of time on
the science of language, in looking at, in detail, what people
should say around subject matter areas, have studied this
debate. Now, this is particularly of interest to me because it
passed, you know, this was recommended in 2009. And, basically,
Mr. Luntz describes the 10 rules for stopping the Washington
takeover of health care. And it is informative even to this
debate today.
For example, one of the things he says, that arguments
against the Democratic healthcare plan must center around
politicians, bureaucrats, and Washington, not free markets, tax
incentives, or competition, is interesting. So we will hear a
lot on that. It also goes on to underscore, you simply must be
vocal and passionate on the side of the reform. The status quo
is no longer acceptable. If the dynamic becomes President Obama
is on the side of reform and Republicans are against it, then
the battle is lost and every word of this 30-page document is
useless.
He goes on to say this, and this is the whole point, it is
not enough just to say what you are against. You have to tell
them what you are for. It is okay and even necessary for your
campaign to center around why this healthcare plan is bad for
America. But if you offer no vision for what is better for
America, then you will be relegated to insignificance at best
and labeled obstructionist at worst. What Americans are looking
for in health care is what your solution is, what it will
provide. The words of more access, more treatments, and more
doctors are sure winners. I agree with Mr. Luntz there. And
that is what this subject should be about, for us providing
more access.
Madam Secretary, may I ask you, are you aware of any
Republican legislative proposals that reduce the number of
uninsured in this country by more than 60 million and make sure
that we continue to provide all the benefits of addressing
preexisting conditions, keeping your children on the plan, and
making sure we focus on prevention?
Secretary BURWELL. I have not seen a proposal that does
that.
Mr. LARSON. I thank you, Madam Secretary. And with that,
submitting this full report for the record, I think it is worth
everybody's reading. And we ought to get back to what this
Committee should be doing. And that is to put Americans first
and put Americans on the road to having the best access, more
access, more accessibility, and more availability to health
care. Thank you.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Time for the gentleman has
expired. We are now going to enter into the two-to-one phase,
two on
our side, one on the Democrats side, to keep it equal. Mr. Bucha
nan.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary. I appreciate you taking the time this week to give
us a call, give me a call and make time for a chance to visit.
My biggest concern, you made four points. At the top of the
list, I was Chairman of the Florida Chamber. We had 137,000
businesses we represented. Most of them were 50 employees or
less. So we have a lot of small businesses. But the biggest
issue, and it is before the ACA, it goes back 15 years, is
affordability. And there was an expectation or hope that we
could bend the curve on affordability. There is no question
people who get the subsidies, they benefit. There are over a
million in Florida. But there are many just above that line,
the poverty line that don't get the subsidies.
And I want to talk on two bases first. Small business,
their cost of trying to provide health care has gone up 20 to
30 percent in the last 3 or 4 years. I just talked to another
person the other day who has 130 employees, and it went up 30
percent. But throughout Florida, throughout our region, we are
not seeing any reduction or anything in terms of affordability
from that standpoint. And many times, last week we had a town
hall meeting, we had one woman, or a couple weeks ago, we had
one woman who said it cost $2,000 a month to get health care.
She can get it for less. But then she has to pay some kind of a
$10,000 penalty in terms of her health care if she has a claim.
What is your thought on the affordability, where we are at as
it relates to people who don't get subsidies?
Secretary BURWELL. When we think about the affordability, I
think we think that some progress has been made. And as you
appropriately reflect, what we were seeing before is we were
seeing rising deductibles and we were seeing growth. And we
have seen a slowdown in the premiums. The things that we have
seen slow down, is we have seen a slowdown in premium growth
across a number of categories. We have also seen Medicare
savings that I mentioned earlier, over $300 billion in terms of
where we are in our Medicare pricing.
The other thing that is indicative is that we have seen the
per capita healthcare costs grow. As a Nation, because we have
so many people retiring and coming into Medicare, the overall
costs of health care are probably going to go up because we
have more elderly. So we do focus deeply on that per capita----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Well let me just mention, because we are
short on time, we are not seeing the discounts, per se. I would
love to have you come to Florida and talk to a lot of small
businesspeople. We are not seeing those. We are not seeing any
kind of discounts. Most of it is 20 to 30 percent increases. In
the last couple of years, they were hopeful but they are not
seeing it. And then, unfortunately, a lot of the costs get
pushed to the employee.
Secretary BURWELL. That is right.
Mr. BUCHANAN. And so, many of the employees that were maybe
picking up a couple hundred bucks a month, now they are paying
$500 to $600 out of their pocket. If they don't get a subsidy,
many of them are being gutted. We like to talk up here a lot
about the middle class. But this is, a lot of this is putting
the middle class at risk in terms of healthcare costs. And what
is your thoughts on that?
Secretary BURWELL. I think this is why one of the things we
need to focus on now deeply is delivery system reform. And that
is the idea of better, smarter, healthier. And by that, it is
both about quality and I think we have to be careful when we
talk about this topic because people hear it and we need to
make sure we preserve quality and improve quality. Why in our
country do we have some of the lowest levels of quality
offerings for health care? It is about improving quality and
affordability.
And right now, one of the things that we did, in January we
committed that the Federal Government, that Medicare payments,
30 percent of them by 2016, 50 percent by 2018 will be based on
value instead of volume as a part of working on this overall
issue. Because we want to hear what you are hearing and that is
important to us. And so that is a part of why we think this is
so important.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me close with the idea, because I have a
few seconds, I hope we can focus more on affordability, all of
us. Because it is bankrupting a lot of people that don't get
subsidies. That is the reality in Florida for small business
and individuals. So the focus needs to be on affordability,
finding a way to bend the curve on healthcare costs. Thank you,
Madam Secretary.
Secretary BURWELL. We look forward to the opportunity to
actually work with you on some of these delivery system reform
issues.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, Madam Secretary, for being here today. There is limited
time and a lot to cover here. As you know, as we spoke earlier
about the consumer operated and oriented plan programs which
were the alternative to the public option, I would argue,
perhaps, these are somewhat quasi-public options, intended to
be low-cost, government-subsidized healthcare plans. And to
date, I believe HHS has awarded $2 billion in Federal loans to
establish the plans.
One plan, as you know, CoOpportunity, which served over
100,000 people in Nebraska and Iowa, was seized by the State of
Iowa and has since been liquidated. Folks who were on the plan
have been left confused and frustrated and, again, looking for
other plans. And I sent a letter on January 23 asking specific
questions. I did receive a response on May 21. I would like to
request unanimous consent to submit both of these letters for
the record.
Chairman RYAN. Without objection.
[The submission of The Honorable Adrian Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Thank you. Now, quickly some
questions. CoOpportunity received approximately $146 million in
Federal loans. Will any of those dollars be paid back to the
Federal Government?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to that, that is a question
I will follow up on.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. I appreciate that.
My understanding is Iowa and Nebraska were told they could
not suspend enrollment within CoOpportunity and have it remain
a qualified health plan. Yet, Tennessee was later allowed to do
so. Do you know why that policy changed?
Secretary BURWELL. So, per our conversation, I actually did
follow up with CMS. And we didn't have the record of that
request in any way coming in. So I would love for our team to
be able to follow up and understand if there was
miscommunication. Because, based on your comment, it was
something that was concerning to me when you mentioned it. And
I went and followed up. So if we can work with your staff to
understand what your staff understands happened, that would be
helpful.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. Recent reports claim only one
co-op didn't have an operating loss in 2014. Is that accurate?
Secretary BURWELL. I would have to go co-op by co-op.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. Are there any concerns about
possible liquidation of any of the other plans in the near
future or not so distant future?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the co-ops, because they
are all new businesses, they are start-ups, like the small
businesses that we were just talking about before, you know, we
are going to have failures in terms of the co-op system. That
was a part of what was set up in terms of the original $5
billion that the Congress gave, but then through sequester and
other means went to $1 billion.
So I think that there will be co-ops that will have
challenges and issues. I think we are working closely with the
States and State insurance departments to make sure that we get
in front of them and do the kinds of things that we attempted
to do in the CoOpportunity situation, which was make sure as
much as possible and where it was appropriate we would engage
in supporting communication, offering a special enrollment
period, and working with the State insurers to use our and any
authorities we had to make sure that those consumers were taken
care of.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. Will any of the consumers who
lost coverage from the failed co-op be penalized by the
individual mandate?
Secretary BURWELL. I do not know how many are not still in
the system. But I will check and will follow up on that. My
understanding is no, but I want to confirm that before----
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. In that vein, I have introduced H.R.
954, which would exempt anyone who has lost health insurance
from the failed co-ops from the individual mandate. Could the
Administration support that approach and that piece of
legislation?
Secretary BURWELL. What I would love to do is have the
opportunity to see if that is something that has already
happened or not and then review the bill.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. Now, in the bigger picture of
obviously large sums of money being offered to these consumer-
operated and oriented programs, what is the likelihood of those
dollars being paid back?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the loans that have gone
out?
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Correct.
Secretary BURWELL. I think with regard to a number of the
co-ops, that will happen in terms of the successful co-ops and
those that are gaining traction and working. As I said, there
may be some that are not. And we will get back to you on that
specific question.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. It seems to me also that the various
States relevant to this issue might have a different approach
for paying the claims that were submitted by--how on top of
this are we? Because it is, in Nebraska, there is a fall back
and, yet, it hurts more people. I apologize. My time has
expired.
Secretary BURWELL. State insurance law, as you know, is a
big part of how that gets determined. But we try to work with
and support the States with different options.
Chairman RYAN. The time for the gentleman has expired. Mr.
Blumenauer.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, I
appreciate your reluctance to deal with hypothetical
legislation that hasn't yet been written to deal with a legal
decision that hasn't yet been rendered. I think that is
prudent. But if this occurrence takes place by the Court, it
seems to me that it would not be rocket science, as some of my
colleagues have mentioned, to make relatively minor changes, to
conform statutes to the intent and text of the bill and move
forward. I think the Committee could take one weekend and fix
it and move on.
I would like to shift gears slightly. We have had an
ongoing series of conversations, it has been 6 years since a
provision I authored was approved unanimously by this
Committee, not just by part of it, unanimously by this
Committee, dealing with end-of-life care. That provision,
despite a kerfuffle and certain rhetorical flourishes, remained
in the legislation. Unfortunately, it fell victim to the
reconciliation process. And 6 years later, we are still trying
to achieve those objectives.
Although the world has moved on, in a best-selling book by
Atul Gawande, Bill Frist, and Billy Graham, all agree that this
is necessary. You recently received a letter from 65 notable
national organizations calling on you to have Medicare
reimbursement for advanced care planning. As you know, the AMA
did the coding. It is all teed up, ready to go. We thought the
Administration was going to be there. And, yet, it lingers.
Published, peer-reviewed research shows that advance care
planning leads to better care, better patient and family
outcomes, fewer unwanted hospitalizations. The list, as you
personally know, is compelling for this service. Is the
Administration prepared to finally move forward and authorize
it?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to this, as I think you just
mentioned, the AMA has given us the guidance and the coding.
And we are in the process of reviewing that. As we indicated in
a recent rulemaking, indicated in our preamble, that is
something that we are working on and reviewing the current
coding.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. So it has been 6 years since Congress
embraced it. The Committee approved it unanimously. We have had
the research clear, the IOM dying in America. I am trying to
understand what it is that is so hard to figure out whether or
not this is part of the legacy of the Obama Administration,
which has done some good things with health care. This seems to
be a really terrific thing that is really simple, that would
make a huge difference in people's lives. Private insurance is
moving. What is it that is hanging this up? Why can't we just
get to yes?
Secretary BURWELL. Congressman, as we have said and in our
conversations and our team's conversations with you, this is an
issue we are going to continue to work on. Because we want to
make sure if we move that we do make the progress that we would
intend to make.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Well, I find it mystifying that the rest of
the world is aligned. This is one of the few things that this
Committee agreed to unanimously and that we see the difference
it makes in human lives. And the Administration continues to
study. And I really hope that this could be part of the legacy
and that it is part of the 2016 reimbursement.
I find it frustrating beyond my ability to express. I am
happy to walk, I have walked the plank for this Administration
on things before. And this is really troubling.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Time for the gentleman has
expired. Ms. Jenkins.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here today. I want to echo the comments of
Chairman Ryan and others on the Committee regarding the Supreme
Court's decision later this month on the constitutionality of
this President's healthcare law. Many Kansans are poised to
lose their subsidies, which is the only thing that makes their
insurance somewhat affordable. Many of my constituents will be
facing increases over 30 percent next year, which, in addition
to the loss of their subsidies, will make their insurance
unaffordable.
And I am extremely frustrated because I had an exchange
with your predecessor, Secretary Sebelius, 3 years ago on
February 28, 2012, when she was a witness here before the
Committee. And on that day, I expressed my concern that I did
not see anything in the President's healthcare law that would
allow Federal subsidies to flow through non-State-based
exchanges. And I told her the Administration didn't have the
authority to allow these subsidies to flow through federally-
facilitated exchanges, even though the IRS at
the time was telling Congress that the distinction didn't
matter. Because in the law, there is no mention of the term
federally-facilitated exchanges.
Even though Secretary Sebelius promised me that HHS would
give me a detailed answer in writing defending her
interpretation of the law, she never did. And, obviously, this
issue didn't go away. And now the Supreme Court will finally
weigh in on it. And I am equally concerned when you suggest
that the decision before the Supreme Court is just about the
subsidies. Because it isn't. We have research here from the
American Action Forum which talks about all of the positive
outcomes from a decision by the Supreme Court against the
Administration. Over 11 million individuals freed from the
individual mandate, over 260,000 businesses freed from the
employer mandate, hundreds of thousands of new jobs, 1.2
million workers added to the labor force.
With limited time, what I would like to do is turn my
attention to a different topic. I have introduced legislation
the past 3 years, along with my colleague, Representative Kind
from Wisconsin, to repeal a provision in the healthcare law
that allows folks to go to their doctor to get a note in order
to purchase over-the-counter medicines with their HSAs or FSAs.
And this presents patients with a maze of government redtape
that they must navigate in order to purchase over-the-counter
medicines, whose use saves the healthcare system money.
Additionally, it presents physicians with the bizarre
scenario of unnecessarily seeing patients in order to prescribe
over-the-counter pain relievers or allergy medicines. This
provision makes care less affordable, more confusing, clogs
doctors' offices, and makes patients less likely to use over-
the-counter medicines. So, Madam Secretary, I was just
wondering if you think that this is good policy and if you
would support us in repealing this provision?
Secretary BURWELL. As I have articulated, one of the things
we are focused on is this idea of how we can improve quality
and move toward affordability. The specific piece of
legislation, I am sorry, I am not familiar with, I am not
familiar in terms of the issue that I think you are trying to
resolve. And so this is one I would want to understand. I also
do want to return to where you began.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. But, in theory, would you support this
if we could convince the Chairman to mark up the bill and move
it over to the Senate? We have done that once. It has already
passed with bipartisan support out of this Committee and out of
the House once before.
Secretary BURWELL. Congresswoman, I would want to look at
the substance of the issue before I could comment specifically
on that. It is not one, I am sorry, I am familiar with.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. All right. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you so much. Mr. Paulsen.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
thanks for being here. In the limited amount of time, I want to
address a couple of things. In Minnesota, unlike many States,
we had a pretty low uninsured rate prior to the President's
healthcare law kicking into effect. You know, we had a high-
risk pool for people who had preexisting conditions. It has
been in existence since 1976. And it certainly wasn't perfect
but it worked pretty well. That high-risk pool was closed to
make way for the new State exchange program that was set up.
And now a lot of the headlines, similar to what we have
heard from some of our colleagues and concerns about premiums
rising, headlines over the last few weeks in Minnesota that
have appeared in some of our papers, show the experience under
the new exchange and the President's healthcare law has been
affecting their pocketbooks, right? And so it got here, you
know, eight Minnesota healthcare plans propose premium hikes
from 11 to 74 percent.
We have another story here, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Minnesota, which is the largest insurer in the individual
market, which you mentioned earlier about the individual
market, having the marketplace work, they announced proposed
average increases of 54 percent. So certainly this is a
pocketbook issue for families, for individuals, for small
businesses alike. And that is why I really do hope, regardless
of the court decision and how that goes, that we will be able
to work with the Administration on addressing some of these
affordability costs. Because I think when you are talking about
premiums, this goes to the heart of affordability, as opposed
to talking about, you know, per capita healthcare costs being
lowered in Medicare and other areas like that.
So just some commentary there, that I hope that cooperation
will be coming forward. Because we need that. We need that on a
host of issues if we are going to solve some of the challenges
rather than just digging in and just protecting every provision
of the law as it is intact right now. And I will just mention
this. You know, my interest with medical devices and medical
technology, which we talked about last week, is very important
in my State. And America has been a leader in developing these
technologies and cures. And innovation happens at a really
rapid pace. But often the regulatory process does not keep
pace. And I don't think it is acceptable that American-made
technology is available to citizens in other countries and it
is not available to our patients here at home.
And the number one concern that I hear now from patient
groups, from doctors, from investors in new med-tech companies,
from manufacturers isn't the FDA. The biggest hurdle they now
face is CMS and the lack of certainty surrounding coverage and
coding and reimbursement. And these decisions take 2 or 3
years. And that is after the devices have already been
approved. And they have already been approved. And this creates
a lot of uncertainty for manufacturers and doctors that want to
utilize the best available technology for their patients.
So I guess my question is, you know, what can HHS do to
oversee CMS, right, which is under your authority, to make sure
that we are bringing certainty to the coverage, to the coding,
and to the reimbursement process for medical technology that,
quite honestly, can lead to less invasive procedures and a
whole host of areas of health care that can actually save
money? It is definitely an impediment right now.
Secretary BURWELL. On the issue of the DME and CMS, we want
to continue to work and would like to work. What we are trying
to do is get that balance between making sure, we have all
talked a lot about healthcare costs and growing healthcare
costs, so making sure that the evidence-based decisions in
terms of CMS saying they will pay for it.
FDA determines its safety. And then CMS determines if we
will pay, if, you know, the benefits are such that it should be
a part of a payment scheme. And we will continue to move things
through quickly. But we will also continue to try to figure out
the ways that we balance it. If there are places and things
that people, that you have ideas about faster, that is
something that we would welcome in terms of what you are
hearing from the companies.
The other thing I think it is important to touch on is the
premium issue. What has been in the news recently is actually a
part of the ACA's effort to make sure that we have transparency
and downward pressure on premiums. What has been in the news
recently is any premium increase that is above 10 percent has
to be reviewed. It has to be reviewed by State insurers. And so
what you are seeing in the space right now in many of the
articles, I am not sure of all the headlines you read, but a
number of those headlines are about the fact that these are now
their first submission. And last year we saw this come down
because the review process works. Because there are
conversations like this in public, that it creates downward
pressure on those premium increases.
So it is a part of the process. And it doesn't reflect the
whole base. Most insurers are saying that the majority of their
people that they think will enroll next year in 2016 will have
premium increases less than 10 percent. So we agree with you on
the importance of that downward pressure.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, thank
you for being here. Obviously, there is a lot of attention and
focus on King v. Burwell and where that Court ultimately comes
down. But in your opinion, how quickly or easily could this
Congress, if it wanted to, enact legislation language to fix
that overnight if it is an adverse decision from the Supreme
Court?
Secretary BURWELL. I think I would hesitate to say how
quickly the Congress could act.
Mr. KIND. Assuming there is a willingness.
Secretary BURWELL. But I think the question of, the issue,
if it is ruled that it is about the subsidy, that that is a
relatively simple solution that one can do legislatively with
regard to subsidies for those that are in the Federal
marketplace.
Mr. KIND. I come from a State, Wisconsin, I am very proud
of, but I have never seen a greater act of fiscal malpractice
by the current Governor than what has been perpetrated the last
few years in his denial of the Medicaid expansion money. And
his budget this year is proposing over $300 million of cuts to
our university system. But if he took the Medicaid expansion
money over the next 2 years, that would bring into the State
$350 million over the next 2 years.
It just seems to be basic math. And his denial of that is
not only denying people who are tough to cover to begin with,
but also denying getting that money into the State where it can
do some good in Wisconsin. I know you especially and HHS have
been working very closely with many other Republican Governors
throughout the Nation to figure out a path forward on waivers,
and modifications, and other things. I would encourage you to
continue those lines of communication. Because we need help in
Wisconsin.
He also rejected the ability for us to form our own
exchange. So we are in that box right now looking at the
Supreme Court. And we could have done it the Wisconsin way and
created our own health insurance exchange. He chose not to. So
if we do get an adverse decision, 166,000 Wisconsonites would
lose their premium tax credits. And my guess is insurance then
would be rendered unaffordable to them too. So there is a lot
riding on this decision. And, hopefully, you will be able to
continue to work with the States and convince them to do the
right thing, especially in Wisconsin where we need help. But I
also appreciate your focus, your sustained focus not only on
delivery system reform, but payment reform, getting to a
quality-based reimbursement system.
And I agree with my colleague, Mr. Buchanan, that more
needs to be paid to cost containment. And there is some good
news. You have set up the new network on quality collaboration
throughout the Nation. And I hail from the land of integration,
coordination, quality measurements, best practices, value-based
medicine and so forth. But in your estimation, how quickly can
we pivot now from fee-for-service volume to a quality-based
reimbursement system?
Secretary BURWELL. When one considers that Medicare dollars
are a large portion, we believe that we can move to 50 percent
by 2018. The goal for 2016, being 30 percent, was where we
started out. Because, obviously, I won't be here, we needed to
set a goal, an achievement that would be there while we serve
out. So we think that you can get to 50 percent of Medicare, at
the point at which 50 percent of Medicare is based on value.
And what we are trying to do is make that pass by this network.
So I am meeting with the insurance, the CEOs, as well as CEOs
of companies, because those are the other payers.
In New York State, Medicaid has committed to doing the same
thing we are. So I think the path that we have Medicare on is
close to the trajectory for the Nation in terms of moving
toward more value-based----
Mr. KIND. You mentioned New York. Why do you think more
States aren't taking up this challenge and converting Medicaid
to that type of payment system too?
Secretary BURWELL. I think that more States are interested.
And in our conversations with States, I think a number of
States are not wanting to have the public commitment. And so a
number of States are a part of that network.
And across all States, I can look around and have talked to
Governors from a number of your States that are willing and
thinking about this because they believe getting the value-
based payments in Medicaid, which is a large expense for the
States, is a very important thing. So I think there are more
States that are interested but are not at the point of public
commitment.
Mr. KIND. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. We are now going to move to 3
minutes per person in order to try to fit in as many people as
possible. Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Burwell,
in the period of time in which the Affordable Care Act was
being adopted, probably the most unpopular aspect of it and
most debated in my district were the IPAB panels. Many names
were given to those panels. And then last week, I think, I was
able to cast a vote publicly that would abolish that panel.
Yet, there is talk about strengthening the panel. There is talk
about expanding the panel. Could you give us an explanation of
what this talk is all about and what the purpose of it is?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the changes in our budget
around IPAB, it is to strengthen and increase the Medicare
savings. Because as we have all discussed, healthcare costs and
the issue of healthcare costs, Medicare being a core element of
that, are very important.
What we are hopeful of, and in the budget, the $423 billion
of Medicare savings that is specific in specific ways, that we
can all have a discussion about, I know there are those who
disagree with us about the balance we have of provider and
beneficiary approaches to getting that money. But I think what
we believe is that IPAB as a tool, and a tool that the Congress
would still engage with, because you all would approve anything
that was suggested by IPAB, Congress would have the opportunity
to give it a thumbs up or a thumbs down, is an important tool
to keep the pressure on all of us.
Because I think we all know, Medicare expenditure is a
tough issue. It is a very tough issue for everyone in terms of,
even the issues we are talking about, about payments for DME or
other things, that is what drives those costs upward. And so we
believe it is a tool in the toolbox. We actually, in our
budget, are depending though on specific issues that the
Congress could review.
And right now, IPAB would not kick in, in the President's
budget it would be 2019. If you don't do any of the changes
that we would do, it would be 2022. And that obviously is in
another Administration.
Mr. MARCHANT. And so why has the President not named anyone
to the panel?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the issue of panel
members, it is something that we believe we should do in
consultation with the Congress. And so that has been a place
and I think it is because, as you were expressing, making sure
if you were going to name a panel, there is appropriate
congressional input.
And the other thing is at this point, now that we see the
numbers, and we have made improvements in terms of the Trust
Fund's viability over, you know, increased by many years, the
need is not for now. And it would be in another Administration.
So the question of us naming the panel now----
Mr. MARCHANT. So the President will not name a panel in his
Administration?
Secretary BURWELL. At this point, with regard to where we
are in the budget, we have not yet done it.
Chairman RYAN. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mrs.
Black.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
being here, Secretary Burwell. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous
consent to insert this report from the Treasury Inspector for
Tax Administration in the record.
Chairman RYAN. Without objection.
[The submission of The Honorable Diane Black follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. BLACK. The Affordable Care Act requires the exchanges
to determine if applicants were offered health insurance by
their employer. And if they were offered that comprehensive and
affordable coverage, then those individuals are not eligible
for the premium tax credit.
The Treasury Inspector General recently reported in this
report, stated that neither the Federal nor the State exchanges
were able to verify most individuals' attestation that they
were not offered health insurance by their employer. And this
is happening despite the fact that the burden and the costly
reporting requirements have been placed upon our employers.
What is it that HHS is doing to ensure that people who receive
these credits actually legally are eligible for them?
Secretary BURWELL. So much of our, this is the APTC that
you are referring to, correct?
Mrs. BLACK. That is right.
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to that, we have a data
matching process that we are doing. And it checks both
immigration status, as well as income status. And that is one
of the processes we are doing to make sure that people who are
eligible, and we release numbers, I think you probably saw last
week where over 100,000 people came off the rolls because we
weren't able to verify the information.
And so that is a process, it is a process last year that
took a longer period of time. And now we have improved to a 90-
day period of time.
Mrs. BLACK. So let me quickly go to the other part of this
which involves the IRS. Because in their application, that is
the individual's application for this coverage, individuals are
asked if their employer offered them health insurance. And the
exchanges then are required to provide the applicant's response
to this question along with the information related to the
employer to the IRS in a monthly data report.
The Treasury found that neither the CMS nor many of the
State exchanges were able to submit this information until well
after the 2015 filing season was complete. So it appears that
two of those State exchanges have still not provided that
required information. This is just one example of the numerous
delays from CMS when it comes to Obamacare.
So healthcare.gov alone took over $1 billion to build. And
yet it is apparent that these systems are still not fully
functioning based on this report. So CMS undertook this mammoth
project without effectively planning for the development or the
oversight. And this has led to hundreds of millions of dollars,
these are taxpayer dollars, that are being wasted.
So my question is, can you outline the oversight that is
being conducted to ensure that the legal requirements that were
set up by the law are actually met and the systems are properly
developed to protect our taxpayer dollars?
Secretary BURWELL. Congresswoman, I want to check because
this report, I think, as you all probably know, there have been
over 50 audits of the Affordable Care Act, and I want to make
sure that I am focused on the right one.
With regard to the one you are speaking about, if it is the
one that I think it is, we are now in a place where the
information is going from the Federal marketplace to the IRS on
a monthly basis. And, you know, with all of these audits that
we have received from both IGs and the GAO, we continue to work
through their suggestions. And I think it is that one. But we
will follow up, and if it is not the case, we are now in a
monthly reporting----
Mrs. BLACK. I would really appreciate your following up.
Because it is related to this report. Thank you very much.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary. I am pleased that during your confirmation process,
you expressed support for improving the safety of medical
devices--a few of us have brought that up--by incorporating the
FDA's new, Unique Device Identifier, the UDI, to assist in
health insurance claims. Myself and Chairman Brady have talked
about this in the past.
I am asking you today, despite this widespread support,
that--some in the CMS, I am putting it mildly, have resisted
this important public health and patient safety effort. So we
need the tools. Could you commit to work with the Committee
this summer to move the policy forward?
Secretary BURWELL. I do commit. And I think we have made
some progress by having FDA and CMS working together on
something that will actually be more implementable. So we are
working on it. And your comments and the Chairman's comments
and others are something that I recognized when I came in. And
so we have been working on it, but would look forward to
working with the Committee further.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you. Let me shift a gear a little bit
here. You would think that if my colleagues on the other side
cobbled together all of the time they spent trying to undermine
the ACA, they would have been able to come up with an
alternative to this law. They can't find anything good to say
about anything. So in this Committee alone, we have had over a
dozen hearings just on issues related to the individual and
employer mandate. Many Members, in good faith I am sure,
brought this up today. Not to mention nearly 64 votes to repeal
or undermine the ACA. Make no mistake about it. That is what
this is about. And how many have we had on this elusive
Republican alternative I keep hearing about? Zero.
The reality is that this Act is working. It has problems.
Medicare has problems. Medicaid has problems. This is a very
imperfect world, Madam Secretary. More than 10 million
Americans have health coverage through the marketplaces.
Eighty-five percent receive tax credits to help with the cost
of coverage. So while we
are waiting, I am interested in the answer to one question. Has

the ACA impacted employer-sponsored insurance offering take-up
rates? And does the ACA maintain the financial incentives for
employers to cover and to offer coverage? That is my question.
Secretary BURWELL. This past week, we have seen a piece of
work by the Urban Institute with regard to the number of
employer-base. The statistics that we have, certainly CBO's
changes to its numbers, most recent changes to its ACA numbers,
have to do with the fact that they now have lowered the number
of people they think will switch from the employer-based market
to the marketplace.
And the Urban Institute numbers that came out this week
said that there actually, on a percentage basis, has been a
slight, very slight, so I would call it basically the same, no
decrease, but the same. It is a slight tip up, but not
numerically, I think, significant. Actual maintenance of those
in the employer-based market. And so there has not been a
decrease.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Mr. Young.
Mr. YOUNG. Madam Secretary, thank you for being here today.
The President after the G-7 summit this week said the
Affordable Care Act is working. I mean, part of what is bizarre
about this whole thing is we haven't had a lot of conversation
about the horrors of Obamacare because none of them have come
to pass. And he continued, somewhat oblivious, seemingly, to
some of the things I am hearing in my own district, saying,
``It hasn't had an adverse effect on people who already had
health insurance.''
You know, I am frustrated. And I know many Hoosiers are
frustrated by some of the adverse impacts they have
experienced, from diminished coverage options, to lack of
accessibility in their own communities for care. A lot of
people are being squeezed when they go into the exchanges with
price increases on premiums. And then there are the penalties,
of course, the mandate taxes that exist if they can't afford to
buy health insurance.
And so I just want to humanize this a little bit for you.
Because I know you are quite conversant in the statistics and
the goings on of much of this healthcare law. Patsy, from my
district in Jeffersonville, Indiana, her premium went up $135 a
month. She no longer has access to the family physician that
has cared for her for over 25 years. Brandon, from Greenville,
signed up for health care his family can't use because his
family's deductibles are too high. And they make just enough
that they don't qualify for assistance. Jason, from Georgetown,
Indiana, had to seriously consider paying the individual
mandate tax because he couldn't afford to pay the increased
premiums on the exchange and didn't qualify for an exemption.
Debra, from New Albany, had her monthly premium skyrocket to
$800 a month, more than her mortgage payment.
So these are just illustrative of what are larger problems
in every State across the country, every congressional
district. And, you know, to use the President's own words,
these horror stories haven't come to pass. They are coming to
pass. They are in existence right now. And I just want to know
what you believe, Madam Secretary, I should tell my
constituents who are trying to comply with this law? Are they
merely collateral damage?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the examples and stories,
I think they are important. And they are important to combine
with the numbers in terms of what we know, that, you know, 16.4
million people in our country are no longer uninsured. And the
stories, I hear those stories and respect those stories. But
having traveled 22,000 miles and having been out amongst
people, I heard the story from the woman in Texas who said you
want to know how to treat MS? I will tell you how to treat MS.
You get sick enough to go to the emergency room, and they will
treat you. And now she said I will know how.
Mr. YOUNG. So in the near term, what do we do? I am sorry
for interjecting but time is short. What do we do for these
Hoosiers who don't qualify for a hardship exemption?
Secretary BURWELL. I think, first of all, we need to make
sure they have exhausted that remedy. And, please, we are----
Mr. YOUNG. I have made sure they have. Our office has.
Secretary BURWELL. And have worked through us. The other
thing, on a number of the examples that you talked about, there
is the issue of coverage to care and helping people understand
how to select the right plan. The plans on the marketplace are
very varied. There are many in terms of the questions of
deductibility and that sort of thing.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Renacci.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here. Earlier on, you said the
Administration is looking for fixes and improvements for the
ACA. And I want to run through just a couple of them that I
think would, it is disingenuous if you don't help make some of
those fixes.
One of them deals with seasonal employees, the definition
between seasonal workers and seasonal employees. I am not sure
if you are aware of the conflict with that definition and some
of the difficulty it is causing people in my district but also
across the country.
The other is the readmission, hospital readmission program.
This program was aimed at reducing unnecessary hospital
readmissions called the Hospital Readmission Reduction Program.
The goal of the program was really something that I would
support and probably many of my colleagues support. In fact, it
is estimated that nearly $18 billion per year is wasted on
avoidable readmissions of Medicare patients alone. However, the
implementation of this program has been problematic, especially
for those hospitals serving low-income populations.
Evidence suggests that economically disadvantaged patients,
especially patients eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid,
are much more likely to be readmitted within 30 days of
discharge regardless of physicians' efforts to educate them on
proper post-discharge care.
Do you believe the readmission program criteria can be
improved by adding clear adjustments for dual eligible status
as well as for other planned readmissions such as those
following trauma?
Secretary BURWELL. So I agree with you on the issue of
socioeconomic status and the difficulties that that can cause.
We actually had a proposal and a rulemaking and a proposed
rulemaking and a suggestion of how to make some of those kinds
of changes. The remarks we received back were an important
issue, but not the right way to go about it.
The Congress, thankfully, has also given us money to
actually do this specific study of how we can work through this
issue. We look forward to working with you on how we correct it
because we had a proposal that others didn't. We believe it is
an important issue. When I analytically understand how we can
account for that but at the same time do what your beginning
point was, which is we know we have more readmissions than we
should, both in terms of quality and price, I will discuss it
in more detail. And so getting to that is something we would
like to do. We have tried to propose it. We clearly didn't get
it there.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you. I have Ensuring Beneficiary Equity
in Hospital Readmission Program, H.R. 1343, a bill that I have
introduced which does have bipartisan support that I would hope
the Administration would consider and support.
Also, on seasonal employees, I have STARS Act, H.R. 863,
really to clarify the conflicting definitions between seasonal
workers and seasonal employees, which is causing compliance
problems for both employers and individuals. Interactions
between seasonal, seasonality, the employer mandate and the
individual mandate, really create opportunities for accidental
noncompliance resulting in significant tax penalties for
American workers and businesses alike.
So that is another issue I would hope that we can work on.
Because these are issues clarifying and fixing, as you said,
fixing or improving the current law. So I thank you, and I
yield back.
Chairman RYAN. The gentleman yields back. I understand that
the Secretary has a hard stop. I regret the fact that not every
Member will be able to ask questions of the witness at this
moment. I would like to invite any Member, particularly those
who did not have the opportunity, to give us--the Committee
their questions in writing. We will submit them to the
Secretary, to the witness, and I ask the Secretary to respond
in a very timely manner to these questions from the remaining
Members.
Secretary BURWELL. I would be happy to. I would be happy to
and I think a number of you have my cell number, so feel free.
Chairman RYAN. With that, to honor your time, your
deadline, the hearing stands adjourned. The Committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
