- THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MEDICARE ACCESS & CHIP REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2015 (MACRA)

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MEDICARE
ACCESS & CHIP REAUTHORIZATION ACT
OF 2015 (MACRA)

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 11, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-HL07

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-365                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DEVIN NUNES, California              CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            XAVIER BECERRA, California
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina

David Stewart, Staff Director

Nick Gwyn, Minority Chief of Staff

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            RON KIND, Wisconsin
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of May 11, 2016 announcing the hearing..................     2

WITNESS

Andrew Slavitt, Acting Administrator, Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services..............................................     5

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Questions from Representative George Holding of North Carolina to
Andrew Slavitt.................................................    43
Questions from Representative Tom Price of Georgia to Andrew
Slavitt........................................................    44

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Impact of IRS Activities on At Risk Citizens.................    58
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO).....................    60
Institute for Child Success (i(cs))..............................    68

THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MEDICARE
ACCESS & CHIP REAUTHORIZATION ACT
OF 2015 (MACRA)

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 11, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Pat Tiberi
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

CONTACT: (202) 225-3943
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Wednesday, May 4, 2016
No. HL-07

Chairman Tiberi Announces Health Subcommittee

Hearing on the Implementation of the Medicare

Access & CHIP Reauthorization Act

of 2015 (MACRA)

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Pat Tiberi (R-OH)
today announced that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing entitled
``The Implementation of the Medicare Access & CHIP Reauthorization Act
of 2015 (MACRA).'' The hearing will take place on Wednesday, May 11,
2016, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at
2:00 p.m.

Oral testimony at this hearing will be from the invited witnesses
only. However, any individual or organization may submit a written
statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the
printed record of the hearing.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to make a submission, and click on the link
entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once
you have followed the online instructions, submit all requested
information. ATTACH your submission as a Word document, in compliance
with the formatting requirements listed below, by the close of business
on Wednesday, May 25, 2016. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3943 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record,
and any written comments in response to a request for written comments
must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in
compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be
maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in
a single document via email, provided in Word format and must not
exceed a total of 10 pages. Witnesses and submitters are advised that
the Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record.

2. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name,
company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be
included in the body of the email. Please exclude any personal
identifiable information in the attached submission.

3. Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the
exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman TIBERI. The Subcommittee will come to order. Good
afternoon everybody. So we are going to begin. I am really
excited to finally be having this hearing.
When I came to Congress back in 2001, the sustainable
growth rate, or SGR as we all know it by, a provision in the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997, was in the process of being
implemented, and under this payment formula, any yearly
increase in per beneficiary spending that exceeded growth in
GDP could result in a negative adjustment for physician payment
in Medicare.
Dr. Price was really well aware of that. Clearly, this
policy or the math didn't work, and for the next 15 years we
had almost yearly struggles over what was aptly named the ``doc
fix.'' Seventeen of these doc fixes later takes us to last
March when we came together in a bipartisan fashion with
stakeholder input and CMS technical support to pass the
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, or now
commonly known as MACRA. With nearly 400 votes in the House,
this legislation finally put an end to the sustainable growth
rate so that doctors could focus on patient care and not worry
about unpredictable payments.
We have called this hearing today to take our first look at
the regulations released by CMS on April 27. We will look
closely at how these regulations match up with congressional
intent and what our Members and CMS are hearing from
stakeholders as they digest 950 plus pages of regulations.
That is the scope of the hearing, to discuss the
implementation of this truly historic legislative feat, and
there is a lot in the proposed rule to discuss. So I know that
on a bipartisan basis we are going to dive in, in a deep way.
Furthermore, I would like to take a moment to encourage
Members of both sides of the aisle, as you hear from
stakeholders and constituents regarding concerns or thoughts
about the proposed rule, please bring them to the attention of
the bipartisan Committee staff so that we can continue to do
robust oversight and keep CMS up to date on the information as
they formulate their final regulation.
The passage of MACRA last year confirmed our commitment on
both sides of the aisle to keep Medicare strong for America's
seniors. This is particularly important to me as well as many
of you, especially after we just celebrated Mother's Day as
both my parents, back in my district in Ohio, depend on this
important Medicare program.
By replacing the way that physicians are paid and
consolidating the separate quality measurement systems, we have
taken a great step toward the ultimate goal of fully-integrated
value-based care through the incentivization of high-quality
care. Now our role, as Congress, is to provide oversight, and
in conjunction with CMS, to provide education on how this new
law will work for the various types of clinicians and provider
groups.
We need to answer how this rule will affect individual and
small group providers versus larger groups. How will this rule
affect specialty groups versus primary care physicians? How
will the timing work for implementation under some potentially
tight timelines? These are questions that I hope to get clarity
on today in going forward through the implementation process.
As we move forward with implementation, I want to make sure
that we, as Congress, recognize some very important facts
regarding the law that we passed. The merit based incentive
payment system, or MIPS is, and was, created as a budget
neutral program. High-quality value-based care will take
effort.
As I said before, such efforts must be recognized within
the environmental and timing factors based in reality. And
additionally, the thresholds for providers to qualify as
advanced alternative payment models are high and are set in
statute. Working on a bipartisan basis with stakeholders from
every corner of our country in an open dialogue, with
cooperation from CMS, will allow us to follow MACRA into the
next generation of value-based health care.
Now we can go to work. With that, I would like to yield to
the distinguished Ranking Member, Dr. McDermott, for the
purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Tiberi.
When Medicare was put in place some 50 years ago, a
critical decision was made by the medical association in order
to have them join in the effort, and they demanded that they be
paid their usual and customary fees, and we, on this Committee,
have been, since that time, trying to get back the keys to the
Treasury. This is another effort here.
Now, the proposal by MACRA, or the MACRA rule from CMS is
really as a result of our efforts, as Mr. Tiberi says, of 15
years of realizing what we put in place didn't work. It took us
15 years to figure out that we have to try to do something
different.
Now, I hope this is the beginning of a constructive
bipartisan conversation about how to advance our shared goal of
controlling costs and improving the delivery of health care in
the country. Passing MACRA was a tremendous bipartisan
accomplishment in that it put an end to a cycle of dysfunction.
We had the same thing happen every year. We are going to have a
20 percent cut in doctor's pay, so there would be a big rush
around here and we would put a patch on it. And then we go on
for another year, and next year it will be a 24 percent cut in
doctors pay, and we put a patch on it. We did that again and
again.
For years we lurched from crisis to crisis. And to avoid
what were draconian cuts in the physician's payment, we ended
up by spending more on those temporary delays than it would
have cost to do away with the SGR in the beginning.
But last year, we put an end to this cycle once and for all
by passing MACRA. I was trying to step forward, as MACRA is
much more than just simple repeal of SGR. It is also the most
significant payment reform the Medicare program has seen in
years.
Thanks to MACRA, we have set Medicare on a more sustainable
course that will allow us to pay for volume in health care--or
excuse me, value in health care, rather than volume. The law
modernizes and streamlines physician's payment. Instead of a
patchwork of incentives and alternative payment models, it
consolidates various programs into a single framework, it will
allow flexibility for providers, it will allow them to practice
medicine independently while still holding them accountable for
providing high-value care.
These are complicated issues, and we are still in the early
stages of digesting this proposed rule. It is big enough. It
will take awhile. But what we have seen so far has been
encouraging. The Administration has worked diligently to
implement the law as intended through a process that is
responsive to the needs of the public.
The proposed rule is consistent with the goals of MACRA. It
provides flexibility to participate either in the merit-based
incentive payment program, or alternative payment methods that
reward high-value care. This will make sure providers do not
end up in a one-size-fits-all approach that doesn't make sense
to them or their patients. It is the product of an open and
transparent process that began months ago through active
outreach, consideration of extensive comments, and public
workshops with stakeholders. The agency has heard from a range
of viewpoints, and the proposal reflects careful consideration
of that input.
I am confident the Administration will continue to be
responsive to the needs of the public as it develops the final
rule. This is an ongoing conversation. We still have much more
to learn as we work toward our shared goal of making the
implementation of this landmark law a success.
Getting the people covered by health care is one thing.
Controlling the cost is another thing, and this is about
controlling the cost, and I don't believe we have our arms
around it yet, but we are in the process, and that is why we
welcome you here, Mr. Slavitt, to make this presentation. Thank
you.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Dr. McDermott. Without
objection, other Members' opening statements will be made part
of the record.
Today's witness panel includes just one expert, and we are
lucky to have him, Andy Slavitt, Acting Administrator at the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, who, along with his
colleagues, have the daunting task of implementing this very
important law.
On a personal note, thank you for having me at your office
yesterday. It was nice to get to know you and members of your
team, and I look forward to continuing dialogue in the future.
With that, Mr. Slavitt, please proceed with your testimony,
and we appreciate you being here today.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW SLAVITT, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR, CENTERS FOR
MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES (WASHINGTON, D.C.)

Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Tiberi, Ranking
Member McDermott, Members of the Subcommittee, and thank you
for the opportunity to discuss CMS' work to implement the
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015.
We greatly appreciate your leadership in passing this
important law, which gives us the unique opportunity to move
away from the annual uncertainty created by the sustainable
growth rate to a new system that promotes quality, coordinated
care for patients, and sets the Medicare program on a more
sustainable path. Our number one priority is patient care. And
thanks to Congress, MACRA streamlined the patchwork of programs
that currently measure value and quality, into a single
framework called the ``Quality Payment Program'' where every
physician and clinician has the opportunity to be paid more for
providing better care for their patients.
In recognition of the diversity of physician practices,
Congress created two paths. The first allows physicians and
other clinicians a new flexibility to participate in a single
simplified program with lower reporting burden and new
flexibility in delivering quality care.
The second path recognizes those physicians and clinicians
who choose to take a further step toward care coordination by
participating in more advanced models like medical homes. Our
goal is to make both of these paths flexible, transparent, and
simple so physicians can focus on patient care, not reporting
or scorekeeping.
We have approached this implementation with the belief that
physicians know best how to provide high-quality care to our
beneficiaries, and we have taken an unprecedented effort to
draft a proposal that is based directly on input from those on
the frontline of care delivery. We have reached out and
listened to over 6,000 stakeholders, including State medical
societies, physician groups, and patient groups to understand
how the changes we are proposing may positively impact care and
how to avoid unintended consequences.
The feedback we received shaped our proposal in important
ways, and the dialogue is continuing. Based on what we learned,
our approach to implementation has been guided by three
principles.
First, patients are and must remain the key focus.
Financial incentives should work in the background to support
physician and clinician efforts to provide the highest quality
care and create incentives to more coordinated care.
Second, we are focused on adopting approaches that can be
driven at the practice level, not one-size-fits-all from
Washington. It will be important to allow physicians to define
the measures of care most fitting with their patients.
Third, we must aim for simplicity in everything we do.
Physician practices are already busy, and we are seeking every
opportunity possible to minimize distractions from patient care
by reducing, automating, and streamlining existing programs.
Among the many places that we seek feedback during the comment
period, this is among the most important as the burdens on
small and rural practices, in particular, have increased over
the last several years.
One of the important opportunities will be for physicians
to define and propose new payment models so that we can create
an array of customized approaches that reflects the diversity
of care across the country, and particularly as it relates to
the various specialties that provide care.
Congress had the foresight to create a formal voice for
physicians through the Physician-Focused Payment Model
Technical Advisory Committee. I had the opportunity to meet
with them last week and can tell you that they are very eager
to move forward with their important work, and we are eager to
work with them.
With all the work that went into this proposal, it is
critical that we receive direct feedback from physicians and
other stakeholders and are undertaking significant outreach
efforts. Our proposed rule is the first step in the process,
and we look forward to receiving and reviewing comments to
refine and improve our approach.
In the month of May alone, we have 35 scheduled events and
listening sessions to hear from a wide range of stakeholders,
and this outreach will remain an important part of our work. I
personally have been meeting regularly with physician groups,
including smaller and rural practices, and have spoken to
thousands of physicians in different parts of the country about
their work, the opportunities and challenges they face, and
what this proposal means for them and their patients.
Throughout this, I have appreciated the open dialogue with
this Subcommittee and the larger Committee, and it is clear to
me that we share the goals of creating a more sustainable
system with smarter spending that keeps people healthier.
We are striving to do just that in the implementation of
MACRA, but it will take work and broad participation to get it
right. I look forward to hearing your further thoughts on this
implementation and to answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Slavitt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Slavitt. As you know, in my
district, I represent urban, suburban, rural, and most of the
concerns I have heard with respect to MACRA and the future
implementation of MACRA is from small and rural providers'
practices.
So the proposed regulation assigns three levels of risk
required for entities participating in the APMs, the
alternative payment models. And what I have not seen are any
tiers or variabilities in the amount of risk for participation
between an individual and small group clinician and large group
clinicians.
Have you heard concern from providers about this?
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you for the question. I think the topic
of particularly small practices and making sure that they can
succeed is of utmost importance, and our data shows that
physicians that are in small and solo practices, so long as
they report, can do just as well as physicians in larger size
practices.
So we know, however, that there is a burden on us to make
the reporting as easy as possible. We also know there are a
number of other steps that we need to be looking for, and
looking out for, to make sure we make things as easy as
possible and accommodate smaller practices.
So importantly, we are looking for additional steps and
ideas as people review the rule, but I will say that we are
focusing on technical assistance, providing access through
medical home models, opportunities to report in groups, and
using a reporting process that automatically feeds data,
reduces the number of measures, and overall lowers the burden
for small practices.
Chairman TIBERI. So in a followup to that, in reading
through the regulation, there are several areas that seem to
allow a little more flexibility for individual and small group
practices. Can you outline some of the major differences in
reporting for individual and small group practices versus the
larger groups that could maybe ease the burden or send the
message to the smaller groups that there is sensitivity there?
Mr. SLAVITT. Sure. Absolutely. First of all, at the request
of the physician--we met with a lot of physicians and physician
groups and small practices in this process. One of their key
requests was that if they are already participating in
something like a clinical registry or some other way of getting
data across that may be an accountable care organization or
clinical registry, that we use that information rather than
requiring them to send it again, and our proposal does indeed
allow multiple ways for us to get information.
Second, we are required to measure the cost of care, and we
are going to be able to do that automatically by getting a
claims fee, so it is going to require physicians to send us no
information whatsoever. And then there are a number of areas
where they will simply need to attest to whether they are doing
a certain activity, which we think will reduce the burden, and
we are looking more broadly at the overall experience for
physicians. Small physicians can report in groups in many
categories where they hadn't been able to before, and then
finally, I would say, there are a large number of physicians
who won't have to report at all because they will be underneath
their minimum threshold. Congress put forward that if
physicians don't see enough Medicare patients or meet the
minimum threshold through Medicare, they don't have to report
at all.
So all of those things, I think, are there. And again, we
also look for additional steps, if there are some, that we can
take.
Chairman TIBERI. Just a final thought, and I don't mean to
put you on the spot on this, but do you think there is any more
that we can do, those of us on this side of the dais, and you
and your team at CMS, to ensure that, as we lay the foundation
for MACRA going forward and there is buy-in, complete buy-in
from the physician community, that the system is not built with
an inherent fairness or fairness issues--again, going back to
the rural provider or the two-person provider group that has a
bunch of angst right now----
Mr. SLAVITT. Right.
Chairman TIBERI [continuing]. As this has begun to unfold.
Is there anymore that we can do, or you can do, or we can work
together on?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yeah. I think it has to be a vital continuous
effort. Last week I met with small physician practices from
southern Arkansas, southern Oregon, and New Jersey. We had a
meeting on Friday with Rural Health Association at their annual
meeting. We went out to Kansas City last week to meet with the
Family Practice Association, and we do hear a lot from small
physicians who are concerned, and I think they are particularly
concerned if people in Washington are making centralized
decisions that are going to impact their quality of care.
And what they tell us over and over again, and we need to
keep talking to them and getting more feedback, is give us the
freedom to take care of these patients. We know how to do it,
let us define quality, let us select the measures that are
right for our practice, give us more flexibility, and don't
make us focus on reporting. Let us focus on patient care. And
it is really critical, I think, as we work together and as you
hear input, that you get this to us and that we hold ourselves
very much to that standard that physicians across the country
are holding us to.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, sir. With that, I recognize Dr.
McDermott for 5 minutes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you. One of the issues that the
questions Mr. Tiberi is raising about small practices sort of
leads me to the question of consolidation and driving doctors
together in larger and larger groups. The question then comes
to my mind--I practiced both as an individual, and in the
military, and in a group practice, so I have been in all sorts
of forums. One of the things that strikes me that is going to
be difficult to deal with here is the whole question of what is
the best care.
If you have a large organization and they have an MRI and
they don't want to use it, or they want to use it, they can
crank a lot of people through an MRI for everything, or they
can say don't use an MRI, and there will be patients out there
who do not benefit from what they could find. I can give you an
example of a young woman, 34 years old who had pain in her
back, and was told there was--you know, you are riding a
bicycle, and there is a lot of reasons why, you know, you are
young, and blah, blah, blah.
At 35, they did an MRI and found a tumor in her spine. Now,
if they had done that, they would have found it 5 years
earlier, but the organization was encouraging people not to
use. So how are we going to make our judgment about whether we
have quality of care, if the major factor is going to be money?
I mean, what is built into this to actually look at the quality
of care?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yeah. So I think at the heart of the question,
the most important thing above all else is making sure patients
get high-quality care, and we do believe that if patients are
getting high-quality care, that is going to lead to better cost
control because if someone gets the right surgery, they won't
need to have a second surgery.
Likewise, quality is also defined as making sure the care
is coordinated, so if somebody needs to have a followup visit
or has a prescription or something with an instruction, that
they understand what that is, it is explained to them and that
the system works and supports them. So our job here is to
enforce that, number one.
Number two, I think our job isn't to define quality here
ourselves as much as it is to take the best standards of care
that the specialists and the physicians around the country have
defined as quality and make sure that we keep up with that and
that we keep those measures as the things that physicians
decide, as a group, that they should be measured on, and those
are the things--and then third, as I said earlier, that at the
practice--things actually differ at the practice level.
And we believe the practice is, by and large, are the
people that know best for what is right with their patients,
and that the dialogue between the patient and the physician--so
nothing we are doing should be seen to be interfering with that
in any way. And in fact, we ought to be reinforcing those
things, and I think MACRA gives us the opportunity to say if
you are delivering a better quality of care outcome for your
patient, you ought to be rewarded for that.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You are suggesting the whole question of
evidence-based medicine, that is, I mean, I have been to the
doctor recently, and they send out, from the University of
Washington, a sheet to me, and it says did you have good care.
Well, was he polite, was he nicely dressed, and blah, blah,
blah, down at the bottom, were you satisfied with your care?
Now, for some people, if they don't get a prescription or
they don't get an X-ray or they don't get a blood test or they
don't get something, they haven't had--the doctor hasn't done
anything.
Mr. SLAVITT. Right.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So how do you measure then the patient who
says, well, I wasn't satisfied because I went away and I still
ain't got--my sinuses are a mess and he didn't give me
antibiotics. How do you deal with that issue in the quality of
care?
Mr. SLAVITT. Sure. I think one of the nicest things is--I
will give you an example. I was sitting down with some
physicians that are practicing medicine in southern rural
Arkansas, I referred to them recently. They are in one of these
models, a medical home model, where they have a per member, per
month payment they get in order to coordinate the care, and
they have hired care coordinators, and what they told me was,
the physician I was talking to told me, he said, now I actually
can get paid to practice medicine the way that I am supposed to
practice medicine instead of practicing medicine the right way
and getting paid on something completely different.
So I think the more we evolve our healthcare system to a
way that reinforces what physicians know are the right things
to do in delivering quality of care to patients, the better off
we are going to be, as opposed to a system where if you don't
make a cut in someone's skin or give them a prescription or
something that they leave the office with, that is not success.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I have a medical home at the University of
Washington. Thank you.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Dr. McDermott. That was really
good. We agree on something.
Mr. Slavitt, thank you so much. You know, I have 12
different questions I could ask you on 12 different topics, and
my mom has one that she shared with me last night she wanted me
to ask you. But it doesn't have to do with MACRA, so that is
for another day, and I would like to remind all Members to try
to keep the topic to this important law that we passed.
With that, Mr. Johnson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Slavitt, welcome. You have said that CMS is working to
regain the hearts and minds of physicians through
implementation of MACRA, and that is great because many
physicians in solo and small practices have really struggled to
stay afloat in recent years.
And while there are a lot of good things in the proposed
rule, I have one issue I would like to raise with you. I am
concerned by the estimates in table 64 where CMS projects the
greatest negative impact on payments to practices with 9 or
fewer doctors and the least harm to large systems with 100 or
more docs. If CMS is trying to win back the hearts and minds of
physicians, this proposal falls short since it will continue to
push physicians out of their solo or small practices.
Can you tell me specifically what CMS is doing to ensure
that solo practitioners and small groups can succeed under the
MIPS and participate in alternative payment models by 2019?
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you. Thank you, Congressman Johnson, for
the question, and I really would actually welcome the
opportunity to address this table, and for anyone who hasn't
seen the table, the table is designed to estimate what the
impact of these regulations could be on practices of various
sizes.
And the first thing I want to make very clear is that the
question of making sure that small groups and solo
practitioners can be successful is of utmost importance, and I
would also indicate that despite what that table shows, our
data shows that physicians who are in small and solo practices
can do just as well and actually do just as well as physicians
that are in practices that are larger than that.
Now, the reason that table looks the way it does is for one
very simple and important reason. It accounts for the fact that
in 2014, when the table the data uses, most physicians in small
and solo practices did not even report on their quality, and
this is important for a couple of reasons.
First of all, I should say that in 2015 and subsequent
years, the reporting went up, so at best, this table would be
very, very conservative, and of course, as I explained to
Chairman Tiberi, reporting is going to get far easier going
forward.
But it does point to a couple of things that I think we
would be wise to pay attention to. One, making sure that it is
as easy as possible for physicians to report. One of the
reasons why we don't have the hearts and minds of physicians is
because there is just too much paperwork in health care.
Mr. JOHNSON. I would agree.
Mr. SLAVITT. They need to be practicing medicine, not doing
paperwork. So there has been a tremendous amount of effort so
far, and this is just a proposal. So this next period of time
for comments is a time when we are hoping people can give us
even further ideas and further ways that we can reduce the
administrative and reporting burden. But to be very clear,
there is absolutely every opportunity, and in fact, an equal
opportunity for small and solo practices to be successful.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, thank you. Maybe we better indoctrinate
the nurses, too. Don't they do most of that?
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Kind is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Slavitt,
for your testimony here today. Needless to say, I think
Congress, in passing MACRA, gave you a huge undertaking, and
now with a 900-page rule, I think it is pretty obvious that we
are going to need to keep the lines of communication open, and
hopefully your outreach with the stakeholder groups will
continue as it has been, with not just physician but patient
feedback as well.
I know many Members of this Committee, myself included,
have been pushing hard to move to a more integrated coordinated
healthcare delivery system. I come from a region of the country
in Wisconsin that established models of care, and has been
pushing aggressively in this direction for quite some time. And
then ultimately, you know, alternative payment methods so we
get the quality, value-based, outcome-based reimbursements. And
again, that is kind of the directive that MACRA gave you.
But also a lot of my providers were early stage first
generation ACO models. My question is, what more can be done in
order to provide an on-ramp for advanced APM payments to those
early stage ACOs, or are they going to have to just leapfrog
and go on to Gen 2, Gen 3, Gen 4?
Mr. SLAVITT. So you are raising a very important question,
which is where physicians have an opportunity--as we mentioned,
all physicians in every program will have the opportunity to
get rewarded for quality care, but where physicians have an
opportunity to and have had the opportunity over the last
several years, to join with other physicians in these more
coordinated care models, the medical home would be one example,
we think those are a good idea. We think they are a good idea
if they are right for the physician, if the physician thinks
they make sense for their patients, and of course, it creates
an opportunity in its own right to earn more.
What MACRA does is it gives physicians an even additional
opportunity, an opportunity to earn 5 percent additional bonus
on top of what they may already be earning in these advanced
models. So the question is: What is the requirement to get
access to that 5 percent bonus? And the legislation puts
forward a number of requirements, and the requirement really,
in a nutshell, if I were going to simplify it, is that there
has to be a higher degree of shared accountability from the
physician, and that shared accountability is shared
accountability for the outcome to the patient and a minimal
sharing of the costs with the Medicare program itself.
So in other words, in order to qualify for this 5 percent
bonus, I think the words that are in the legislation are there
has to be a more than nominal risk.
So our job in putting this regulation together is to put
the definition around what is that nominal risk. We have tried
to do that in as consistent a way as possible and as simple a
way as possible, but really it is one of the areas where we
really are inviting feedback. And then all of our models,
whatever model we are in, will have to qualify based upon that
definition.
And so even if a physician is in a model that doesn't
qualify because there is not as much nominal risk, there is
still great opportunities, and there is still opportunities for
them to grow into other models.
Mr. KIND. Well, finally, you know, the great cost driver in
our society, and it is true at the Federal level at the budget,
at State and local, for families and businesses alike, is
rising healthcare costs. So with the direction this rule is
taking, can we sit here with reasonable confidence that this
may ultimately lead to some cost savings but without
jeopardizing the outcome or quality of care that our patients
are receiving? Or is this going to turn into a Lake Wobegon
type of situation where everyone is above average, everyone is
qualifying for bonus payments, and there is no real cost
savings at the end of the day?
Mr. SLAVITT. Right. Well, I think, first of all, we all are
striving for a higher quality healthcare system. We all want
our money spent more wisely, and we don't want to do it in a
way that people feel like they are getting--skimping on their
care. We have 10,000 new seniors every day in America, and our
jobs are to be able to figure out how to take care of them
better for less money. And that means being able to take care
of them in lower cost settings, more comfortable settings like
their homes rather than in institutions like hospitals, and so
those types of incentives are vital to this program.
Within the regulation, there are--the pool balances out,
and so we are going to have to allocate money and have upward
and downward adjustments as part of this program in order to be
able to meet the sustainability test you talked about. That is
nothing new. There are upward and downward adjustments in
programs today. What is new is that this will be a simpler more
aligned program that is easier to measure and keep track of.
Mr. KIND. Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Roskam is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I have
an observation, a point, and a nudge.
My observation is this: There is a level of anxiety that is
out there in our public life today because people look at
Congress and they say nothing is happening. And yet here we
have this issue where both sides of the aisle, the White House,
everybody came together, wrestled a very complicated issue to
the ground, came up with a solution, and it doesn't involve
snarling at one another on television, it doesn't involve, you
know, a hyperbole and so forth, but there was this very serious
effort, and we are on the verge of, I think, some good things.
So just a little shout out, and that is, three cheers for
something getting done, and I think there is an encouraging
element to that.
My point is that debate matters. I would argue that one of
the reasons that we were able to have that discussion, when
Speaker Boehner and leader Pelosi were able to come together,
and the two of them really drove the discussion, it was because
it had been well wrestled through in the United States over the
past several years that we need to do something on Medicare.
And both sides have different views of the world and so forth,
but it had become normalized in that sense that these things
had to change.
So debate does matter, and I think we are better off if our
debate doesn't involve snarling at one another, and it is two
various points, but debate matters because debate is a prelude
to action. Margaret Thatcher said: First you win the debate,
then you win the vote.
Okay. Now here is the nudge, and this is the nudge for you,
Mr. Slavitt. One of the things that I think you and I have
talked about offline, and you have alluded to some of this,
too, a minute ago, there is this tension that is out there, and
there is a tension that manifests--and let me just tell you a
quick story.
I served in the State legislature, and we had some
education testing issues that came before us, and you know how
this works. There is always a new test, there is always a new
standard, so I called a friend of mine, who is an old friend
from high school, who is a high school administrator, and I
said: Give me the straight scoop on these tests.
And he said: Peter, look, will you just pick a test and
stick with it and not change it every 4 years? He goes: We are
happy to be accountable, but stick with the test, stick with
the program. And that deeply resonated with me.
So the tension is that I think healthcare providers want a
standard, they want something that is predictable, but now,
also, the tension is they don't want something that is
declarative and dispositive and can never be revisited because
that is big and that is overwhelming and that is what SGR had--
that is what we had to do for, you know, the doc fix for all
those years. That was declarative. It was an
overcharacterization, and it failed. And the proof that it
failed was you had to kick--we all had to kick the can down the
road.
So my nudge is this: As you are going through and you are
figuring this out--and I really appreciate the disposition and
the attitude and the open rule time that you have now and the
comments that you are taking in, if you could really be mindful
of those smaller practices that Mr. Johnson mentioned, the
point that Mr. McDermott made, and that is, how is it that a
physician that is stewarding antibiotics correctly or not
giving in to patient pressure for a prescription, how is that
physician protected? Also, I hadn't thought about it until Mr.
Kind mentioned it, are the bonus payments a new floor, and does
the average become the expectation?
So, I am here, and I think that the Chairman has set the
great tone here, and that is for us to listen and to learn, but
as you are navigating through those natural tensions of having
something that can be predictable but also maintaining that
level of flexibility where it can be revisited and changed, I
think is the best of both worlds.
And with that, you don't need to respond. I'll yield back.
Thank you.
Chairman TIBERI. If you would like to respond, you may. It
is up to you.
Mr. SLAVITT. We had this conversation, including a little
bit, yesterday. I think this idea of making sure that people
don't feel like the game is changing on them, made porous, is
critical. So there is enough in this legislation that allows us
to tell folks going in, hey, here is how it works, in advance.
I think there is nothing more frustrating than being told after
you took the test how it is being graded.
And then I think you make an important point as well, which
is how do you trade off making sure you are predictable, with
staying current with the state of the art of the state of
medicine, and what physicians are saying that they want, and I
think we have a process for that, we take comment on that
process, we think it is an effective process, but it is also
important that physicians have the flexibility to navigate the
process, particularly at different times in their practice.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you. Mr. Thompson is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having the
hearing today. Thank you, sir, for being here. I am sorry I had
to step out, so I hope I am not going to be repetitive here.
But we are all very, very interested, I think you can tell
by the tone of all the questions, that this law works. We have
a very vested interest in that, not only as a Committee of
jurisdiction, but also these are the people, providers, and
patients that we represent at home, and we want to make sure
that it works.
And so to that end, I would like to hear what the
Administration is doing to help providers get ready ahead of
the 2017 start date, and what would you recommend providers be
doing to get ready, and is there anything that we, as Members
of Congress, should be doing to help facilitate this
transition?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yeah. Thank you. So I guess maybe I will start
to direct that question as if what I would say to a physician
who was wondering what does this all mean, and it is a
conversation that I get to have frequently because I have been
having a lot of conversations with physicians, and I think
there are probably 5 things I would say that I would keep in
mind as a physician or from, I think, our perspective.
Number one and most importantly, keep focusing on your
patients and on patient care. Don't worry about the
scorekeeping. It will be our job to put this forward in a way
where it becomes easier, and indeed, it will be easier and more
streamlined than the processes that people have to go through
today, so that is the good news, and that is the first thing.
The second thing is, we have to continue to talk to people
and educate people as there are opportunities. As the
Chairman's question implied earlier, because physicians will
have the opportunity to decide which measures and which ways
the measuring quality they want to be measured on, at some
point they will be able to think about what those things are
and they will be able to put those in motion, and that is
really one of the important early things.
I think if there are opportunities to participate in these
more advanced models, these care coordination models like
medical homes, they should obviously consider those because
there are some extra rewards for that, but it won't be until
the spring of 2018 that physicians would first need to report
on MACRA. And so it is important that they not get too
concerned about that.
And then the final thing I would say, and I think what we
are trying to encourage for everybody, is to provide us
feedback. During this comment period, we really want physicians
to be able to review this. We are setting up a number of
sessions. I talked to 3,000 physicians yesterday on a call. We
do twice a week webinars to get your questions answered and
then ask you to give us feedback on how you think this is going
to affect your practice.
Mr. THOMPSON. And as far as us being able to do anything to
help facilitate the transition, any comments for the Committee?
Mr. SLAVITT. I think the more listening sessions and open
forums that there can be with physicians, and giving physicians
an opportunity not just to hear what is in the rule but to tell
us how it is going to impact them--I spoke with one of the
Members of the Subcommittee who asked me to participate in one
of those sessions with people in his district. I think we have
a lot of the staff at CMS that are available to do phone calls
and other things to reach out directly, so let us know what you
are hearing from your constituents, and our job is to be
responsive.
Mr. THOMPSON. And so in my particular case, would you
rather do a phone call to the Napa Valley or would you rather
come out and do it in person? I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Maybe a future Subcommittee hearing.
Dr. Price is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Slavitt, for joining us today. I think, as has been said, I
think we are moving in a better direction, but we still have a
long way to go, and if we are going to make it so that
physicians can once again be able to care for patients without
an inordinate amount of influence or burden from outside, we
have to continue to work through this, and I appreciate your
willingness to do so.
I have a couple of specific areas, and then I want to tick
through.
One is you have the moving from meaningful use to ACI,
whatever we want to call it, we have the 365-day rule. In the
past, it has always been a 90-day rule, which means that the
practice has to demonstrate that they comply for a 90-day
continuous period within a 365-day period.
It only makes sense, nobody is perfect every day, and if
they are going to get dinged because they are not able to
comply 1 day or 2 days or 3 days, then we have simply got to
move to a 90-day, and I hope that you are able to work in that
direction.
Mr. SLAVITT. So it is one of the key areas we are inviting
comment right now during the comment period.
Mr. PRICE. Good. So I invite comment as well from folks
from whom I have heard.
Mr. SLAVITT. Okay.
Mr. PRICE. On the alternative payment models. You have a
lot of folks out there, a lot of docs, guys, and gals who have
already modified what they are doing. The bundled payment, BPCI
programs, the future CJR program, and yet it appears that those
programs, that CMS has pushed on docs, and encouraged docs, and
incentivized docs, don't even qualify for APMs. That doesn't
make any sense at all.
So I hope you are looking at just grandfathering those or
moving them in or allowing them to qualify as APMs.
Mr. SLAVITT. So Congressman, one of the things that I think
we have to do now that the law is being implemented is to go
back and look at all of our models and see where we can make
changes to them so that the participants in them can qualify.
And I know that Dr. Conway is very much directing the team to
look for ways to do that where possible. They have to meet--
there are certain requirements that have to be met.
An example would be what percentage of the patients I am
seeing are part of this bundled payment, and so that is because
that is in the statute and the law, we have to look at how we
can modify these programs or work with you on what our
flexibility is to be able to----
Mr. PRICE. I agree. If you expand the ability for them to
use their entire practice instead of just Medicare, that
oftentimes gets them to that point.
Mr. SLAVITT. Right.
Mr. PRICE. So I would urge you to look at that.
Mr. SLAVITT. Okay.
Mr. PRICE. Docs are really frustrated with things for which
they are being held accountable that they have no control over.
One of them is on the meaningful use, ACI issue, this data
blocking that is occurring by the vendors. Docs don't have any
control over what the vendors do at all, so how we can have a
system that actually punishes docs or potentially punishes docs
because of what somebody else does that they don't have any
control over, again, that doesn't make any sense at all, and
they are pulling their hair out trying to comply with this, so
if you can look at that, that would be appreciated as well.
Mr. SLAVITT. Will do.
Mr. PRICE. I want to touch on the nominal risk that you
talked about. The nominal risk, as I understand it, is a
minimum of 4 percent of total spending to be qualified under an
APM.
Mr. SLAVITT. That is correct.
Mr. PRICE. And as you know, the physicians control, I don't
know, pick your number, 14, 15, 16 percent of total spending.
So 4 percent of total spending is really a 25, 30 percent hit
for the docs. So how can we have a system that punishes the
people that are--where the rubber hits the road, trying to care
for these patients, and again for which they have little
control over? Shouldn't that be 4 percent of the physician
total reimbursement?
Mr. SLAVITT. One of the areas where we are looking for
feedback in the comment period is both what is nominal risk
quantitatively? We have chosen a number that was consistent
across the MIPS program, but that is just in the proposal.
Mr. PRICE. Doesn't that presume that the physician controls
every dollar of spending?
Mr. SLAVITT. And that is the second area where we seek
feedback, which is, under what universe total cost of care,
which of course the benefit of a total cost of care is a
primary care physician has the opportunity to get rewarded for
being able to keep the patient out of the hospital when they
don't belong there and so forth. Of course, as you point out,
it is an area where we are looking for feedback and very much
hearing that perspective.
Mr. PRICE. A lot of those things are out of their control.
Mr. SLAVITT. Sure.
Mr. PRICE. We would like to believe that they control them,
but in an ideal world, that might be nice, but a lot of those
things are out of their control.
I have a few seconds left, and I just want to point out,
once again, the table that you identified, table 64, which by
your own data, stipulates that 87 percent of solo practitioners
are going to see a negative adjustment. This is your own data.
Granted, it is 2 years old, but it is going to be 2-year-old
data that is going to reward them in 2019 based upon what
happens in 2017, so I would urge you to relook at how you are
adjusting that, and in realtime, providing an update.
Mr. SLAVITT. Right. Right. And we are going to look in the
final rule at having the most updated and most accurate
information in that table. Again, while that table would not be
good news for reality, I don't believe it is reality, however I
will say that the silver lining is I think drawing attention to
the impact of this regulation on small and solo practices is a
good thing, and so I think it is where we need to have
dialogue, and so despite the fact that I don't think that table
represents the reality, I do think that the reality of how
difficult it is to practice medicine in a small or solo
practice is very real, and so we are looking for ways to make
sure we make it better.
Mr. PRICE. Great. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you. I think you might be sensing a
theme up here.
Mr. Blumenauer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to have the conversation today. Mr. Administrator,
I appreciate the approach that you folks have taken to help us
turn the corner.
I personally have found the charade we went through for
some 17 years kind of embarrassing, dancing away from an event
we know nobody had any expectation should happen. We were
dealing with a budget fiction.
I think the agreement that was struck is reasonable. There
is still much value to be squeezed out of the system, but I
appreciate the fact and some of the references from my friend,
Dr. Price.
We have people who are in the middle of practice patterns,
limitations on data, and just a whole host of other changes
taking place, and I appreciate the commitment to do so in a
thoughtful and deliberate fashion.
You have also heard another theme emerge that people are
keenly interested in making sure that we make this transition
to rewarding value over volume, and that we have had problems
in the past with some things, theoretically. I mean, I have
strongly supported Medicare Advantage, but at the same time,
parts of the Affordable Care Act to try to coax more value out
of it because, theoretically, it should enable us to deliver
care more efficiently, and we continue to have a pretty
significant premium.
The compromise that was struck, and one that I thought was
healthy, was to provide bonuses based on performance and try to
deal with some of the areas where there is some decidedly, I
don't know if one wants to call them outliers, but there are
some real performance problems being overcompensated, coming
from one of those regions that we like to think that if
everybody practiced medicine like they do in my congressional
district, we wouldn't have the funding problems that we have.
You know, I am looking at charts like this that kind of
display how it is supposed to work over time. I wonder if you
can just give us a sense of where you think the pinch points
are, where will some of the things that we need to be prepared
to be able to work with you be, if there are further
adjustments legislatively, if there are things that we need to
do a better job of just being able to understand ourselves, to
explain to our community at home, where are the pinch points
you think we need to zero in on?
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you, Congressman Blumenauer. I think I
point to a couple of areas that I think are really critical
focus areas for us. One is the education and communication
process, particularly with smaller practices and individual
solo physicians. It is vital that we hear their feedback and
understand what the impact of the decisions that we are making
here today will be on their practices several years from now.
So that education process, I think, means a couple of things.
One is that we talk in plain English instead of acronyms,
which we are quite guilty of here, I know, but we are trying
very hard to do a better job with that. We have created simple
fact sheets, and training sessions, and PowerPoints, and as
many options as possible to do that, and to the extent that you
can help us do that and tell us what you are hearing, that is
going to be critical.
The second thing that I think we will need to continue to
hear from you all on, and I think the conversation with
Congressman Price is apropos to this, is where there are places
where you think there should be flexibility and how we should
be exercising flexibility, whether it is with smaller practices
or whether it is in how we define the models that qualify for
the 5 percent bonus, and in all of those areas, your feedback
on our interpretations is critical because we really do want to
get to the best answer.
And I will tell you that we don't have a monopoly on that.
We want to do that through the dialogue and the debate that
Congressman Roskam referred to, and we also are going to have
to make this an ongoing commitment because we will have to look
at this program at the end of its first year and understand
what worked well and what didn't and what can work better, and
we can't be afraid to call out the things that didn't work as
well and sit down together and try to figure out how to make
those things better, whether it is with technical improvements
or whether it is simply in how we are implementing things.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate the
opportunity to get into something, which I hope we are able to
periodically review and update. I appreciate that part of this
is process and part of it is performance, and being able to
strike that balance in a way that is protective of the people
who depend on this service but also of the taxpayer, I think,
is going to be a challenge for our friends at CMS and for the
Committee, and I hope we can continue sort of zeroing in in
that fashion. Thank you.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you. Well said. Mr. Smith of
Nebraska is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Administrator Slavitt, for being here today. I represent a very
rural district, and some parts more rural than others, in fact.
With 75 counties touching six States, obviously, we are very
spread out. We are the number one agricultural district in the
Nation, very productive. Of the nearly 60 hospitals in my
district, about 54 are designated as critical access, and that
might be a single designation, but that is about 54 different
types of expertise and providers, and I am actually inspired by
the work that they do serving communities from smaller than
1,000 up to about 12,000 plus. Nonetheless, they have a very
large task, and I guess so do you.
Can you discuss the feedback you received from rural
providers in response to the initial RFI and how you addressed
that in producing the rule and then what rural providers and
critical access hospitals can expect from this rule?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yeah. Thank you, Congressman. And in your
district, and I think throughout the country, you know, we face
the challenge of not having enough physicians, in many cases
enough specialties, and there are many districts around the
country where there are, you know, only one or two providers in
certain specialties. So we cannot allow the sideshow that goes
along with the practice of medicine to make the practice of
medicine less fulfilling and less rewarding.
So as it relates to the small physician practices, the
medical home models that many of them are participating in, we
have had really terrific feedback from, and I think what I hear
from small physicians is: give us the opportunity, find ways
for us to have the opportunity to participate in some of these
same opportunities, the models that people do in urban settings
and make them work for us. So can you make changes to them that
can work for us? That is, I think, one of the things we----
And then on critical access hospitals. Obviously, for us,
you know, so many of our Medicare beneficiaries get taken care
of and get treated and rely on those critical access hospitals,
and the economics of health care in rural America is different
than it is in other places. And that is both a short-term issue
that we have regulations, as you know, to set and deal with,
but it is also a longer term question around how those
hospitals are structured, what they provide, and how we support
them in the appropriate way.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. In your response to the
Chairman, you had mentioned a reporting exemption for small
providers. At the same time I have heard questions from those
who fall below the reporting threshold who would like to be
able to report data. Will they have that opportunity?
Mr. SLAVITT. So it is interesting you say that. I had that
feedback last night when--in talking to a specialty society who
said we want our specialty to be more engaged in the practice
of medicine with seniors. And so even our physicians, who are
only seeing small amounts, want to do that.
I will tell you I heard feedback in both directions so that
I think our job will be, over the comment period, to take all
that in and figure out how to do the best job accommodating the
most types of practices as possible.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. Well, I appreciate that. I
know that the providers I talked to are constantly not just
saying what the problem is but providing solutions and
innovations, and I would hope that we can empower providers to
care for their patients without the government getting in the
way or messing things up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you. The former mayor of Paterson,
New Jersey, Mr. Pascrell, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Slavitt, under your leadership, CMS has
stressed the importance of better data to improve quality, to
improve outcomes, and has made great strides in making that
data available.
MACRA included a provision that allows innovators to use QE
data, to help us make smarter decisions. Do you agree that the
medical devices used in care--and I will focus in on that--
particularly for the most common Medicare procedure, joint
replacements, play a role in healthcare quality and outcomes?
Medicare has no information on the medical devices
implanted in Medicare beneficiaries. I think we should let that
settle in for a few seconds. Extremely problematic, I think,
from an oversight perspective, and most importantly, from a
safety perspective. You and I have had discussions, there is a
history here that we need to address.
So shouldn't this information be made available?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yeah.
Mr. PASCRELL. Administrator.
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you, Congressman.
So the question you raise is really one of--should there
be, and how should we capture, a device identifier in a unique
way on every device, and I think that is the goal. It is a goal
that we share. It is a goal that the FDA shares. And it is
critical for post-market surveillance to be able to understand
the safety of how these devices work.
So there are several, I think, critical things that we can
do, and are doing, and are trying to do to make this possible.
So despite our enthusiasm for this--and this is an issue that
has long preceded me. As you know, it has been an issue for
quite some time--there are a number of parties who have a say
in the matter of how this happens.
I think as a first step, we are moving forward with the
incorporation of a unique device identifier into electronic
health records. I think this is a strong step, particularly
considering the dramatic growth in electronic health records.
But I know that there is also an interest on claim forms that
there is a way for providers who provide care to indicate the
device identifier on the claim form. We think that also has
merit, particularly from a research perspective.
I think there are a couple of issues to making that a
reality: One is the Committee that essentially designs the
claim form, which is made up of a wide group of participants
and hospitals and physician groups; second, is making sure that
if we at CMS are given the charge to do this that we can fund
it and have the funds to do it operationally; and then third,
there will be an education and training process because the
history is that physicians don't automatically put the
information they need to down on a form unless it is critical
to them getting paid.
So I think we need to work through all of these issues with
you. We have pledged to do this with your office, and we are
working closely with the FDA to find the best path forward.
Mr. PASCRELL. I think you have used the best word,
``critical.'' But if we don't do it this time, then we have to
wait another 15 years before we change those forms, and our
seniors will not be well served. This is important. I have been
frustrated with CMS' resistance to what I believe is a very
important priority, particularly of safety, including the
unique device identifiers on health insurance claims.
In order for the UDI to be added to the claims form as part
of the next update, it would go into effect, I think, in 2021.
That is the soonest. We need to act now, and I think--I can't
stress enough, Mr. Chairman, we are talking about the safety of
the people who use these devices, and we all want to be on the
same page. This is, I think, a good time for us to address this
issue.
A number of cases, a number of anecdotal stories about not
only seniors, by the way, but--we talked about seniors here
because we are talking about Medicare--people that have had the
problems, and we need to address that in order to improve
safety. Everybody on this Committee talks about it, and I
believe them and their hearts. Here is a chance for us to do
something about it.
But I want to thank you, Mr. Slavitt. You have done a great
job and thank you for putting up with us, but we are not going
away. Thank you.
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you, Congressman.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Pascrell.
Ms. Jenkins is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Administrator, for joining us today.
Medicare obviously plays an important role for many
Kansans. It is the largest payer for medical services in
America, a lifesaving benefit for many people. Last year, over
485,000 Kansans had health coverage from Medicare. We were
pleased MACRA passed last year in a bipartisan manner. With the
passage of MACRA we repealed SGR and instead put in place what
will hopefully lead to a better reimbursement system for
physicians.
Mr. Slavitt, the relationship between a physician and a
beneficiary cannot be underscored in importance, and I believe
this is especially true when talking about seniors. With the
moves that MACRA makes toward higher-value care centered on the
quality of care administered by clinicians, it is ever
important to ensure that we encourage greater and greater
communication around decisionmaking between the doctors and
their patients. So as MACRA's implementation continues over the
next several years, do you
see room to begin including patient activation measures,
placing greater responsibility on this relationship with the
hopeful result of shared responsibility over healthcare
maintenance and thus furthering the quality of care?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that. I
think that is a really important question, and I think there is
an opportunity over the next several years to begin to
incorporate those engagement measures in.
There are a few things that are in the current proposal
that I would point to that take steps in that direction: One is
there is a practice improvement focus opportunity on the
creation of a joint care plan between a patient and a
physician; second, in the advancing care information area,
there are opportunities that focus on measures around how
patients and physicians are communicating using technology and
making sure that information is being made available to
patients electronically and through other means.
But I think this is, as you point out, a ripe opportunity
and a brand new area of focus for more patient engagement. We
have been meeting with a number of patient groups as we have
been putting this work together, and that is an important area
of feedback for us.
Ms. JENKINS. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. Davis is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me welcome you, Mr. Slavitt. I know that you have spent
considerable growing-up time in Evanston, Illinois, which isn't
very far from my district. And I also know that your mother
lives in my district, and I am pleased to tell you that I have
not had any real complaints from her, and so that makes me feel
good.
Mr. SLAVITT. That makes one of us.
Mr. DAVIS. But let me compliment you on your work. Medicine
is a very complex environment, and there is tremendous
complexity. And I also want to thank your staff. I have 24
hospitals in my district, four large medical schools, a number
of research institutions, and a very activated citizenry. So we
get lots of inquiries, lots of calls for assistance, a lot of
calls for clarification. And so we spend considerable time not
pestering but certainly inquiring of your staff, and I want to
thank them for the kinds of sensitivities they have displayed.
I also have a very active medical community, physicians
associations and organizations. Just last week I had a meeting
with the Chicago Medical Society. But I have heard concerns
that under the proposed rule that we are talking about, only a
limited number of physicians will meet the alternative payment
model, or APM, criteria to earn the payment bonus.
By your own estimation, you have indicated that there may
be only 30,000 to 90,000 physicians who meet these terms, which
is a tiny fraction of the total Medicare-eligible doctors in
the country, and I am certain that we will hear some more from
these physician groups. They would like to know what could make
it--or how likely is it that anything will make it easier for
there to be more pathways to qualify for the APM bonus
payments?
And how can CMS improve the opportunities for our
physicians to meet the advanced APM criteria, and achieve the
incentive to drive better care that Congress intended?
And would you consider additional pathways that qualify as
advanced APMs to provide assistance for our physicians who wish
to enter the current model?
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you, Congressman. And my mother made me
promise to tell you that she was a teacher at Howe and working
with Principal Pat Tyco (ph), she knows you well and so she
made sure I said this publicly. So I have delivered that for my
mother.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you.
Mr. SLAVITT. And your question is an important question
because all physicians who participate in the Medicare program
are going to have a significant opportunity to get rewarded and
get paid for providing quality medicine, which is exactly what
we hear from physicians that they want. Some physicians will
have the opportunity to go further, and I think the law allows
those physicians to get a 5 percent bonus if they participate
in these advanced payment models.
So our goal is not just to make the core program good but
to create as many opportunities for physicians as possible to
move into these programs, and we can do that in a number of
ways. One of the important ways to do that is to simply create
more models and more opportunities. We also have to make it
easy for people to move back and forth if they choose to
between programs, and I think that is one of the things that we
are striving to achieve.
And then, as we talked about earlier with Dr. Price, we
also have to look at--are there ways we can take existing
models and make them compliant with this new law? So we are
going to work on all three of those avenues because it is a
goal for any physician that wants to move to one of these
advanced APM or care coordination models that they have the
opportunity to do so.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Former Mayor Marchant of Texas is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Slavitt, does the CMS have the resources to approve and
implement the new alternative payment model proposals in a
timely manner?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yes. Thank you.
I believe the question is can we implement new models in a
timely manner, and one of the things that we have to do--and
the answer is yes, we can. We need to, in concert with the
committee that was set up by the Congress, the PTAC, we need to
receive proposals from physicians because physicians can
generate their own proposals for models and quality and then
work with them to, as rapidly as possible, test them and put
them into action.
It is one of the things that we have had the opportunity to
work on over the last 6 or 7 years through the innovation
center. It is something that we have gotten better and better
at, and we are eager to get going with this Committee to get as
many models in as possible so that we can get more and more
models approved. And I had a chance to speak with that
committee and speak in front of that committee to try to
encourage more model development.
Mr. MARCHANT. And there is a deadline period, so you are
confident that you can get all that done by the deadline?
Mr. SLAVITT. Well, fortunately, this is something that will
be ongoing, so as soon as we get models in we can get them
tested. But this committee, I believe, will be standing for a
number of years. I am not sure if I know the exact number of
years, but it will be ongoing because physicians will be able
to continue to develop new models.
Mr. MARCHANT. So the transition in governments that is
coming up won't have any affect on this process?
Mr. SLAVITT. No. The staff at CMS will work with the new
secretary, whoever that is, and continue moving that forward
very much with that, and I think there is--as I have heard
today and as I think we continue to hear--there is strong
bipartisan commitment and a strong commitment to this program
in moving this forward, so I don't see any concerns at this
point.
Mr. MARCHANT. And just some input in my district, I hear
from two different groups, and this is concerning the new
program where you basically are--let's say, a knee replacement
or a hip replacement, you are basically going to fund a lump
sum for that. I am hearing from seniors who think that the
doctors and hospitals are going to cut corners so that they
will make the most amount of profit and just hurry them through
the system. And then I am hearing from the doctors and the
hospitals who are afraid that they are not going to get enough
money to take the kind of care of their patients that they need
to take care of them.
So I guess you have created a pretty positive--these two
tensions that are working out there, could you just make a
comment about that?
Mr. SLAVITT. Sure. I think what you are referring to is a
new type of payment approach, new for Medicare but it has been
ongoing in health care for a long time, called the bundled
payment.
Mr. MARCHANT. Yeah.
Mr. SLAVITT. And really the idea behind the bundled payment
is so that people--everyone who is involved in the patient
care, whether it is before they would have a surgery, the
surgeon, the anesthesiologist, but also the people that take
care of the patient afterwards, have an alignment to get on the
same page to provide a high-quality outcome and to do it as a
team.
And so it is relatively new to Medicare. We have had good
experience and good feedback so far. But as with anything new,
we continue to look for feedback, for data, for our
experiences, and in particular, if there are beneficiaries in
your district or hospitals or physicians in your district that
have experience with the program, we would love to get feedback
for them from you or your staff.
Mr. MARCHANT. Well, the group that I hear from the most is
the in-home healthcare people, who feel like they are kind of
at the tail end of the process and that they may be the ones--
and they feel like they are the most cost effective of all, yet
they feel like at the end of that process there may be some
shortchanging going on.
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you.
Mr. MARCHANT. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing today.
Mr. Administrator, thank you for being with us. Thank you
for all your great and good work.
Can you talk more about what people on Medicare might
experience as a result of this change of payment policy, how
smaller provider groups would be impacted and the doctors who
need help to get up to speed?
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you.
I think the most important thing that we have an
opportunity to focus on here is patient care and improving
patient care. And I think the ways to do so are severalfold:
First, is this new legislation allows us to pay physicians more
for providing higher-quality care, and the objective is to do
this in a way which allows the physician to define what they
believe to be the highest quality care from a menu of options
and reward them for achieving those benchmarks. And I think
physicians have been asking for that in one form or another for
quite some time.
Second, though, it is important to do that in a way that
frees up physicians to actually practice medicine instead of
just keeping score. And too many programs result in a lot of
paperwork and a lot of scorekeeping and a lot of reporting, and
we need to minimize that by simplifying wherever possible.
The role of small physician practices, which you also
mentioned, is critical here. And as we mentioned earlier, we
believe that small, solo, and solo practitioners have every
opportunity to be just as successful as larger size practices,
and our data suggests that that indeed happens so long as the
smaller practices report. So that means we need to minimize
paperwork.
We have also put in place some accommodations for smaller
practices, including some technical assistance, some additional
models, and ways that they can get excluded from reporting if
their volumes are too low.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you.
Furthermore, Mr. Administrator, this is a very large
regulation, over 900 pages. It is pretty big. It is a lot to
digest, a lot to understand. If you had to tell your doctor the
highlights of these changes, what would you tell her, what
would your doctor need to know to maximize benefits and avoid
payment cuts?
Mr. SLAVITT. Great. That is a great question, and it may be
one of the most important things that I can communicate today.
First of all, it is key focusing on patient care. There is
nothing in here that should distract anybody from patient care,
and, in fact, it will make it easier by streamlining a
patchwork of programs that are already out there today into
something simpler. So that is first.
Second is they will have the opportunity to select goals
that they believe are right for their practice and right for
their patient population, and at some point in time they will
have an opportunity to do that.
Third, I think, would be that over time there will be
opportunities for them to participate in more advanced models,
like the kinds you asked me about earlier.
Fourth, is they don't need to really worry about reporting
anything until spring of 2018, and we will make it clear what
needs to be done well before then.
And then finally, the last thing, and this is more my
asking of them, is to provide feedback to this rule, whether it
is through the medical society they belong to, the State
medical society, or directly to us. We really need line
physicians who are practicing medicine every day to give us
their feedback on what works about this rule and what might be
the unintended consequences.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much. And again, I appreciate
your effort, your great and good work, and thank you for being
willing to serve.
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Lewis.
Mr. Paulsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Slavitt, it is great to see you here today--
welcome--rather than on an airplane going back and forth to
Minnesota.
As has already been said, you know, last year both sides
took very historic action to move forward to finally get rid of
the flawed Medicare payment formula based on the SGR and we
wonder if we are going to fix it every 6 months or every year.
And like any law, passage is just the first step, right? It is
the implementation that has to be carried out and followed
through, making sure it is done correctly so that we are
achieving the intended results.
I just want to thank you at the outset for working with
physicians, working with patients, having that connecting
dialogue with all the appropriate stakeholders, including
Members of the Committee, to make sure that we are implementing
it in the correct fashion.
I do want to continue on the comment theme and just mention
at the outset that it is important to know that I continue to
hear from folks back in Minnesota as well that aren't in large,
integrated practices, solo practices, small group practices, et
cetera, that do have that concern. And as you mentioned, you
want to make sure that they have every opportunity to
participate. And I think they want that reassurance and we just
kind of need to keep monitoring that going forward. I thank you
for that.
Let me ask you this question: I have also heard from a lot
of physicians and doctors in Minnesota about the meaningful-use
program for electronic healthcare records and how it doesn't do
a very good job of taking into account the way physicians treat
patients and use their electronic healthcare records. Is this
rule the same-old, same-old, or do you make real changes in how
you are going to be encouraging doctors now to actually use
their electronic healthcare records?
Mr. SLAVITT. Thank you, Congressman. And I would agree that
our district practices some of the best medicine.
The meaningful-use program is something that we took an
extremely hard look at. We took a step back, because the
meaningful-use program actually is responsible for helping to
make technology pervasive in medicine, and that is a very good
thing. If we look back 5 or 6 years ago, most physician
offices, most hospitals didn't have adequate information
technology. Today, by and large, 97 percent of hospitals, 70
percent of physician practices have technology.
But as we look at how to go forward, we spend a lot of time
talking to physicians and hearing exactly what you said,
Congressman, which is that the meaningful-use program was
focusing on making sure they were using their computers and not
focusing on taking care of patients.
We also heard that physicians want their technology to be
more connected. They want to be able to get information back
and forth from other physicians when they refer patients or
from hospitals, and they are also frustrated that there isn't
enough connectivity and the data doesn't flow as easily as it
should.
And so we have been asked to focus on it, and I believe
have focused on, in this rule, changing the program so it
becomes much more flexible, moves the focus to the patient and
away from the use of the technology, focuses on the interaction
and communication, and allowing the free flow of data to move
back and forth. And those are the areas that we emphasize we
look forward to comments on during the comment period about
whether or not we have done that well.
Mr. PAULSEN. Does it seem like the proposed rule, replacing
meaningful-use with this new category, advancing care
information, right, we have all these different acronyms, but
accounting for 25 percent of a physician's performance score in
the first year, is that going to essentially be
interoperability now for electronic healthcare information for
venders, for hospitals, for all the different actors and
players, physicians and other providers? Is that the intent
that this information is going to be that widely shared, that
readily available, not just being on the computer but actually
using information?
Mr. SLAVITT. Right. That is the intent. I would say
everybody has a job to do in that regard. If any of us here
could wave our magic wand and make the healthcare system more
interoperable, I think we would do it. But this really requires
vendors to share data to publish to what they call open APIs,
to not practice what we talk about is data blocking, which the
Congress has expressly asked that vendors not do, and
physicians, to a large extent are really a victim of what the
technology allows.
They all want to share data. I have not met a physician who
when they refer a patient doesn't want to know what happened to
that patient and get that back electronically. But it is the
technology that really needs to do that job. We think in the
EHR certification that just came out and in a number of the
other activities, we think vendors are going to move in that
direction. They need to move in that direction.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. I
yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Paulsen.
Thank you, Mr. Slavitt.
One comment related to that is--we can discuss this more--
as you develop a final rule and the performance period begins
on January of 2017, vendors are going to have a limited time to
reconcile with this new rule and then physicians are going to
have to digest the new rule. So, you know, I hope that, again,
particularly for the small group rural markets, I hope that you
will work with us to make sure that that implementation is done
smoothly.
And related to that, I don't know if you think you have
some authority in this area, but the gap of time between
performance period and then the payment here for physicians is
2 years, yet the clinician reporting period is a shorter period
of time. Do you think CMS has the ability, the rulemaking, the
authority to change that a little bit?
Mr. SLAVITT. Yep. So one of the things that we do see
comment on are the proposed measurement periods and payment
periods. What I will say is a couple things: One is, we have
two feedback periods built in so that--one in the middle of
2017 and one in the middle of 2018, to provide information back
to physicians. So there is a more current feedback loop.
The second thing I would say is because we have focused so
much on reducing burden and reducing the number of measures and
so forth, that is--we have had some feedback that people want
to make sure that that starts as early as possible. We have had
other feedback, of course, which tells us make sure we have
enough time, make sure we have enough time to do the things we
need to do, make sure we don't get penalized unnecessarily
because we didn't have enough time.
And to your earlier question, Mr. Chairman, if people will
begin on the older technology and move to the newer technology,
they will not get penalized for that. So we are making those
accommodations. But of course, the purpose of the comment
period is for people to tell us what are the things we missed,
what are the things that could have an impact on someone's
practice or on their patients that we didn't think of.
And that is one of the reasons why, if there is an
important message today to get out, it is to please engage in
the rule and give us the feedback that we need to hear.
Chairman TIBERI. Well, I can't thank you enough for coming
today. As you can tell, in a bipartisan way, Members have a lot
of interest in this and not just at the Subcommittee level but
the Committee as a whole, as well as the Congress.
And we really appreciate you taking the time and look
forward to working with you and your team as you continue to
develop this and ultimately put it into practice the way that
we all intended it to be. And I appreciate the fact that you
were so kind yesterday as well.
I look forward to working with you. Hopefully we have
treated you nice enough that you will come back, as we have
this bipartisan concern about the way this unfolds.
So as a reminder, any Member wishing to submit a question
for the record will have 14 days to do so. If any Members
submit questions after the hearing, I ask that the witnesses
respond in writing in a timely manner.
With that, again, thank you and this Subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:36 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
