- HEARING WITH MEDPAC TO DISCUSS HOSPITAL PAYMENT ISSUES, RURAL HEALTH ISSUES, AND BENEFICIARY ACCESS TO CARE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING WITH MEDPAC TO DISCUSS HOSPITAL

PAYMENT ISSUES, RURAL HEALTH ISSUES, AND

BENEFICIARY ACCESS TO CARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-HL03

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-368                   WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan,
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
DEVIN NUNES, California              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  XAVIER BECERRA, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

Joyce Myer, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            RON KIND, Wisconsin
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of July 22, 2015 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESS

Mark Miller, Executive Director, Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission.....................................................     5

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Association of American Cancer Institutes, statement.............    64
America's Essential Hospitals, statement letter..................    67
National Association of Chain Drug Stores, statement.............    72
National Rural Accountable Care Organization, letter.............    76
National Rural Health Association, testimony.....................    86
John Kastanis, President and CEO Temple University Hospital,
statement......................................................    92

HEARING WITH MEDPAC TO DISCUSS

HOSPITAL PAYMENT ISSUES, RURAL

HEALTH ISSUES, AND BENEFICIARY

ACCESS TO CARE

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m. in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Kevin
Brady [Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Good morning. It is my pleasure to welcome
Dr. Miller back to the Health Subcommittee to help us continue
our discussion on payment reforms.
Earlier this year, Congress took the first step in this
area and passed legislation to fix the way Medicare pays our
nation's physicians. We did so in a broad, bipartisan, and
bicameral way, and I was glad to see the President sign this
important legislation into law.
Well, now we need to take the next step, and that means
looking at Medicare's acute-care payment system. I want to
raise the topic of site-neutral payment reforms. This is a
policy MedPAC has highlighted for several years now. The
President's most recent budget even included a site-neutral
policy with respect to services provided in hospital outpatient
departments. So this area of payment reform is not--or at least
should not be--a new or contentious topic.
This year's June report brings us new information and data
that could help elevate our discussion in this area.
MedPAC has found that, for some cases, we are paying as
much as $4,000 more per case, simply because there is a
discrepancy regarding status. That is, was the patient supposed
to be classified for inpatient status or outpatient status?
Unfortunately, this is a real question that hospitals are faced
with.
But because the inpatient and outpatient payment systems
are so different, it is hard to get an accurate assessment of
what is driving this trend. More to the point, the codes that
are used to determine what Medicare should pay for inpatient
services are entirely different from those used for outpatient
services. Not only does this mean hospitals are responsible for
managing two different billing systems, but it means Medicare
has to do the same.
And the issues with payment disparity become magnified when
we consider that Medicare is expected to spend more than $130
billion on inpatient services, and $40 billion on outpatient
services this year alone. Clearly, this is an area ripe for
reform. MedPAC has proposed some innovative solutions; I look
forward to hearing more today.
Also, MedPAC's testimony focuses on indirect medical
education, and disproportionate share hospital payments, two
add-on payments that certain hospitals receive to help offset
the cost of teaching medical students or treating a larger
volume of uninsured or under-insured patients. It is important
to note that when we are talking about payment disparities
between the inpatient and outpatient systems that these two
add-ons, IME and DSH, are only included on the inpatient side.
Outpatient discharges are not eligible to receive these payment
adjustments. As a result, these important payments get caught
up in a financial numbers game and end up driving incentives.
I believe both of these programs are critical and need to
be designed to deliver the most targeted payments possible. As
arbitrary add-on payments, they are not achieving their
mission. As MedPAC notes in the June report, and as Medicare's
own trustees tell us each year, the program is facing serious
fiscal and demographic headwinds. Spending is out of control,
and the current financial underpinnings will soon not be able
to sustain the program for the long term. Congress needs to
tackle these issues, and we need to tackle them now.
We have already started down this path by successfully
reforming how Medicare pays our local doctors. My hope is that
we can carry this progress over into other payment areas.
Chairman BRADY. With that, I would like to introduce
today's witness, Mark Miller, the executive director of the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, known as MedPAC. And
before I recognize our Ranking Member, Dr. McDermott, for the
purpose of an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members' written statements be included in the record.
[No response.]
Chairman BRADY. Without objection, so ordered. And I will
recognize our Ranking Member, Dr. McDermott, for his opening
statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today. I hope it will be a constructive conversation
about how we can improve and strengthen Medicare.
I would like to thank our witness, Dr. Miller, for coming
again today. We haven't seen you for a long time. We missed
you, and we thought it was time to have a talk with you again.
The work that MedPAC does makes an invaluable contribution,
really, to the legislative process. We may not always agree
with the Commission's recommendations, but we can trust that
MedPAC's reports are based on the facts, data, and thoughtful
analysis.
Today's hearing is an excellent opportunity for the
committee to carefully examine a number of issues that affect
the future of the Medicare program. At the heart of the
conversation must be the most important concern: that is,
making sure that beneficiaries continue to have access to
affordable, high-quality care. Any proposals that we discuss
here, I think, should be seen through that lens. And any
changes that we have to make have to be in the best interests
of the beneficiaries.
Medicare is really about beneficiaries. It isn't about
providers, it isn't about drug companies, it isn't about
hospitals, it isn't about anybody else. It's really about
beneficiaries. Medicare is a key component of the social safety
net in the country. It provides core health care benefits to 54
million seniors and people with disabilities. And I hope this
Committee will join me in looking at ways to strengthen, not
cut the program, to ensure that it remains strong in the
future.
If we are looking to achieve savings, the first place we
should look is to make sure that payments are appropriate and
accurate. We should proceed with caution before radically
cutting payments at the expense of hospitals that serve the
most vulnerable patients, and the teaching hospitals that train
the physician workforce.
As we discuss the potential policy issues today, it is
important to remember that many are not formal recommendations
by MedPAC. They are thought-provoking ideas that provide us
with starting points for discussion. It is the role of the
committee to carefully consider these ideas and ask tough
questions about what they mean for Medicare and the
beneficiaries.
I am hopeful that this hearing will serve as an opportunity
for us to highlight a transformation that is radically shaping
the health care system and practice of medicine. Across the
country at this moment we are seeing a rapid and dramatic trend
of hospitals merging together into massive health systems that
exert tremendous market force. We count on our system to be
working on the basis of competition, but it is increasingly
questionable whether that occurs. We are witnessing hospitals
purchasing small physicians' practices. As a consequence, more
physicians are now hospital employees, something that was
almost unthinkable when I went to medical school. This trend
raises a question about the future of the medical profession,
health care spending, and patient care.
As policymakers, our role is to ask these questions. The
committee needs to hold a hearing on this issue and other
topics related to health care consolidation. It is not a
partisan issue, and I believe that we can work together to ask
these questions and find out how to address this issue and move
forward. And I hope this morning will be sort of a beginning.
So, welcome, Dr. Miller, to the committee.
Mr. MILLER. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Dr. McDermott. And thank you,
Dr. Miller. You are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK MILLER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MEDICARE PAYMENT
ADVISORY COMMISSION

Mr. MILLER. Chairman Brady, Ranking Member McDermott,
distinguished committee members, I am Mark Miller, executive
director of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. On behalf
of the commissioners, I would like to thank you for asking us
to testify today.
The Commission's work in all instances is guided by three
principles: to assure that beneficiaries have access to high-
quality, coordinated care; to protect taxpayer dollars; and to
pay providers in a way to accomplish these goals. I will start
off today by reviewing some hospital trends.
Hospital inpatient admissions are declining, both in
Medicare and among the privately insured population. This has
been a trend for several years now, and it is fueled in part by
movement of surgery from the inpatient to the outpatient
setting. In contrast, service volume in the outpatient setting
has been increasing rapidly. For Medicare fee-for-service, the
increase has been 33 percent over the last 7 years.
While it varies by market, overall there appears to be
excess inpatient capacity in the country. Hospital occupancy
rates are around 60 percent and have been declining. And in
rural areas the occupancy rates are around 40 percent. This is
an issue that will drive change in the near term. Regardless of
whether a hospital is urban or rural, the focus of hospital
care is changing from the inpatient setting to the outpatient
setting.
Another fact of life is that the hospital industry has been
consolidating for several decades now. Again, it varies by
market, but many hospitals have very strong bargaining
positions relative to private insurers. And, consequently,
private insurers pay hospitals well above their cost, and much
more than Medicare pays. On average, hospitals are paid 150
percent above their cost by private insurers. Our analysis has
shown that these higher payment rates in turn results in higher
costs. In other words, if a hospital is paid more by private
insurers, all things considered, there are higher costs per
admissions in that hospital.
One other trend that I believe all of you are aware of is
that there has been a lot of activity by hospitals in
purchasing physician practices [sic]. Some argue that this is
to integrate and coordinate care. Others argue that this is to
capture market share and increase revenue by obtaining higher
outpatient hospital payment rates for office services.
Perhaps the most concerning version of this is where a
hospital purchases a physician practice in the community, and
then shifts the billing for those services from an office fee
schedule to a hospital fee schedule. This means that insurers,
private and Medicare, pay more, although very little has
changed. And, of course, of most concern, the beneficiary has a
higher copayment, as a result of this.
Turning to some of the Commission's recommendations, the
Commission has recommended increasing Medicare's hospital
payment rate, but coupled that with site-neutral payment
reductions to remove some of the market distortions I just
mentioned. To improve coordination, the Congress adopted the
Commission's recommendation for a penalty on hospitals with
excessive readmission rates. Readmission rates have fallen, but
there is a further adjustment needed for hospitals that serve
substantial numbers of the poor.
The Commission recommended retargeting the excess indirect
medical education add-on payment to hospitals and other
entities that administer reform graduate medical education
programs that focus on care coordination, and provide training
in alternative sites of care. The Institute of Medicine
recently made a similar recommendation.
Most recently, the Commission has made a series of
recommendations regarding the recovery audit contractors, to
strike a balance between program integrity and administrative
burden on hospitals. At the same time, the Commission made a
set of recommendations to improve the protections for
beneficiaries who are treated in observation status in the
hospital.
With respect to rural care, the Commission has made a
number of recommendations that have resulted in higher payments
for rural hospitals over the years. And, as a result, the 900
rural PPS hospitals have higher margins than those for urban
hospitals. And, as you know, the remaining 1,300 rural critical
access hospitals are paid on a cost basis.
The Commission undertook a comprehensive review of access,
quality, and payment between urban and rural areas in 2012. In
general, the Commission found that urban and rural Medicare
beneficiaries have similar levels of health care use,
satisfaction, and quality, although there are some important
differences that should be discussed, if we get into that.
More importantly, the Commission strongly believes that
there is a need for supports in rural areas, but that these
supports are often not well targeted or designed. One principle
for reform that I will mention here is that supports should be
targeted to providers who have low patient volume, and are thus
unable to cover their fixed cost, but serve as a vital source
of access, meaning that they are distant from other providers.
To put it simply, in short, targets should support low-volume,
isolated providers.
In closing, I would like to thank you for asking the
Commission to testify today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Doctor, thank you very much. Clearly, our
goal is to save Medicare for the long term. And to do that we
have got to get the incentives right, both for providing high-
quality care to patients, affordability for our seniors, and to
make sure this important program is around for a long time in
the future.
I found it striking that MedPAC concluded that Medicare
paid roughly $4,240 more, on average, for an inpatient stay
than for a comparable outpatient surgery. This sounds like a
good place for Congress to start establishing site-neutral
payment. I hope you agree with that.
Mr. MILLER. It is certainly an area that should be looked
at. It is one that we have begun to look at.
Chairman BRADY. You know, focusing on just the 10 surgical
DRGs, or the procedures, like MedPAC did, how difficult would
it be for Congress to craft a policy--and, obviously, what we
are looking for is providing appropriate care at the
appropriate setting for the appropriate price, and not creating
incentives for people to get moved into higher costs,
procedures, or areas, when we could do it in a neutral
approach.
Mr. MILLER. I think that there is probably two ways to--or
two ways to think about responding to that. One is whether
there is the ability to kind of crosswalk between sets of
services in the settings, so that you could create relatively
comparable classifications of services, and actually focus on
this is the service and set payments around that. And that,
while it has a complexity to it, is probably something that
could be done. And we could talk more about that. What I
think----
Chairman BRADY. And a crosswalk is what, exactly?
Mr. MILLER. So it was what you were saying in your opening
statement. You were talking about the notion that there were
different systems and different codes, and that is why I was
trying to bring it back to that. There are different systems
and different codes, but you can probably work, you know, a
crosswalk across that to begin to look at comparable, you know,
groupings of services, or overlapping services. And the number
that you are referring to in our report is a pass through, you
know, the top 10 medical and the top 10 surgical services,
where we try to do that.
But what I do also want to say, just by way of, you know,
of caution, is what is more difficult to comment on is the
actual structure of the policy. So if you try and say, ``I am
going to set up a site-neutral policy, where you have some
services paid outpatient, some inpatient, and then some paid
site-neutral,'' that is certainly a goal that you can move
towards. But what will be key is how services get in and out of
those three systems, and how, in a sense, you police the
borders, if you will, when a service gets into one setting
versus another.
And so, that would be the kind of issues that you would
have to think through, and not inadvertently create other
incentives that drive services in one direction or another.
Chairman BRADY. Just sort of proven out, the crosswalk, we
think, is very important. We have gotten some pushback that
that is difficult to do. I think--how difficult do you think it
would be for CMS if we focused on these 10, you know, where you
have identified them?
Mr. MILLER. Yes, and I don't want to toss this off as
simple, but I--you know, I decidedly think it is doable. These
things--there are, you know, proprietary products that exist in
nature. They do somewhat different things, so reasonable people
can kind of end up with somewhat different categorizations.
And so, there is some issues there that need to be smoothed
through. And probably what you want, you know, if you were to
ask CMS to do this, you would want, after they develop the
crosswalk, you would want a clinical scrub, to make sure that
you have some coherency in the categories that you created from
a clinician's point of view--does this make sense to a
physician?
Chairman BRADY. Sure.
Mr. MILLER. Nurse practitioner, that type of thing. And
then, you know, you put it out for notice and comment.
But, you know, my sense is that the intellectual technology
to do the crosswalking exists.
Chairman BRADY. Yes. One of the areas of reforms,
obviously, inpatient/outpatient, are tremendously complicated.
They are, in some sense, a demolition derby of reimbursements
and incentives. The June Report, again, looking at these
surgical procedures, June Report mentioned, really, two
approaches: one, the site-neutral payment for these surgeries
could be carved out of the inpatient/outpatient system and
moved into a separate one; secondly, surgeries calling for
site-neutral could be subsumed under the inpatient payment
system.
These are two approaches we ought to be looking at. We
included one of them in our draft last November on hospital
reforms. Can you lay out sort of for the subcommittee what you
see, the pros and cons of that? A separate system for those, or
moving them under an inpatient?
Mr. MILLER. Okay. So--and I want to just do one thing
quickly before I answer your question. You know, the way the
Commission went at this was we were responding to kind of the
two-midnight rule and a lot of the reaction to that, and a lot
of concern on the part of the committees, and so forth, of what
to do there. And the Commission ended up making recommendations
on RACs and beneficiary protections, and talked about the
payment stuff, but have not made recommendations on that yet.
So I want to be real clear.
Chairman BRADY. Got it.
Mr. MILLER. We are talking about, you know, ideas, not
policies, and not recommendations.
I think one thing to think through is the reason that you
want to do these types of things is that your need for
oversight, RAC types of overview, becomes less. To the extent
that you make payments more comparable, there is less
incentives to push a patient in one direction or another. So,
to the extent that you are setting out and saying, ``I want to
set up payments so that this incentive is not so clear,'' that
is one of the benefits of it. You are making decisions for
clinical reasons, as opposed to financial reasons, and you may
not have to have so much oversight.
The risk--and I already said it, so I will try and be very
abbreviated--is how you set those boundaries and what services,
whether the services are well-defined or bluntly subject to
gaming, depends on, you know--that is the risk you run when you
try and set something up like this.
If you do it inside one of the existing systems--because
your other question was what if I did some site-neutral stuff
inside inpatient, or I did some site-neutral stuff in kind of a
stand-alone system--my sense is, particularly if you are
talking about a small set of services or conditions, or
whatever we are talking about here, is you probably have less
churning and change if you put it inside at one of the existing
systems.
But I got to tell you, I am talking right off the top of my
head, here. I would have to--want to think about this a lot
more. Just saying that part----
Chairman BRADY. Yes, good. Finish with this question. We
talked about a bit, both in the opening statement and yours,
there is a gradual migration services from inpatient to
outpatient. We need to recognize that. So we are concerned that
this means, for our policies and payments associated with that,
such as indirect medical education and DSH, it has an impact.
So, our goal is to preserve and protect these funds. I am
concerned that they are not protected when they are so
dependent on just one area, inpatient admission. One strategy I
think Congress can pursue is reimburse indirect medical
education and DSH in a lump-sum payment, rather than as a per-
discharge add-on. So what do you think of this approach, how it
might preserve and protect IME and DSH goals?
Mr. MILLER. I want to be really clear. This precise idea,
or this precise notion, is not something that the Commission
has talked about. And at the end of my answer I am going to
tell you one thing the Commission has talked about.
But to try and answer your question first, I think I
understand your instinct. I think your instinct is what you are
saying is--if you are tied to inpatient, and inpatient is going
down, how do you preserve that, I think, if that is what you
are saying. And, to the extent you were to capture that, and
assign that dollar to a hospital, in theory, movements in
volume up or down or in or out would make that a more stable--
regardless of movement, it would make that a more stable
payment, all things considered.
I would also think if you were to say that is the direction
you would go, I am sure the Commission would also say, ``You
want to think about, like, maintenance of effort types of
things.'' If you get the block of dollars, you don't just back
out of the teaching function, and that type of thing. But I
assume, you know, if you are thinking about these kinds of
things, you would be thinking about that.
Now, the one thing I do have to say is the Commission went
in a different direction on this, and said there is $3.5
billion in direct medical education payments that are not well
accounted for, and the Commission said, ``Take that as a lump
sum,'' but it was payable to hospitals or other entities that
created these new programs. So, in a sense, we went in a
somewhat different direction here from your idea.
Chairman BRADY. Well, I am not so sure we aren't going in
that direction----
Mr. MILLER. Well----
Chairman BRADY [continuing]. As well, to be honest.
Mr. MILLER. Well, that is----
Chairman BRADY. Because I think we need a better--one
thing, this is a bipartisan issue. How do we make sure we have
the right training, the--for more doctors and future doctors?
And we are intent on getting a much better insight into how all
this is funded, and the results of that funding, going forward.
So, Doctor, thank you very much.
Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I read your report, and over half of it is drug policy.
About 100 pages are----
Mr. MILLER. June Report, yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And it is interesting we are focusing on
hospitals, because I think drugs--we recently passed a bill out
of here called--the 21st Century Cures Act was passed out of
the House. It didn't come through this commission--this
Committee. But it had a provision in there that gave incentives
to hospitals for the overuse of newer antibiotics.
And my question was did they come to you and talk to you
about that? Did the Energy and Commerce Committee come to you?
Mr. MILLER. Not specifically, that I remember.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It seems like it is going to----
Mr. MILLER. I am not sure I have got the provision well
squared away in my head, just to be----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, they are saying, ``Use these new
antibiotics, as opposed to the traditional antibiotics,'' there
would be an incentive if you used the new antibiotics.
Obviously, more expensive and better for the pharmaceutical
industry, but I am not sure it doesn't drive up costs in
hospitals.
Mr. MILLER. And I am just not wired enough on the
specific----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Okay, all right.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. Provision to help you.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. That is fair enough. The issue that got you
here--that is, the two-night, or the midnight, two-night--
midnight business and all that--do you think you can find a
site-neutral payment system that will not disadvantage the
patients?
Mr. MILLER. And just to kind of try and pick up the thread
here in my own mind, you know, the Commission approached the
two-midnight issue, and ended up with a set of recommendations
on RAC and beneficiaries, and ultimately didn't make
recommendations on payment, and didn't feel that there was a
necessity at that moment to deal with a--you know, the RAC, and
the backlog issues through a payment change.
Your question is a little bit different, perhaps. But can
you create a site-neutral payment that is fair to the
beneficiary? I think it is all in the design of the policy, so
I would say it is possible. Not this site-neutral conversation,
but the Commission has made recommendations in--on other site-
neutral policies between the physician setting and the
outpatient setting. We actually think that helps the
beneficiary, because it keeps their copayments down. In fact,
it was one of the motivations for it.
Now, here, in this--pushing together inpatient and
outpatient, it would probably depend on what services and how
you defined the actual thing, as to what the effect on the
beneficiary's out-of-pocket would be. It would be very hard for
me to comment, without knowing ``the thing.''
Mr. MCDERMOTT. We are talking theoretically here. Do you
think you then could design a policy that a doctor and a
hospital wouldn't look at and say, ``Hey, let's do this,
because that will qualify for this,'' which is a higher payment
than that which is not a higher payment?
Mr. MILLER. And what I have tried to say and respond to a
couple of questions that have occurred so far is that is the
trick, is, you know--right now there is an incentive between
the inpatient and outpatient settings that look like this. And
if I can get into the inpatient, and I can keep the inpatient
for one day--or keep the patient for one day, that is a very,
you know, profitable transaction. I think you----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Let me stop you right there.
Mr. MILLER. All right.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Okay, it is transaction good for the
hospitals.
Mr. MILLER. Yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. What about the beneficiary?
Mr. MILLER. So it depends on whether the beneficiary--so,
generally, the beneficiary's out of pocket is less in
outpatient than it is in inpatient. If you jump the inpatient
wall, you pay $1,000, $1,200 deductible. If you are staying in
the outpatient, in general, the beneficiary's liability is
less.
However, if it is surgery, it is actually not as much
difference. So it really kind of depends on--and this is why I
am saying which services and what you do with them. And I think
part of the reason the Commission said, ``If you started
thinking about surgery''--I mean thinking about site-neutral
here, you might start with thinking about surgery, because the
event is pretty definable, it is harder to game. And the
differences in the copayments may not be as much.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You are talking, therefore, about a patient
who comes in with what looks like appendicitis, and they put
him in observation, and they ultimately wind up becoming an
operation for removal of the appendix. That is one kind. But
the other kind of case would be somebody who has a pain in
their chest, and they put him in for observation, and they
never graduate to full-fledged ICU or cardiac surgery, or
whatever.
Mr. MILLER. And just to take that point and just put it a
little bit differently----
Chairman BRADY. Dr. Miller, could you do me a favor? Pull
that microphone just a little closer to you.
Mr. MILLER. I am really sorry about that. So nobody has
heard anything I said up to this point?
[Laughter.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I have been listening.
Mr. MILLER. Okay. All right. So now I have no idea what is
going on.
[Laughter.]
Mr. MILLER. So, just to pick up on the thread of your
question--I apologize, I didn't realize that was going on--
the--one of the things that the Commission did think about was
whether we were talking about this kind of idea for medical or
for surgical.
For--and I am not a physician, so I apologize for
everything that is about to happen. For a medical condition, it
is more complex to kind of follow what is going to--it can be
more complex--on what is going to happen with the patient. You
know, your point. Chest pain, I have chest pain, I have a heart
attack, you know, these types of things can be relatively
fluid, as opposed to surgery, where the event and the procedure
and the thing that is going to happen to the patient is more
well-defined, and most of the cost is very present in that
event. And I think that is why the Commission thought, if you
start something, start looking there.
Does that answer your question, or am I--now you are sorry
I moved this close to me, right?
[Laughter.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, I--my feeling, then, is what happens
to the patient at that point? Does he or she wind up more out
of pocket?
Mr. MILLER. And I think that really depends on the service.
But in a surgical situation--and I don't want to speak too
globally on this, because the Commission really sort of looked
at this, but didn't dive as, you know, deep on it. Generally
between, you know--for over--surgeries that tend to overlap
settings, the beneficiary's liability is more comparable
between the inpatient and outpatient setting than the
liabilities for a medical procedure.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Can I have just a second to ask unanimous
consent to drop in a letter from the American Hospital
Association dated July 22nd?
[No response.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It is their----
Chairman BRADY. Without objection.
Mr. MCDERMOTT [continuing]. This Committee.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Dr. McDermott.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Miller, let me start by thanking you for testifying
today. As you know, our nation has an incredibly complex
hospital payment system, with different coding classification
systems and reimbursement systems, and where the procedure is
performed.
MedPAC concluded in its June Report that, because Medicare
generally pays more for patients who receive similar services
in inpatient settings compared with outpatient settings,
hospitals have a financial incentive to admit patients. To
address the problem, MedPAC drafted a crosswalk to link 10
comparable inpatient and outpatient surgical codes. Such a
crosswalk allowed MedPAC to compare these similar codes, which
you then found resulted in inpatient surgical costs, roughly
4,000-plus higher than for similar outpatient surgeries.
I think it is an important step to ensure greater
transparency in Medicare spending, so we can ensure hospitals
are not admitting patients solely for financial profit, but
because it is medically necessary. So I would like to take
these moments to ask a couple specifics.
First, how important is it to have a crosswalk between
similar surgical codes for inpatient and outpatient payment
systems?
Mr. MILLER. I think, if the committee wants to pursue the
idea that it seems to be asking questions about, site-neutral,
that type of thing, you have to have something like that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. How difficult was it for MedPAC to
establish a crosswalk for these 10 surgical codes?
Mr. MILLER. It was not simple. And I will just say, again,
I think reasonable people could come to different places in
crosswalking individual codes from one location to the other.
But I think there is probably a manageable process that people
could go through to come to a crosswalk that would generally be
viewed as acceptable.
You would want a clinical, as I said, overlay after you did
those crosswalks, to make sure you were doing things in a
clinically rationale way. I would say that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, thanks. And finally, in your opinion, is
this something CMS could pursue in the future?
Mr. MILLER. I do. I think--I am sure they would prefer to
speak for themselves, but, you know, my sense is that they
could engage through a contracting process with, you know,
firms that exist that do this, bring something in that would be
used for public use. They would have to work with it, both
mechanically and clinically, as I said, because I don't think
these things are just off-the-shelf, everything is perfect, you
know. They would have--and they would want to put it out for
notice and comment, get people--the hospitals, physicians,
beneficiaries, everybody--to comment on it. But I do think it
is a process that they could pursue.
Mr. JOHNSON. Everything is off the shelf, just like this
hearing.
Mr. MILLER. Yes, right.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. I appreciate your opinion, and
I appreciate your help on that issue. Thank you.
Mr. PRICE [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Kind
from Wisconsin is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Miller, thank you for being here. I usually ask you a
quick question about rural hospital reimbursements. In your
2013--your recent report, you indicated in 2013 the overall
margin rate for rural hospitals was about 22 percent. But also
in the report you acknowledged that a large part of that margin
was based on the HIT incentive programs that have been going to
rural hospitals. That now is being phased out.
So, are you--is MedPAC taking into consideration the phase-
out of the HIT incentive program, and what that is going to do
to margins for rurals? Because 40 percent of them are operating
in negative margin territory, already.
Mr. MILLER. I think the answer to that is yes. The
Commission--and one thing, and it went by really fast in my
opening statement, so I will just say it again. We have made,
for the last few years, positive Medicare payment increases for
hospitals. We recognize that rural hospitals are about at 0.2,
but let's just call it zero. Overall margins are negative for
hospitals in Medicare. And, consequently, the Commission has--
among other reasons, the Commission has made recommendations
for payment updates for rural and urban hospitals. So----
Mr. KIND. Okay.
Mr. MILLER. And, in thinking through those issues, we take
into account things like your--exactly what you are asking.
What is going to happen to this? What is going to happen to
that. And we look forward to all of that----
Mr. KIND. Okay, very good. Let me shift gears. Obviously,
CMS has been pushing the metal a little bit hard now on
changing the payment system, going to a more value and outcome-
based payment model. You, undoubtedly--and MedPAC,
undoubtedly--has been watching this very closely. I want to get
your impressions on how that is going, and whether there are
some additional areas of acceleration when it comes to value-
based payment models, especially in the post-acute care area,
where I think there is some substantial savings that can be
had, while also increasing the quality of care.
Mr. MILLER. So we are not talking about hospitals or rural,
necessarily----
Mr. KIND. Now, we have----
Mr. MILLER. We are talking bigger----
Mr. KIND [continuing]. Moved on to a totally different
payment question here.
Mr. MILLER. Okay. I am going to start. But if I don't have
the right question here, you know, just redirect.
So, if you are talking about kind of large, you know,
payment delivery reform types of things, like accountable care
organizations----
Mr. KIND. Right.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. And that type of thing, so what I
would say is, you know, coming out of the health reform
legislation--so there were things like the re-admissions
penalty, which I know is not particularly popular, but has
actually had the effect of reducing re-admissions. And just by
the way, the Commission has some ideas to address hospitals
that deal with disproportionate shares of the poor that we
could talk about if anybody wants.
Moving on from that, ACOs, I think the analysis we have
done there suggests that ACOs are producing small savings,
onesie and twosie percent types, and it is in parts of the
country where fee-for-service tends to be high, which, if you
think about it for 30 seconds, kind of makes sense.
On the bundling and post-acute care, there hasn't--you
know, there is that demonstration--I don't want to make a
global statement, and I don't think this is a Commission
statement, but there hasn't been a lot to show there yet, that
I have seen. And I think there is some concern on the part of
the Commission that, you know, lots of people wanted the data,
a lot fewer people wanted to take risk. And to the extent they
wanted to take risk, they wanted to do it for only a few
services.
And so, getting a lot of traction in the post-acute care,
say through a bundling strategy, I don't see a lot of it yet,
and I am worried that what is out there isn't going to
necessarily----
Mr. KIND. Well, Mr. Brady and I have been working on some
proposals, and undoubtedly would like to follow up with you and
others at MedPAC for some advice or guidance, as we get ready
to move forward on that.
Mr. MILLER. Okay.
Mr. KIND. Great, thank you.
Mr. PRICE. The gentleman yields back. I was next in line,
so--maybe I will let the Chair take over here, and then I will
assume my rightful position.
[Laughter.]
Chairman BRADY [presiding]. So Dr. Price declined to
recognize Dr. Price?
[Laughter.]
Chairman BRADY. Is that the case? Thank you for letting me
step out for a minute.
Dr. Price, you are recognized.
Mr. PRICE. It was this perspective that I--welcome back.
Mr. MILLER. It is good to see you.
Mr. PRICE. Thanks for coming. And I appreciate your
qualification on--as a surgeon--on your definition or your
description of the difference between a medical observation and
a surgical observation, and we will have a conversation about
that offline.
Mr. MILLER. Okay.
Mr. PRICE. The--I have a number of questions I want to
raise. The first is on meaningful use and electronic health
records. In a 2012 MedPAC report you commented--MedPAC
commented on--talking about the decreased uptake of utilization
by physicians of EHRs. And I have been surprised that in the
last three reports, or last three years, MedPAC hasn't
addressed the issue of meaningful use and EHRs. Is there a
reason for that? Do you plan on addressing this issue that is
so incredibly important for the----
Mr. MILLER. We can certainly dive back into it. You know,
we are a small operation. We kind of--we can't cover the
waterfront every year, all day. And so we tend to focus on
things and then move to other issues. But if there is an
interest in it, we can certainly try and look back into it.
Mr. PRICE. Let me just share with you. I spent a couple
hours this past Monday night in Atlanta with a group of, oh, 80
to 100 physicians on the specific issue of meaningful use, and
the incredible challenges that they are having in their
practice, caring for their patients: decreasing productivity,
increasing costs, decreasing access to care from the patient
standpoint. And so I would urge MedPAC to take another look at
it, especially in view of the fact that it appears that CMS is
forging forward with stage three without regard to any
information or statistics, real metrics that demonstrate that
stage two has actually been a success.
Let me shift to site-neutral payments. And I appreciate
MedPAC's perspective on this, and the push that you all have
made. I think it is an incredibly important issue. And I am
curious as to whether or not you believe that CMS could go
ahead and do site-neutral payments right now, without Congress
acting.
Mr. MILLER. Without Congress acting? I don't know the
answer to your question, off the top of my head, not in any
real, significant way, at least that we have been thinking
about it. The recommendations we have made, and I think some of
the discussion here--although I would really have to think
about it--would require more changes in law. But I am not 100
percent----
Mr. PRICE. Sure.
Mr. MILLER. It would depend on what you meant by ``site
neutral,'' I suppose.
Mr. PRICE. Well, especially outpatient surgical procedures
and what I think are significantly-increased costs to the
system, yes, but also, as Dr. McDermott has pointed out, to the
patient, as well, in terms of copays and deductibles on things
as insignificant as minor procedures, but as significant as
major procedures like joint replacements, which are now being
done in an outpatient setting in many, many instances, so I
would----
Mr. MILLER. And I want to say I want to think about the
answer to your question, because, depending on if it is done
inside an existing system, I wonder what flexibility the
Secretary would have. So I want to withdraw a little bit, and--
--
Mr. PRICE. Great.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. Think about it.
Mr. PRICE. I would love to----
Mr. MILLER. Yes, I don't know the answer to your question.
Mr. PRICE. In-office ancillary services exception, GAO
reported in multiple studies for between 2004 and 2010 that
they didn't uncover any evidence at all that suggested that it
would be appropriate to repeal the in-office ancillary
exception. Milliman did a study that showed that costs in the
hospital were greater than costs in the office. JAMA has done a
recent report that demonstrated the same.
Can you opine as to--or can you share with us what
information you have provided to CMS as it relates to this, or
opine as to whether--why you believe HHS or the Administration
seems to be incentivizing a move towards hospitalization, as
opposed to--and utilizing services in hospitals, as opposed to
the office for these kinds of procedures and examinations?
Mr. MILLER. Yes, and I am just going to--and you tell me if
I am off base. I am not--I don't feel so much that people are
actively trying to incent the move from office to hospital,
although you may be aware of something I am not.
More--the way I think about the issue is, historically,
private and Medicare created payment systems to pay for
hospital care and physician care. Hospitals is no mystery.
Hospitals are more expensive.
Mr. PRICE. Yes.
Mr. MILLER. And a big argument is why and what people
should pay for, and all of that. And so you end up with payment
systems for comparable services that look like this. And then,
hospitals have started to purchase physician practices, and
then just shift the billings from one setting to the other.
More what I see is that motivation, is that there is a
financial signal out there, and people have begun to pick up on
it, and are moving in that direction. And our recommendations
on site-neutral--and I think what was included in the
President's budget, although I don't have that wired in my
head--were to try and do a bit more of leveling that out----
Mr. PRICE. Correct.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. So that that incentive didn't
exist as strongly.
Mr. PRICE. Correct. Did that mean my time is up, or that I
have got a minute?
Chairman BRADY. Thank you both very much.
Mr. PRICE. I look forward to getting back with you, Dr.
Miller.
Mr. MILLER. Yes. Sorry for going on.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Pascrell, you are recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Miller, for your service.
I would like to discuss with you graduate medical
education. In my home state of New Jersey, there is 42
hospitals maintaining residency programs. That number is
increasing. I am proud that our hospitals are at the forefront
of training the next generation of physicians. I know you are
very interested in that.
Mr. MILLER. The Commission is, yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Despite the fact that our teaching hospitals
turn out many highly-trained physicians every year, New Jersey
faces a physician shortage. My state's challenge retaining
physicians in New Jersey after they complete their residencies
is a big problem. But many of the states that my colleagues
here today actually benefit from this problem. States like
Pennsylvania and Delaware, with lower costs of living, benefit
from residency programs that New Jersey hospitals undertake.
When physicians complete their residencies, they move out of
the state.
A few months back I met with a family physician who
completed his residency in New Jersey, and then moved to Texas
to practice where the cost of living is much lower. Given the
shortage in the physician workforce pipeline, impending
physician retirements, the aging of the Baby Boomer population
and a number of other issues, we need to be growing the number
of Medicare-supported residency positions, not reducing them.
The landscape of how we deliver health care is changing.
The Affordable Care Act laid the foundation for moving away
from a fee-for-service model towards quality-based payment
systems. Congress could take one step further by repealing the
sustainable growth rate earlier this year. That is what we did.
One of the issues MedPAC has highlighted in the past is the
role that GME funds and teaching hospitals can play in
preparing new physicians to practice in a quality-based health
system. One fact--one of our hospitals in New Jersey, the
Hackensack Medical Center, has an extremely successful
accountable care organization. They have adopted their GME
program to promote this integrated tier model.
Dr. Miller, can you talk a little bit about how teaching
hospitals can leverage their position training the next
generation of physicians to underscore the importance of
quality-driven health care, care coordination, and a team-based
approach to health care, which we talk about all the time? But
this is going on in places throughout the United States. Would
you respond to that?
Mr. MILLER. I think so. So the Commission did some work
back several years now, and, as I mentioned quickly in my
opening statement, I think the IOM--read more recently--said
some very similar things. And what the Commission said is we
took a look at curriculums. And we are concerned that in the
residency trainings there was not focus on team-based care,
using evidence-based metrics to guide care, you know, using the
HR--you know, the stuff that you think about in a reformed
delivery system.
And what we said was there should be a set of criteria--
and, given time, I won't drive you through it--there should be
a process that includes many stakeholders--which I won't drive
you through, it is all written down in the report--to come to
this more comprehensive look at graduate training, to drive
towards delivery reform, to have physicians and other health
professionals who are versed in these skill sets, as well as
training in alternative settings.
Physicians see a lot of patients in nursing homes, offices,
clinics, you know, urban and rural. And to drive in that
direction, and then attach the GME dollar to the programs that
meet that criteria. They could be hospitals. And, to the extent
that your--the hospital example you said is driving in that
direction, at least in the Commission's point of view, that is
what we would be looking for.
Mr. PASCRELL. Well, let me ask this final question, Dr.
Miller. If you say--and I believe you believe in what you
said--wouldn't it be--an incremental increase in those
residency positions help states like New Jersey?
Mr. MILLER. Well, we were so close, but the Commission does
not agree with that, and----
Mr. PASCRELL. Why not?
Mr. MILLER. I will tell you. The Commission's view was
simply expanding the number of slots is going to produce more
of what we have, and it is not necessarily going to keep
residents in your states. They can still leave.
Mr. PASCRELL. Right.
Mr. MILLER. And so I think there was some concern that,
without a much more rigorous look at, you know, changing the
graduate medical education strategy, and what is needed, we
shouldn't just simply increase the number of slots.
Mr. PASCRELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of
respect for Dr. Miller, as you know.
Mr. MILLER. But you disagree.
Mr. PASCRELL. But, through the Chair, I would like to get a
more definitive answer to the question. We don't have the time
right now. With your help, I think we can.
Chairman BRADY. I would be glad to.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thanks.
Chairman BRADY. And, just so you know, we are going to be
holding a hearing dealing with GME, and sort of get deeper into
this subject, because it is a bipartisan----
Mr. PASCRELL. In the fall?
Chairman BRADY [continuing]. Issue, going forward. Yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Okay, thank you.
Mr. MILLER. And I want you to know that if you would like
us to come to your office and--you or your staff--and just take
you through all of it, we are----
Mr. PASCRELL. Yes, I think that would be a good idea, too.
Mr. MILLER. More than happy to do that.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, appreciate it.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Smith--Dr. Smith, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. I thought physicians were leaving
rural America for urban America, but I hear otherwise. So
obviously, I represent a rural constituency, and there are many
challenges. And I talk to providers, and especially in rural
areas, where, you know, support staff is probably not what it
is in urban areas. I am not complaining about that, but the
recovery audit contractor issue has had a significant impact,
and it just has frustrated a lot of providers. So I had a bill
last Congress which would have reformed the RACs, and I am
continuing to work on this issue.
But I was wondering. Now, the Commission made several
recommendations for the RAC program. Can you touch on those
recommendations, perhaps, and maybe give a brief rationale for
each one? I don't want to put you on the spot, but if you do
have those handy----
Mr. MILLER. No, I do have them handy. This was in our most
recent report. I figured it would come up at some point.
So, with respect--just focusing on the RACs--and we also
made recommendations on beneficiary protections, but just on
the RACs, we basically said three things, that, instead of the
RAC review being very comprehensive and hitting all kinds of
hospitals, focus the RAC efforts on hospitals that have
apparent patterns of one-day stays. And so, in a sense, it is
just--it is targeting.
Number two, RACs are a contingency fee-type of operation,
and we want the RACs to bring the most credible and defensible
cases, not just sort of, you know, take as--take their chances,
and do as much as possible, and then see what happens. And so,
we would say the contingency fee should, in part, be adjusted
if they have poor overturn rates. They bring lots of cases,
they get overturned, then their contingency fee should be
brought down. Make it a financial incentive to bring good,
strong cases.
The third thing was to adjust the look-back period for the
RAC. So RACs were able to go back several years on hospitals
and say, ``I am challenging this particular admission.'' And,
you know, two or three years, a lot of administrative costs
trying to dig that out, electronic record. And it may be past
the point that, if the claim was denied, that the hospital
couldn't bill for the--a set of outpatient services that they
did provide.
So you might say, ``Well, this inpatient was unnecessary,
but they did provide some outpatient services coming in the
door,'' if you will. And so we said, ``That should be better
aligned, so that the hospital has the ability to make this
calculus: `I can defend this case, and so I am going to
appeal,' or, `Actually, I am not so sure I can defend it, so I
am not going to appeal it, I am going to actually just take the
lower outpatient reimbursement, and walk away,' '' and that is
the dynamic, rather than appealing everything or appealing
nothing, that we are trying to get set up in there.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay.
Mr. MILLER. So those were the three RAC things.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Sure. I appreciate that. Shifting
gears here just a bit, I represent a number of critical access
hospitals. Some are--well, they are all rural. Some of those
are actually remote. And I know that you have previously said
that the closing of rural hospitals is proportionate to the
closure of urban hospitals. Is that an accurate description?
I would say that the impact to the community, or--and
perhaps to the patients themselves is disproportionate. Does
the Commission take that into consideration at all?
Mr. MILLER. Yes. And by saying it is proportionate, I don't
think anybody was trying to say--and this drives right to a
point that I would like to make; you may agree or not, but it
does--the Commission, in writing that down on paper and
reporting what is happening, we aren't trying to say, ``and
therefore, there is no issue here.'' I--you know, obviously, if
you are in a urban area and a hospital closes, and there is two
other hospitals right nearby, the significance of that closure
is very different than if you are the only hospital within 50
miles.
And the thing that we are trying to say is rural--and this
comes from our rural commissioners. First of all, think of
rural this way. There is rural, as in 50 miles from any other
provider on a hilltop, and there is rural adjacent to an MSA.
You are right across the border from, you know, a metropolitan
statistical area.
The access implications of closure in those two settings
are very different.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Right.
Mr. MILLER. You know? You might have to travel somewhat
further into the MSA, but you are--still have access to
something.
And so, the point that I think the Commission has been
driving at for several years is think about the supports that
go out to rural areas. And what you want is to really support
that isolated, low-volume provider, because they can't ever be
expected to cover their costs. They are too small, there is not
enough admissions that roll through, or outpatient visits to
cover their costs, and there is no other alternative.
But all over the place we are--I think I am done.
[Laughter.]
Chairman BRADY. You know, by the way, no other witness ever
stops when I do that, so I appreciate that very much.
[Laughter.]
Mr. MILLER. But I am going to finish. It is very short. A
lot of our current supports for rural areas kind of make it
critical to the community to hang on to their hospital, even if
that hospital is close to another hospital, and they both have
low volume, and, bluntly, they are more likely to have low
quality. Whereas, if there was a consolidation, they might be
economically more viable, and might even improve quality there.
Sorry about that.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Doctor, and thank you, Mr.
Smith.
Mr. Davis, you are recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Miller. Illinois's 7th congressional
district, which I represent, contains the most hospital beds of
any congressional district in the nation. In addition to that,
we are home to four major academic medical centers. According
to the new workforce projections, the nation faces a shortage
of between 46,000 and 90,000 physicians by 2025, with shortages
most acute in surgical specialties, the result of a growing
aging population, and the newly insured, which tend to need
more specialized care, especially the elderly, who are living
longer. Medical schools have increased enrollment, and teaching
hospitals are expanding training to address physician shortage.
Medical schools and teaching hospitals are also working hard to
ensure that new doctors coming into the system are trained to
serve in new delivery models that focus on care coordination
and quality improvement.
I am concerned that reductions to Medicare graduate medical
education would harm teaching hospitals' ability to effectively
train the number of physicians we need in the future, and would
adversely impact access to care for both the elderly and the
newly insured.
My question is, while Congress seeks to reform Medicare
payments to graduate medical education, shouldn't we also be
making sure--or trying to make sure--that we are able to meet
the projected need, as we continue towards 2025?
Mr. MILLER. I think the answer to that is yes. I think a
couple things that I would say. With absolute respect--and I
don't know the source of your numbers--but I would say,
depending on who is doing the projecting, you can get very
different kinds of numbers of what shortage and what is in
shortage.
There are also people in the academic community who have
less of a stake in this, and have looked at this, and have
argued that it is not so much aggregate supply as distribution
problems, and have suggested also changes about which, you
know, level of physician versus a nurse practitioner versus a
PA that could--for example, to, you know, fill some of the
needs.
What I would say directly to your points are one question
is, given the dollars that go to support slots, the Commission
could think about which of those specialties are likely to
either be in short supply or--and/or are less lucrative for the
hospital to support, and shift the given dollar to support
those kinds of training programs. So, some interns and
residents are very valuable to the hospital, and they will
support them even without a subsidy. Others are less valuable
to the hospital, and they are less likely to support them. So
you could think of, given a dollar, how you distribute that
dollar.
A second thing I want to say is the Commission did not
ultimately reduce indirect medical education. It did redirect
how it was--you know, it went to the various programs, and that
is what I was saying in response to the question before you.
Mr. DAVIS. Let me ask you a little bit about site-neutral
payment policies. Do you see this adversely affecting teaching
hospitals and disproportionate share hospitals, perhaps more
than others, because of the clientele----
Mr. MILLER. I definitely----
Mr. DAVIS [continuing]. That they----
Mr. MILLER. I definitely see where you are going, and the
Commission contemplated this. And so I am just going to blow
past this part. It depends on what kind of site-neutral you are
talking about; it will affect different hospitals differently.
But let's just say, for the purposes of your question, some
site-neutral policy has an effect on a hospital that serves a
disproportionate number of poor folks. The Commission said you
could mitigate that, the effect of the policy, by looking at
the amount of, you know, poor people, say, that hospital
serves. They actually directly contemplated policy designs that
would try and address that problem.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. I know that time is a
factor, but I would like to discuss these issues with you
further, if we have an opportunity to do so.
Mr. MILLER. As always, we are happy to brief you and your--
or your staff, whichever way you would like to go.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Marchant, you are recognized.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would love to pick
up where Chairman Brady was talking at the very beginning. The
Affordable Care Act splits the DHS funds into two pots: 75
percent of the dollars go into a pot that is being reduced
every year; and the other 25 percent, which is sometimes
referred to as the empirically justified pot, is not being
reduced.
It is my understanding that MedPAC came up with this notion
of empirically justified. Can you explain how MedPAC got to
that classification, and their reasoning behind it?
Mr. MILLER. I can, and I just--I think you are clear in
your mind, I just want to be clear in everyone else's mind. We
didn't come up with this system that you are referring to, the
two parts, but we did come up with the empirically justified
notion.
So, this is work--and this is way back, now, but this is
work when we were thinking about the indirect medical education
add-on payment, and the disproportionate share add-on payment.
And here is a way to understand it. It is a little bit
technical, but I can do it, I think, very simply.
Here is a hospital's cost per case. And, thinking about
what drives that cost per case, it might be more complex
patients in one hospital or another, or differences in wages
from one area to another, or something like that. And so you
could see that cost go up and down, based on what is happening
in a given hospital.
There are add-ons for IME and, to your question,
disproportionate share. And the rationale for it has changed
over time and who you are talking to. But at any--one way to
think about it was it was supposed to help hospitals that
served disproportionate shares of the poor. And the thought was
serving poor folks increased the cost for the hospital.
And so, if you run that analysis--which I can take you
through in detail, but for this conversation, if you run that
analysis--it says that is true, but it is this much more, and
the adjustment is this much more. So, the adjustment over-
achieved, if you will, and gave the hospitals more than their
cost increase.
We just went through the analysis and said the adjustment
actually, you know, should be smaller than it is. And we
actually didn't even make a recommendation, we just
analytically went through it and said this adjustor is set too
high.
Mr. MARCHANT. Is it your opinion that the DHS money is
going to the hospitals with the greatest need?
Mr. MILLER. All right. I know you think this is a yes or no
question.
[Laughter.]
Mr. MILLER. But let me tell you--let me say it this way. If
you think it is about poor Medicare patients, the answer is no,
because the DSH adjustor contemplates poor Medicare patients
and Medicaid. If you think it is about supporting poor Medicare
and hospitals that get lots of Medicaid patients, it is
probably tracking that. If you think it is about uncompensated
care, it is not tracking that, so it depends on what you----
Mr. MARCHANT. The next question----
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. What you think--sorry.
Mr. MARCHANT. The next question may help you with that.
Mr. MILLER. All right.
Mr. MARCHANT. I am particularly interested in the hospitals
in the State of Texas. As you may be aware, we are not a
Medicaid expansion state. So it is my understanding that The
DHS formula is based, in part, on Medicaid days for hospital.
Mr. MILLER. It is.
Mr. MARCHANT. Is it possible that the--that in addition to
losing money on the Medicaid DHS side, Texas hospitals are also
losing money on the Medicare DHS side because of how the
formula is calculated?
Mr. MILLER. It is correct that if you have more Medicaid
patients moving through your hospital, your DSH will be higher.
Mr. MARCHANT. So, in a state that didn't expand, it is
arguable that your volume is not what it would be in a
neighboring state that has a similar situation that had
expanded?
Mr. MILLER. I think, factually, that is a true statement.
Mr. MARCHANT. So I have one, two, three, four--six
hospitals that have contacted me that I believe they feel like
that their funding has been affected by the fact that Texas is
not an expansion state, based on the formula.
Mr. MILLER. I don't think the fact set is wrong. Without
making a judgement about what people want to do, I think the
fact set is correct. If you have more Medicaid patients moving
through your hospital, your DSH payments will be higher.
Mr. MARCHANT. So we are preparing some legislation that we
will present to the committee to try to rectify this. Thank
you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Roskam, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Miller, thanks for your time. My question has to do
with some of the work that The Oversight Subcommittee has done
at Ways and Means, particularly in the--looking at fraud and
improper payments.
So, a few months ago we had the individual who is in charge
of anti-fraud efforts at CMS before the subcommittee, and we
posed a simple question to them. And the question was, ``What
is your fraud and improper payments rate?'' And they said it
was 12.7 percent, which is a number that is so big it just
takes your breath away.
Now, just for the sake of creating a sense of wonder, we
had the person who is in charge of anti-fraud efforts at Visa,
the credit card people, asked them the same question. His
answer was, on $10 trillion worth of global transactions, their
fraud rate is .06 percent. So this cavernous difference just
really does take your breath away.
There is a lot of discussion about how it is that we are
going to make sure that the trust fund isn't depleted and so
forth. One of the things--there is a general discussion about
improper payments as one of the goals that you have, mitigating
against improper payments.
So, the reason for my inquiry about improper payments is
this. Congress basically--you know, if you look out over these
different things that we have done over the past few months, we
have got a highway trust fund that is going broke, we have got
this, that, and the other thing, we have the SGR, you know,
Congress is basically grubbing around in the forest, looking
for truffles, and trying to come up with a bushel of money to
pay for these things.
And yet, the amount of money that is going out the door in
improper payments just literally, at our hearing, it just took
our breath away. You do a back-of-the-napkin calculation on
this, and it is--you know, it is a billion dollars a week. And
the cumulative nature of this is just incredible.
What insight would you have for us on the improper payment
side, in particular? Because the interesting thing is there is
obviously nobody that is defending the status quo. It is not a
partisan issue, it is not a philosophical issue, it is not a
geographic issue. It is just a common-sense thing, where we
should all agree that payments should be proper. And, if they
are proper, we are going to save a fortune.
What insight would you have for the committee, as we
venture out into this, particularly in the improper payment
arena?
Mr. MILLER. Right. And I just want to preface I am probably
not the--you know, the fraud guy that you want to answer this
question. The Commission tends to think of payment policy,
looks at distortions, tries to stop, you know, bad practices.
But detecting fraud is kind of a different option.
So, the first thing I would say about the size of the
number--and in no way am I trying to defend anybody or
anything--is, you know, when I have gotten close to this issue
a couple times in my life--and not close enough, and not really
versed in it--there is this difference between fraud and
catching fraud, and documentation of a service. So a service
was provided, it is a legitimate provider, but someone takes it
apart and says, ``You didn't provide the right piece of
information.'' And I don't know if that 12 percent versus
whatever you said----
Mr. ROSKAM. I take your point. And just parenthetically,
here is part of the problem with CMS. They can't tell you the
difference.
Mr. MILLER. And that is why, every time I get close to
this, my head pretty much explodes. And so I am probably not
the right person to do this.
But the thing that I would say--so there are--you know,
there is this distinction between outright fraud--and fraud is
complicated, because people are actively trying to avoid
detection, and I think that makes it hard. There is a cost of
detecting it, and a cost of payment ratio. Those are generally
pretty positive. And I have seen numbers like that.
The other thing, which is just an off-comment I will say
out loud, I think some of these data releases, where you begin
to just kind of look at, you know--look at what the raw data
says, has driven CMS and some of the other program integrity
folks in directions that they probably wouldn't have otherwise
seen, you know, individual sets of providers who come out at
the top of the heap, and are just pulling reimbursements that
are just unbelievable. I think those kinds of things, those
public releases of data, can also help, almost from a crowd
sourcing point of view, to get other eyes on the problem.
Mr. ROSKAM. So a sunshine policy. I mean that is sort of--
--
Mr. MILLER. Yeah----
Mr. ROSKAM [continuing]. Disinfectant theory.
Mr. MILLER. My sense is that those things have driven
people into identifying providers that had huge drug spends,
you know, huge Part B spends, that type of thing.
Mr. ROSKAM. Okay.
Mr. MILLER. But I don't know this issue real deep. I
understand what you are trying to ask, but----
Mr. ROSKAM. Okay, thank you. Yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mrs. Black, you are recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
being here, Dr. Miller. A very interesting discussion today.
I want to ask you about the Medicare hospital area wage
index, which is supposed to ensure that Medicare hospital
payments reflect the geographic differences in wages. I have
concerns that many have raised over the years that the area
wage index is neither accurate nor fair. The fact is that
around one-third of all hospitals who receive exceptions to the
area wage index shows that the system is not working.
I am even more concerned about the adverse impact that the
current system is having on hospitals in Tennessee, in
particular, and in the South, across the South, which have seen
their area wage index levels rapidly decreasing over the years,
while the area wage index levels in other states have been
increasing.
So, Tennessee hospitals are being penalized, because they
have experienced an increase in cost, including wages over the
years, but these increases have not been quite as high as the
hospitals in other states, where--with the wage index levels.
It is simply unfair. I mean they have done a good job in
keeping costs down, but they are being actually punished for
that.
So, back in 2007 MedPAC actually recommended that Congress
repeal the area wage index. And is this still MedPAC's
recommendation, that Congress would repeal this wage index?
Mr. MILLER. I got to tell you, I have been tearing up
through this whole thing, because people have kind of forgotten
that idea. And the Commission did make a set of
recommendations. We do understand what you are saying, and the
issues that are being raised there. And we made that
recommendation several years ago, and the fundamental--there is
a number of things that are going on in it.
But to get to the heart of your question, what is going on
is we would move the wage index system off of a hospital-
reported wage, and base it more on area wages in--or wages in
the area for the labor that hospitals, offices, post-acute-care
providers are drawing. And that may sound like a big, technical
thing, but what it actually does is, if a hospital decides that
it happens to be flush, and it raises its wages, all other
things being equal, the wage index relative to other hospitals
goes down, because it is down across hospitals. Whereas, we
think it would be a lot fairer to hospitals and other providers
to base it on the wages in the area, which are much more--less
sensitive to an individual hospital's behaviors. And we think
that that would bring some greater equity and address some of
the issues that you are raising.
There is a whole set of other things which I won't make you
crazy with that we also recommended at the same time. But, yes,
that is our policy. We did recommend that change. We think it
addresses at least some of the things that you are raising.
Mrs. BLACK. I know that that was your recommendation back
in 2007. Is MedPAC doing anything now to update that
recommendation?
Mr. MILLER. We can go through and update the analysis
again. But the principles still stand. And, I mean, bluntly,
this requires the Congress to take action.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay.
Mr. MILLER. And you know the dynamics here. I mean this
means some----
Mrs. BLACK. That is right.
Mr. MILLER. Right. And that is the issue.
Mrs. BLACK. There will always be winners and losers. But
when we look at what is happening in Tennessee, it really is an
unfair system.
Mr. MILLER. And----
Mrs. BLACK. For our reimbursements. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Jenkins, you are recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the
hearing.
Thank you, Mr. Miller, for joining us. I want to return to
a discussion Congressman Smith started with you, and discussed
the issue of rural hospitals, and some closures.
MedPAC's March 2015 report addresses the rural hospital
closure crisis, and finds that rural hospitals represented 44
percent of all closures. The report finds that the closed
hospitals are an average of 21 miles to the next nearest
hospital. Yet the report does not specifically address the
issue of access to care in rural America.
My congressional district has a number of these rural
hospitals, and the State of Kansas has 83 critical access
hospitals, more than any other. These hospitals provide
excellent care to my constituents. And, without them, my
constituents would lose local access to care. When a patient
has a heart attack, 21 additional miles of travel makes a
difference.
So, my question is, has MedPAC considered the impact of
access to care for rural Americans if and when these necessary
safety net providers close?
Mr. MILLER. So, I mean, my answer would be yes. Each year
we assess access, quality, capital markets, cost, and payments,
and a number of factors in setting an update payment for the
hospitals. And I can't remember if you were here when I was
talking to Mr. Kind. The Commission, for the last couple years,
has made positive payment updates for hospitals the last couple
of years. Over 10 years--or longer, even--the Commission has
made recommendations with respect to rural payment that have
increased payments to rural hospitals, trying to address some
of the issues that you raise.
Now, all that said, I also want to say something else,
which is in 2012 the Commission did--and this was an exchange I
believe I had with Mr. Smith, which was when you think about
the supports, think about, you know, how--and particularly the
Congress is always working with a limited dollar. Think about
where that dollar is going to make the greatest difference. If
you just say all--increases to all rural, you are increasing
payments for a hospital that sits right next door to, you know,
an urban area, and a hospital that is 50, you know, miles out
on a hilltop. And so, there are other ways to think about how
the support is provided.
And the other thing I think is just a fact of life--and it
is for urban and rural hospitals, but to Mr. Smith's point, and
to your point, it can mean a lot more in a rural area--is if
admissions continue to fall, these hospitals are--urban and
rural--are going to have to rethink their mission. And an idea
that seems to be floating around some of the urban--or rural
areas, sorry, that I have talked to people about is the notion
of whether--is it a full inpatient hospital that you need at
that point, or do you need something more like an emergency
room/urgent care type of thing.
Because, you know, your point is a heart attack, to go 21
miles or more miles, I get your point. But what about a
routine, you know, inpatient hospital service, if, in fact, the
admissions are declining? It is going to be struggle for
hospitals, and particularly for rural areas, to support
hospitals if admissions continue to decline.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, I agree. Another study I saw from the
National Rural Health Association, it reports that 283
additional rural hospitals are on the brink of closure, just
shutting their doors. And this means, you know, for these
communities, they are not going to have the comprehensive local
care that they need to survive. And, of course, I think you
understand when rural hospitals close there is a domino effect,
and employers are affected, communities, families, and the
like.
Just quickly, where are folks that call rural America home
receive needed health care--where are they supposed to receive
the needed health care, if we see these rural hospitals
closing?
Mr. MILLER. And I think it goes back to a point that I was
making a minute ago, which is, again, how many fully
comprehensive hospitals do you need for any given set of miles?
I absolutely agree that you need some set of comprehensive
care. But if the--we are supporting hospitals that are in rural
areas that are very close to one another.
And a question for the Congress, particularly with a
limited dollar, is if there was a consolidation there, one
hospital, it might be more financially viable. It might have
higher quality. And it could be that we need to have these
conversations about a different community saying, okay, they
will have an emergency facility, and this--you will have some
consolidation for the hospital, and then an emergency facility
to serve where you don't have a full hospital. Sorry.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Ms. Jenkins.
Mrs. Noem, you are recognized.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to be a part of this Committee hearing today. I
appreciate the ability to sit at the dais.
Mr. Miller, I am from South Dakota, so home of where the
deer and antelope play, and it is a long ways to drive
anywhere. We have had many consolidations already, but yet it
is still a struggle for our people to get access. So I wanted
to visit with you a little bit about the unique challenges that
some of our rural providers face. And in your testimony you
stated that the last time MedPAC looked at rural Medicare
beneficiaries' access to care, you found that the mix of--for
rural providers was incoherent, and that it lacks a common
framework.
So, in South Dakota, the providers that I meet with, they
would agree with you. They tell me that they are forced to
chase after dollars many times, using a bizarre mix of
adjusters and add-ons, which only adds to their administrative
burdens. And, to make matters worse, CMS often carves real
providers out of payment reforms, leaving them behind.
So, as the committee considers payment reform, can you
suggest how we can improve the situation for rural providers?
Mr. MILLER. Okay. I mean we are having a, you know,
theoretical or principle conversation.
Mrs. NOEM. Absolutely.
Mr. MILLER. Again, focus your dollar, first and foremost,
on isolated, low volume, okay? Because isolated means there is
no other alternative, low volume means I can't support my
costs. And so, you know, if there is a dollar the Congress has,
that first dollar should go to those types of facilities. I
hate to keep harping on this. One that is right next door to an
urban area, maybe the need is not as great.
And I have to tell you my rural commissioners, when we went
through this--and I don't want you to think we don't look at
rural every year. We just did a comprehensive thing in 2012. I
mean the rural commissioners were saying, ``Rural isn't rural
isn't rural.'' It differs, depending on how far and how
frontier you get.
A second principle that the Commission talked about was the
notion that you can provide supports, but you can either do it
open-ended or in a fixed way. If you provide an open-ended
support, you are probably giving them--and there is evidence of
this, that costs go up. And so then your supports have to chase
that cost over time. If you give a fixed support, the provider
continues to have some pressure to contain their cost. So we
would say think about that.
It gets into individual measures. The empirical basis for
some of the adjustments is questionable, and gets into a little
bit more technical conversation. But there are things where,
you know, the analysis would say, ``This is how much support
you should give,'' and there is this much, and you get kind of
funny distortions, or people chasing what you said.
Mrs. NOEM. Yes.
Mr. MILLER. Because I have talked to rural people, and they
say the same thing that you are saying.
On the quality front, there is a dilemma. And I think that
is what you meant by leaving them out of reform----
Mrs. NOEM. Payment reforms.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. Or at least part of it is, you
know, they can't play as much in the quality. And this is a
dilemma, in the sense that if you have a small--it is hard to
get an accurate measure. You get real noisy quality results.
I mean the Commission has talked about accumulating
multiple years of data. If rural providers are willing to be
treated as a group, you can consolidate them and say, ``Judge
us on our net performance'' is the way to try and jump those
kinds of fences.
Mrs. NOEM. Have you come to a conclusion on that? Do you
think that would be accurate? Or have you floated that idea to
rural providers to see if they would consider----
Mr. MILLER. We have certainly discussed that in principle
in our reports. I mean, obviously, when somebody comes to you
and says, ``Okay,'' it is the two of us, it is hard, you know,
for us to say that one is noisy, that one isn't noisy. We would
have to see the thing to know.
And, actually, there is also some people who are trying to
organize networks of rural providers and ACOs, as well.
Mrs. NOEM. Okay.
Mr. MILLER. You know, again, kind of accumulating a number
of rural providers.
Mrs. NOEM. Okay, thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mrs. Noem.
Mr. Crowley, you are recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to sit on your committee hearing today.
I know this Subcommittee is looking primarily at hospital
policy issues, and so I am glad to have the opportunity to
participate in the discussion.
Mr. Miller, as you know, I resent--represent part of New
York City, home to a number of world-class medical
institutions, from teaching hospitals to cancer centers to
medical schools. So I have had many discussions with health
care systems on how much they rely on Medicare payments, just
to be able to provide care to their populations.
Today I want to focus on the issue of graduate medical
education, or GME. At the start there is a point that I want to
make clear. Training our nation's doctors has long been a
shared responsibility between individual teaching hospitals and
the Federal Government. And that is because it is a shared
benefit. The teaching hospitals may be the one receiving the
payment to offset a portion of their cost, but it is the whole
country that benefits from more well-trained doctors.
Ensuring that our academic medical centers receive adequate
funding through GME is not just an issue for that hospital. It
is an issue for our entire nation. The doctors who are trained
in New York, for example, going to practice all over the
country. And they practice in every specialty, too, from
primary care and family medicine to the most targeted
specialties. So, I really do think that the discussion of how
we pay for graduate medical education can't just start and stop
with dollars and cents at a single hospital. It has to consider
the investment that we make in caring for our senior citizens,
and in our nation's entire health workforce.
Part of that investment is also in the highly complex and
costly patient care missions that teaching hospitals undertake.
They run advanced trauma centers and burn units, and they see
more complex patient cases. They treat patients with rare and
difficult diseases like Ebola. And that helps train future
doctors in all those areas. Graduate medical education payments
designed--were designed by Congress to reflect all these
undertakings, beyond just the explicit costs you may see on
paper. And teaching hospitals will continue to take on new
challenges.
Mr. Miller, in your testimony you say that to provide our
health care delivery system, we need to ``ensure that our
residency programs produce the providers and skills necessary
to integrate care across settings, improve quality, and use
resources efficiently.'' Well, from what I have seen, our
teaching hospitals are tackling that challenge head on.
One of the things we have strived to do with the Affordable
Care Act are--the permanent doc fix and other initiatives, is
to highlight the importance of coordinated care, preventative
care, and other quality measures. We all recognize that care
does not just happen within the four walls of a hospital, and
it shouldn't. Teaching hospitals are doing more to train
residents in community care settings, and to focus on giving
residents the skills they need to provide exactly the kind of
care that MedPAC and others have called for. And they have to
use resources efficiently, because they are getting hit with
cuts from all sides.
I would argue that a sufficient investment in GME, not
cutting and redirecting funding away, is what enables hospitals
to do all these things. Do you disagree? Why can't we
accomplish these goals without cutting funding?
Mr. MILLER. The Commission has a policy on GME, or a
recommendation on GME, that I can take you through. The
Commission's policy took a block of the current IME dollars and
allocated them in a different way. It didn't reduce them.
But I also would say, in response to at least some of the
points that you are making, as it stands--we are talking about
$3.5 billion--the accountability for that dollar doesn't exist.
The notion that it is being devoted to teaching and, you know,
training for, you know, a reformed delivery system, or whatever
the case may be, currently we have no accountability for it. It
is just a dollar that flows into the hospital. It can be used
for anything.
So I think we would agree, in the sense of saying you take
the dollars that exist, you allocate them differently--which I
can take you through--and you target them to hospitals--and
this is the part where you may disagree, but just to be clear--
and other providers who are running graduate medical education
programs that are more comprehensive in team-based care,
evidence-based medicine, and also alternative sites of care,
where they are trained, in addition to the hospital. But we
didn't talk about eliminating the dollar.
Mr. CROWLEY. I appreciate that. I can appreciate
accountability, as well. And I think you appreciate the
complexity, in terms of the teaching of a modern doctor today.
As a New Yorker, we can chew and walk gum [sic] at the same
time, and I think we can do more and do it better. I agree with
you on that.
I believe we need strong investment in graduate medical
education, like raising the outdated cap on the number of
residents that Medicare supports. And I am just finishing, Mr.
Chairman. I have a bill to do just that with my good friend and
my colleague, Dr. Boustany, in a bipartisan way, and a large
bipartisan support for that, Mr. Miller, as well.
Mr. Chairman, I know you have talked about putting together
legislation to help support our nation's hospitals, and I hope
you will consider this issue as a priority to include. I also
hope you will recognize the hurtful impact of cuts to GME
program, not only in the hospitals that rely on this federal
contribution, but on the doctors that train there, on the
patients who they will see throughout their careers.
I look forward to working with you and the committee to
ensure that we continue to provide needed funding to our
nation's teaching hospitals. And, with that, I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Crowley.
Mr. Renacci, you are recognized.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, as
well, for allowing me to be part of this Committee hearing this
morning.
Dr. Miller, your testimony and the June MedPAC Report
raised some critical issues, especially as they relate to
improving hospital payment policy. The ACA included a new
program, which is addressed in the report, aimed at reducing
unnecessarily hospital readmissions. The program is known as
the Hospital Readmission Reduction Program. The goal of this
program is one that I and many of my colleagues support. In
fact, it is estimated that nearly 18 billion per year is wasted
on avoidable readmissions that--18 billion per year is wasted
on avoidable admissions of Medicare patients alone. Reducing
these preventable readmissions would reduce costs and improve
outcomes.
However, the implementation of this program has been
problematic, especially for those hospitals serving low-income
patients. Dr. Miller, can you explain the correlation between
hospitals serving low-income patients and readmission
penalties? Is there a direct correlation, in your opinion? And
do you have some concerns?
Mr. MILLER. Yes, and we have some fixes, as well. So there
is a relationship. Depending on what you mean by direct, it--
this is more a subtlety. There seems to be a critical mass. So,
you know, you get more poor people, you don't see a lot of
change in readmission rates. Then you hit a certain level of
having poor people as a percentage of your hospital, and then
you start to see higher readmission rates. There is a
relationship. It is not directly one to one, but there is a
relationship, and we have laid this out in the report, and we,
you know, fundamentally agree with the statement that you are
making.
The Commission ended up saying this. And what we ideally
want--we have made some other recommendations to refine the
measure--what we really want is we don't want the penalty
dollar. We want the hospital to avoid the readmission. It is
better for the patient. You know, the program saves money by
avoiding the readmission. You know, the penalty is really just
a motivation. And, actually, a very small amount of dollars are
actually driving relative change. And so I am hoping that this
is headed in a positive direction.
With respect to the proportion of poor people, this is what
we would do. We would not adjust the measure. So if a hospital
has a good or a bad readmission rate, that remains on paper,
because we think hospitals need to be focused on that, the
public needs to be aware of it. Whether you are rich or poor,
you should know what your readmission rate is in a given
hospital that you are about to walk in the door.
However, mitigate to some extent the effect of the penalty.
And the way you do that is you say that the penalty will be
mitigated based on how many proportions of poor people, and we
would put hospitals in a category and say lots of poor people,
the penalty is not as heavy, few poor people, the penalty is
heavier.
And then, within any category, you have to outperform your
colleagues. So if I am a hospital with lots of poor people and
I do well on readmissions, you know, I am spurring other
hospitals to improve their performance. So we would mitigate
the effect, but we would do it through the penalty, not adjust
the measure.
Mr. RENACCI. But you do agree, then, that hospitals that
have these lower-income patients inevitably are going to have
these readmissions more than other hospitals.
Mr. MILLER. Yes, but we also believe that there are
hospitals out there with lots of poor people who have
relatively low readmission rates, and change can occur. And we
would mitigate the penalty to help them along. But yes, we
agree with the statement you made.
Mr. RENACCI. All right. Well, I share your concerns that
many of the hospitals--especially in my district--that serve
the most needy are being unfairly penalized under the Hospital
Readmission Reduction Program.
I have introduced H.R. 1343, the Establishing Beneficiary
Equity in the Hospital Readmission Program, which would require
risk adjustment for socio-economic factors when calculating
hospital penalties, ensuring these critical hospitals can
continue to take care of the least among us without being
penalized for doing so, and I thank you for your word MedPAC
has done on this issue.
And I yield the remainder of my time.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Renacci. You know, going--as
you have noticed, we have a hearing on competition next week,
focusing on rural disparities. We are going to be discussing
GME and hospital payment reform, in the hopes of bringing--
through the fall, in the hopes of bringing some legislation to
the floor and to the committee there. Today's hearing was very
helpful and insightful, as we go forward with that.
So, Dr. Miller, thank you for your testimony. Appreciate
your continued assistance. We will need it, getting answers to
the questions that were asked by those on the committee.
And as a reminder, any Member wishing to submit a question
for the record will have 14 days to do so. And if any Member
does, Doctor, I ask that you respond in writing in a timely
manner, which I know you will.
Again, thank you. With that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Public Submissions for the Record follows:]
Association of American Cancer Institutes, statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

America's Essential Hospitals, statement letter

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

National Association of Chain Drug Stores, statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

National Rural Accountable Care Organization, letter

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

National Rural Health Association, testimony

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

John Kastanis, President and CEO Temple University Hospital, statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
