- BETTER COORDINATING WELFARE PROGRAMS TO SERVE FAMILIES IN NEED

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BETTER COORDINATING WELFARE PROGRAMS TO
SERVE FAMILIES IN NEED

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 3, 2015

__________

Serial 114-HR07

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-286                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DEVIN NUNES, California              CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            XAVIER BECERRA, California
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina

David Stewart, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota            JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of November 3, 2015 announcing the hearing..............     2

WITNESSES

Maura Corrigan, Visiting Fellow, American Enterprise Institute
(AEI)..........................................................    13
Geoff Davis, Member of Congress (retired), Republic Consulting,
LLC............................................................     7
Robert Greenstein, President, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities (CBPP)..............................................    37
Nick Lyon, Director, Michigan Department of Health and Human
Services (MDHSS)...............................................    26
Scott Sanders, Executive Director, National Association of State
Workforce Agencies.............................................    57

SUBMISSIONS

Articles.........................................................   100

BETTER COORDINATING WELFARE PROGRAMS TO SERVE FAMILIES IN NEED

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable
Charles W. Boustany, Jr., [chairman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. The subcommittee will come to order.
Good morning to everyone. This hearing is the latest in our
series on moving America's low income individuals and families
forward. In prior hearings we reviewed how families are faring,
what actually works to help them, some ways to address fraud
and abuse, how current programs discourage work and higher
earnings, and more.
We have drafted possible reforms to the TANF program and
are reviewing how best to move those forward, and all along the
way we have actually listened to real people, trying to
navigate these programs and find the work and earnings they
need to escape poverty for good.
Today's hearing takes a step back and reviews the dizzying
array of programs designed to help low income families and how
that patchwork of programs complicates the challenges for those
most in need.
This Federal welfare system is large, fragmented, and
growing in cost. The nonpartisan Congressional Research Service
estimates that we currently operate over 80 programs that
provide food, housing, health care, job training, education,
energy assistance, and cash to low income Americans.
I have a chart I want to show here, if we could put the
chart up on the screen. Here you see a graphic depiction of
that array of benefit programs designed to help low income
individuals and families. This chart was an adaptation from a
nonpartisan CRS report, and in short, it shows a mess.
This system may have started out with very good intentions,
but it has become over the years a confusing maze of programs
that are overlapping, duplicative, poorly coordinated, and
difficult to administer.
I defy anyone to say that this is the best way to address
the human tragedy so many of our fellow citizens experience. We
spend roughly $750 billion at the Federal level on these
programs and hundreds of billions more at the State level. All
told, taxpayers provide $1 trillion per year in help for low
income American. Yet today there are 9.4 million more Americans
living below the poverty line than there were in 2007, before
the last recession.
In sum, we are spending more and getting worse results when
it comes to promoting the work and earnings that keep families
out of poverty.
A number of these programs like TANF, SSI and Child Welfare
are under the jurisdiction of this Subcommittee. Others come
under the jurisdiction of the full committee, such as various
low income tax credits, and many others involve other
committees, complicating our efforts at better coordination.
But we have to start somewhere. This hearing will give us a
chance to review this array of programs, understand the
challenges created by their sheer number, and review some of
the State efforts to rationalize the services they provide and
to navigate this complexity. That understanding will lay the
groundwork for future efforts to modernize and streamline or,
at the very least, better coordinate these programs to help
more Americans achieve opportunity and upward mobility.
So we certainly welcome our guests today and look forward
to their testimony.
I now am pleased to yield to my friend and the ranking
member of the subcommittee, Mr. Doggett, for the purposes of
making an opening statement.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to all of our witnesses. Especially welcome the
former chair of the committee, Mr. Davis with whom I worked on
the data issues in a bipartisan way, and I think those issues
are important, as well as coordination.
I was encouraged to hear Speaker Ryan reiterate this
weekend his interest in seeing reform in all of our programs
that relate to poverty. I hope that can be a bipartisan effort.
I have certainly attempted to make it such an effort, but it is
far from certain that it can be.
Making a bipartisan effort begins with recognizing what the
history is on the programs within the jurisdiction of our
committee, and it involves avoiding some of the old canards
that reflected in the notice for this hearing that there are 80
welfare programs gobbling up at a greater and greater pace over
a trillion dollars of our taxpayer resources.
The 80 programs referred to include things like the breast
and cervical cancer early detection program, and Federal work-
study. The analysis of those programs by the Congressional
Research Service indicates that the vast majority of them are
directed toward helping the elderly and disabled, and that of
all of the 80 programs that are referenced there, Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families, which is the principal program
that this Subcommittee and committee are concerned about, takes
up a whole one percent of the amount devoted to what has been
mislabeled as ``welfare.''
I voted for the Welfare-to-Work Program in 1996, and if we
are to evaluate it based on how many people it has gotten
thrown off the welfare rolls, it is a tremendous success. If we
are to evaluate it by the words that were spoken at the time by
the Republican members of this Committee who considered its
approval and signature by President Clinton to be a great
victory, if we are to evaluate it by their words as to what the
objectives were for this program, it has been a failure. It has
not gotten people out of poverty at the rate it should have and
into sustainable living wage jobs, and there is a good reason
why that has not happened.
It is not because of the laziness of poor people, but
because we have not focused the resources necessary to
accomplish the objectives of that Act, of the dollars that were
being allocated in 1996 in real dollars for the purpose of
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or Aid to Families with
Dependent Children, whatever at that time. The purchasing power
of those dollars today is about a third less. We have not added
more. We have reduced as our population has grown the amount of
resources that are there.
But an even more important factor than the total amount of
resources, is how those resources have been used by the States.
The suggestion that Speaker Ryan, in the days I served with him
on the Budget Committee and in this Committee, is that if we
block grant more monies to the States we will get better
results, and we will end that confusing polka dot graphic that
we just saw, and the States can figure it all out, and
everything will be better.
Well, the Temporary Assistant for Needy Families Program
does not offer hopeful evidence that that will be the case. In
2014, the States were using eight percent of their Temporary
Assistance for Needy family funds on work related activities.
The purpose of the legislation, according to the legislation
itself, was to end the dependence on government benefits by
promoting job preparation and work.
Our colleagues here emphasized the goal was to train
people, to provide them child care, to get them into the
workforce. That has not been what has occurred here. In fact,
we have had a great welfare program that the Temporary
Assistance for Needy families has promoted, but it has been
welfare for States that did not want to use this money for the
core purposes for which this Congress intended on a bipartisan
basis to do, but to use it for other purposes, mainly to fill
State budget gaps for anything that pertained to social
services.
Some of those dollars may have been spent on appropriate
and worthy programs, but they do not relate to the core
purposes of TANF, which is to get people from poverty into the
workforce. When you look at the dollars allocated for child
care by the States, when you look at the limitations that are
in the Act but what the States have done as far as education,
it is just not satisfactory.
Nearly half of the States have no work participation
standard because of the case load reduction credit. I hope when
we look at this Act we consider that and that we cannot solve
the problems particularly of child poverty in this country by
simply throwing words at it. We do not want to throw dollars at
it. We want to see them better coordinated, but we have to have
State partners that are focused on the core purposes of this
Act, which is to get people out of poverty into the workforce,
setting an example for their children and providing a better
future.
And I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman for his statement.
Without objection, each member will have the opportunity to
submit a written statement and have it included in the record
at this point.
I want to remind our witnesses who are here today to limit
their oral testimony to five minutes. We have your written
testimony and without objection your full witness testimony
will be made part of the permanent record.
This morning our panel is a very distinguished panel. We
will be hearing from:
Geoff Davis, former Member of Congress, a colleague of ours
and now with Republic consulting, LLC.
Maura Corrigan, Visiting Fellow, American Enterprise
Institute.
Nick Lyon, Director, Michigan Department of Health and
Human Services.
Robert Greenstein, President, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities.
And Scott Sanders, Executive Director, National Association
of State Workforce Agencies.
So at this time, it is my pleasure to welcome back our
former colleague, the distinguished former chairman of this
Subcommittee, Geoff Davis, my friend.
Geoff, we really appreciate you being here to offer your
unique perspective on these issues, and you may proceed with
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF GEOFF DAVIS, A MEMBER OF CONGRESS (RETIRED),
REPUBLIC CONSULTING, LLC

Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Doggett, and all my
friends on both sides of the dais, thank you for the invitation
to join you today to discuss ways in which we can better
coordinate the current web of the more than 80 welfare
programs.
As someone who grew up in a challenging environment and
managed to climb out of it by the grace of God, I commend your
ongoing efforts to improve the quality and processes in these
programs because, done correctly, they can have a great,
positive influence on the lives of those in need.
I was first introduced to improving complex processes and
systems of systems during my time in the Army. After my active
service, I worked in business operations and eventually led
professional services teams that focused on process improvement
and implementing large enterprise resource planning and
customer relationship management systems, as well as their
associated analytics and performance monitoring tools.
While we worked for companies ranging from the Fortune 500
down to small, single site facilities, the way to improve an
operation was always the same: minimize complexity to maximize
effectiveness.
Process improvement is a continual effort, indeed, a way of
thinking. Each small step, each constraint removed allows
better use of time and resources. The outcomes are always
increased capacity to deliver products and service, greater
customer satisfaction, earlier detection of problems, and money
saved.
When I became chairman of the subcommittee in 2011, I
endeavored to apply my real world experience in processes and
systems to the programs within the subcommittee's jurisdiction,
and I am happy to see that current members are continuing these
efforts.
Today all major companies across all industries use
integrated, real time data and analytics to provide better
customer service, save money, and improve their products. Large
companies typically use what is called a data warehouse, which
can be physical or cloud-based. Well run systems maintain only
one record on a person or a product throughout that system. All
users of that record draw from and update that single source to
avoid errors and duplication.
This standardized record system is called a logical data
model and forms the foundation for accurate and precise
decision information. Admittedly, the private sector companies
often are not faced with some of the constraints that we find
when we are viewing the 80-plus welfare programs that are in
existence today, but I believe there are many lessons that we
can learn from private sector efficiencies.
When I had the honor of being part of this Human Resources
team, I was proud of our achievements in the space of data
standardization for some of these programs. Ranking Member
Doggett and I made a conscious effort to review and improve
H.R. programs from a process perspective, not from an
ideological perspective.
Everyone on the subcommittee genuinely wanted to make these
programs work better for those in need. There were many places
where we could have started, but getting better and more
streamlined data seemed to be the biggest need and the best
first step.
After multiple hearings and meetings with input from all
sides, Ranking Member Doggett and I introduced the Standard
DATA Act, a bill to require the development of common standards
for data and information sharing program by program. Together
we incorporated this concept into the Child and Family Services
Improvement and Innovation Act, which was signed by President
Obama in September of 2011. The idea was also later applied to
the unemployment insurance program, TANF, and SNAP, among
others.
I always refer to the Standard DATA Act as the most
important law you have never heard of. After those achievements
in 2011 and 2012, another bill known as the DATA Act was signed
into law in 2014. This moved the ball even further toward an
open or shared data environment for the whole of government.
Before I close, I want to commend the Departments of Health
and Human Services and Labor for their ongoing efforts to
implement these statutes. Their success in this area will lead
to more transparent and effective processes, which will serve
more clients, reduce response times, increase agency capacity,
and ultimately assist those in need on their climb out of
poverty.
Thank you for the privilege of joining you this morning. I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Davis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Geoff, and thank you for your
profound contribution on this Subcommittee and the work you did
working with Ranking Member Doggett. It really advanced things,
and we are deeply appreciative, and we hope to build on what
you have accomplished.
Next we are happy to have Ms. Corrigan here.
You may proceed with your testimony. Please turn on your
mike.

STATEMENT OF MAURA CORRIGAN, VISITING FELLOW, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTION

Ms. CORRIGAN. Good morning, and thanks so much for the
chance to testify before you this morning.
I am Maura Corrigan, a Visiting Fellow at AEI in Poverty
Studies, formerly head of Human Services in Michigan under
Governor Rick Snyder, and prior to that 19 years as an
appellate judge in the State of Michigan. I left the Supreme
Court in order to run Human Services.
My message this morning is simple, two things that need to
happen in this Congress: one, simplify the maze of programs. I
once told my children that I want on my tombstone ``Tear down
this silo.'' The programs that we have are too siloed. We are
stuck in the prescriptions of those programs instead of getting
at the bottom line. Your welfare state chart shows this.
We need to consolidate and coordinate these programs in
service of one goal: that every American has a chance at the
American dream, that everyone can move out of poverty. The
current maze of programs we have poses barriers to this for
all.
The second thing I think is crucial is that we coordinate
the messaging in all of these programs. First of all, the
people must believe they can move up, that they have hope. The
second is a three-word mantra that I have stolen from Great
Britain when they reformed their disability system, three
little words: ``better off working.'' That ought to be at the
heart of every safety net program.
All of the committee, I believe, thinks this, but in the
programs I administered only two out of nearly 80 had any sort
of a work expectation written into the law.
People conform their expectations to the law, and this was
not present in the law I administered. Clients want to work and
things get in the way of them being able to do that.
The second thing we need to tell the truth about is family
formation. We should not impose our values on others. That is
so, but on the left and on the right, we understand that
children do best when they're raised by two married, involved
parents. That is true in all the studies, and I am not aware of
any social safety net program that conveys this message,
despite our knowledge of these statistics.
These are central or root causes underlying intergeneration
poverty, we need to get at these: better off working; two is
better than one; and, yes, you can move up.
The complexity of the program I outline in my testimony,
you know about benefit cliffs. You know about tax consequences
that affect people that are attempting to work. I wanted to lay
out for you my job at AEI entails being a liaison with State
secretaries, and several of them have said to me that we need
to change the nature of our workforces in human services
because of the significant mental health issues that are
affecting the clients that we see who are in poverty. There is
depression; there is despair, and social workers are not
adequately trained to deal with what they are seeing and the
problems of intergenerational poverty.
It is not the clients who are to blame. It is the policies
themselves that need to be reformed. In my testimony I gave you
examples of three Michigan programs that I think were important
in effecting change in our State. I wanted to move social
workers out of offices and to go where the problems were, and
we took social workers mobile. We moved them into schools so
schools could be the community hubs. We sent social workers to
workplaces, to support poor people who were going to work every
day, and these are laid out in my testimony, and I invite any
comments on those.
I firmly believe in the Opportunity Grant proposal conveyed
by then Chair Ryan last year because what it would do would
collapse 11 programs into one, integrate programs together, and
permit States the opportunity to have holistic solutions, local
solutions.
Our States in this great American dream are a laboratory
for experimentation. We understand that. We have the ability to
innovate. States can do it.
I believe the war on poverty is capable of being won, and
that if we simplify what we are doing in these programs, like I
learned about public speaking, K.I.S.S.: keep it simple,
stupid. If we can simplify what we are doing with the maze of
programs and if we coordinate the message, better off working,
two is better than one, then we have hope.
Thank you very much for your attention this morning.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Corrigan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. We thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Lyon, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF NICK LYON, DIRECTOR, MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES

Mr. LYON. Thank you, Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member
Doggett, and other Members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify in front of you here today, and I
appreciate your interest in this issue.
I come to share with you the success of what we are trying
to do under Governor Snyder in Michigan. On January 1st, 2015,
he addressed this problem by creating the concept of the
``River of Opportunity.'' The goal in this was to address
multiple programs, cross-purpose, terribly complex, difficult
to navigate, and certainly at times hindered the success of
those we were trying to serve.
What we found is that when people suffer a temporary
setback, they would fall off the River of Opportunity, and the
purpose of our programs is to bring them back onto the river so
that they could be successful.
Our reorganization focused on several key issues. It
focused first on people, not program; root causes, not
symptoms; results, not process; community. Government cannot do
this alone. It has to be local solutions and local effort, and
outcomes.
The governor operationalized this by consolidating the
Departments of Human Services, former Director Corrigan's
department and my department, the Department of Community
Health, so that we have several Federal programs around Health
and Human Services. It is a $25 billion budget, 14,000
employees with a presence in every county.
We built much of what we have done on the successes of what
you will see both in Director Corrigan's testimony and my
testimony, the Pathways to Potential Employer Resource
Networks. It was really about serving the people directly.
Our vision is improved health, safety, and self-
sufficiency, and we focus this on people in three different
groups: first, children. Obviously children need to be in the
situation where they can best learn, and to do that they have
to be safe and they have to be healthy.
Individuals with intellectual or developmental
disabilities, we want them to be able to live and work in their
most independent setting possible as they so choose, and
adults. We want to lead them back toward the path to self-
sufficiency and increase their employment options moving
forward.
Obviously within my testimony we have a list of the
federally funded programs. The United States Department of
Health and Human Services has 150 distinct funding sources that
come through our department; the United States Department of
Agriculture, 14; Housing and Urban Development, 13; those are
just to name a few State departments.
There are 223 distinct Federal funding sources, all with
their different program requirements, all with their different
stakeholders, all with potentially different definitions of
income. This makes it difficult for us to navigate as leaders,
as managers of these programs. It makes it difficult for our
case workers to navigate. Think about how difficult it is for
that person who walks in the door for the first time
potentially in their greatest time of need and how difficult it
is for them to navigate.
So our solution is moving towards an integrated service
delivery system. It is going to be person centered, goal based.
We are going to move case workers from the concept of checking
off boxes and working all day in the IT system to really go out
and be social workers again and really be success coaches. We
want them working with people directly and working with
families directly rather than checking a box.
That is a first real significant opportunity. The second
piece I see in this, and this is probably because I come from
the health side, is I really believe in the concept of
preventive services. We need to do what we can to move ahead of
these situations that happen.
Our system is reactive in a way. We react once something
bad happens, many times in the most expensive and intrusive
fashion possible, and we really need to start moving towards a
way that is preventive in nature. This applies in health, but
also applies with families. Think about how much better off we
could be if we identified a potential family at risk of abuse
and neglect and help that parent or parents succeed with their
children rather than reacting to a situation that might have
occurred to avoid potentially foster care involvement, court
involvement, prosecutors, et cetera, and not only is the family
better off; the child is better off as well.
So as you are thinking through this, and we have done a lot
of the thinking here on anything that we can do to be helpful,
the things that really come into play is increased Federal
flexibility. We have to reduce the complexity. It is just too
complex for our system to navigate as a whole.
Outcome based payment models that include incentives for
States to reach outcomes. Ranking Member Doggett certainly
mentioned that sometimes we focus on process rather than
metrics, and I believe that we have to fund preventive services
and focus on goals.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lyon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. We thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Greenstein, you may proceed with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT GREENSTEIN, PRESIDENT, CENTER ON BUDGET AND
POLICY PRIORITIES

Mr. GREENSTEIN. Thank you very much.
My testimony today basically makes three points. The first,
safety net programs that assist people with low or moderate
incomes can and should be improved, but they are far more
effective than is often understood. If we use the data that
measure poverty in the way most analysts believe we should,
that is, counting assistance like SNAP and the earned income
credit rather than ignoring them, the census data show that the
safety net--could I have my first slide please--that the safety
net cuts poverty nearly in half, the census data showing that
it lifted 38 million Americans out of poverty last year.
And these figures which you see in the slide from the
Census Bureau's supplemental poverty measure actually
understate the safety net's effectiveness because they rely on
census data that substantially undercount the number of
households getting benefits like SNAP.
The Urban Institute has developed a highly regarded, widely
used model to adjust for the underreporting of benefits and--
second slide please--once the corrections are done, we see that
the safety net cuts poverty a little more than in half.
Of particular note, in recent years advances in poverty
research have enabled researchers to track children over
several decades as they grow into adulthood, and what we have
learned is that basic income support for poor families,
including things like income credit, rental vouchers, things of
the sort, can have significant long-term, positive effects on
children. The research has now linked more adequate income
support for poor children in early childhood to increased test
scores and educational attainment in school, and then in turn
to increased employment and earnings in adulthood.
My second point involves cost. The costs of these programs
have grown, but it is overwhelmingly due to the Great Recession
and the sluggish recovery, and the rise of health care costs
throughout the U.S. health care system, also pushed up by the
aging of the population, and of course efforts to cover more of
the uninsured.
So sometimes people assume that the universe of low income
programs, low income programs in general are exploding in cost.
The hard budget data show that is not the case.
Next slide, please.
Once we look at the cost of this universe of programs
outside health care, we see that while the cost went up in the
recession, it is now declining. Within a few years, in will be
below its average cost as a share of GDP over the 40 years from
1975 through 2014, and by early in the next decade, we will be
below the prior 40-year average.
The same is true if you look at spending on low income
programs as a share of the Federal budget, up in the recession,
now dropping. Projection: within a few years it will be below
its average over the previous four decades.
Final point on coordination, which should certainly be
improved. Various States have been making important
improvements in this area in recent years, including through
the work support strategies demonstration that is using
innovative ways to make programs like SNAP, Medicaid, and child
care more integrated and easier to navigate.
And Congress took an important step last year when it
passed the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, which has
promise of increasing coordination between job training and
TANF. Certain reforms in TANF could further that coordination.
But there is an obstacle here, and part of the obstacle is
that the ability to have closer coordination is constrained by
the limited TANF resources that are used for work activities.
The latest data for 2014 show that States, in general, were
spending only eight percent of TANF and State maintenance of
effort funds on work activities in 2014, 16 percent in child
care, and 26 percent on basic assistance, but half of the funds
were not going for any of those purposes.
Now, in the coordination area, the one thing I would
recommend against is eliminating key safety net programs like
SNAP or rental vouchers and merging their funding into mega
block grants. That would likely result in increased poverty and
hardship over time for three reasons.
First, it would entail converting programs like SNAP that
respond automatically in recessions when need increases into
fixed amounts that do not respond to the changes in the economy
and poverty.
Secondly, history shows that when policy makers consolidate
programs into very broad block grants with very broad purposes,
States substitute some of the Federal block grant dollars for
State dollars previously being spent on that purpose. The GAO
has documented that that occurred to some degree under TANF.
Finally, when funds are merged into very broad block grants
with very diffuse purposes, the outcomes get hard to measure,
and this may contribute to funding decreases over time, the
proof being in the pudding.
We just completed an analysis of the 13 major health, human
services and social services block grants created in recent
decades. We found that in 11 of the 13 funding has been
reduced, often a lot, since their creation, and if you just
take 2000 to 2015, overall funding for the 13 block grants is
down 28 percent in real terms, and these are for health and
human and social services.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Greenstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. We thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Sanders, you may now proceed.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT SANDERS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF STATE WORKFORCE AGENCIES

Mr. SANDERS. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Doggett,
and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Scott Sanders, and
I have served as the Executive Director of the National
Association of State Workforce Agencies, otherwise known as
NASWA, for the past year.
NASWA members are the publicly funded workforce agencies
from 50 States, Washington, D.C., and two territories, and one
of NASWA's strategic goals is to drive the national workforce
agenda. NASWA members administer various combinations of
critical programs, including the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act, or WIOA, employment services, training
programs, unemployment insurance, vocational rehabilitation,
local market data, and social service programs.
Before joining the association, I served as Commissioner of
the Indiana Department of Workforce Development, or DWD, which
operated the workforce training programs under WIOA, UI, labor
market data, and adult education programs. I greatly appreciate
the opportunity to share some approaches States have initiated
to better integrate programs that serve those in need and the
challenges facing the States and the public workforce system.
The enactment of WIOA presents a unique opportunity for the
workforce system to partner with adult education and vocational
rehabilitation, as well as many of the human service programs,
such as SNAP and TANF. Hopefully this coordination and
alignment of workforce programs yields better outcomes.
I commend this Subcommittee in the draft TANF legislation
for continuing the spirit, but do not underestimate the heavy
lift this entails.
Could I have my first slide, please?
Over the past year NASWA has compiled information on the
programs administered by each of our State members. As shown on
the map here in kind of a teal-bluish green or the California
color, 23 of the NASWA members administer programs funded by
WIOA, UI, Wagner-Peyser, Trade Adjustment Act, labor market
data, and reemployment of veterans. There are 14 agencies
managing voc. rehabilitation, eight agencies coordinating adult
education, and six workforce agencies having some role
administering TANF.
While Commissioner, I learned firsthand of the challenges
at State level to coordinate our services. We constantly sought
to improve our agency's relationship with economic development
groups and educational providers. We were continually working
within groups that had different geographic boundaries.
If I could have my next slide, please.
On this chart, although busy, the monitor reflects the
State boundaries for eight different entities in Indiana and
underscores the challenge that Indiana and many States face in
trying to coordinate programs. The map in the upper left
reflects the boundaries of the workforce system, which uses
economic growth regions, but the boundaries for the social
service agency that administers SNAP and TANF just below use
different boundaries.
In addition to the multiple jurisdictional boundaries,
other issues, such as siloed legislative sources, regulatory
guidelines, and funding streams further complicate the seamless
delivery and coordination of services. Indiana has worked to
overcome some of these boundaries and in 2011 moved adult
education into DWD and recently began coordinating services
with the social services agency.
Other States have been moving in this direction. Louisiana
combined rehabilitation services into their Workforce
Commission and is preparing to launch a software platform that
will handle multiple programs through one integrated system.
Texas operates the TANF Program and will soon also
administer the State's Vocational Rehabilitation Program.
Ohio has one agency that administers its TANF and workforce
programs, and Utah has created a plan to align and coordinate
services to address intergenerational poverty. Some suggestions
to take into consideration are increasing the flexibility in a
TANF grant to include reemployment services; review Federal
jurisdictions to determine whether that structure and oversight
arrangement makes the most sense; align Federal reporting
metrics for social service and workforce programs; and help
States integrated disparate computer systems to provide
accurate data; allow States to tailor programs and services to
specific needs; create common data definitions; and reduce the
funding uncertainty of programs which creates havoc for States
trying to serve those in need.
I also encourage the Federal departments that administer
programs like SNAP and TANF to work in coordination with the
Department of Labor and not to create separate training
programs. For example, the Department of Agriculture announced
last week a Center of Excellence for SNAP recipients to obtain
employment and training skills. This is an important initiative
that needs to be coordinated with the existing infrastructure
of the workforce system so there is not just another siloed
effort.
In summary, we owe it to take steps towards a more
coordinated workforce system. While there will be challenges in
implementing, we always envisioned, this Committee has the
opportunity in TANF and other reauthorizations to greatly
increase the alignment of workforce programs under its
jurisdiction to improve services for both job seekers and
employers.
Thank you for the opportunity to be with you today and for
your interest in initiatives that help employ American workers,
improve coordination amongst various programs, and help
Americans achieve financial independence.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sanders follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. We thank you for your testimony.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for their testimony.
This has been very helpful and very enlightening.
We now enter a period of questions and answers. Each member
has five minutes, and I will begin with mine.
Geoff, again, welcome. It is good to see you. And before
you came to Congress, you were engaged in work where you were
helping businesses improve efficiency so that they provided
goods and services to their customers in a more efficient, cost
effective manner.
If we could put the chart back up there that I mentioned
earlier, so if a customer came to you with this kind of
organizational chart, I know it is kind of putting you on the
spot here because we are now revealing this really for the
first time, but I think it achieves a purpose of demonstrating
the complexity of this.
How would you approach reforms? How would you tell that
customer, ``All right. Look. We have got to organize this thing
better, coordinate these programs better because there are
inherent ways''?
The individual who is trying to, you know, benefit from
this is getting lost in the shuffle.
Mr. DAVIS. Probably the first thing I would do is say
remain calm looking at this.
[Laughter.]
Mr. DAVIS. But I can say candidly, having worked with some
larger organizations, that chart is not that uncommon from the
beginning place of some major American corporations in the late
1980s and early 1990s.
Moreover, our military after Goldwater-Nichols began a
massive integration process improvement that ironically looked
much like that.
I think the first question is, and I put this in my written
testimony, when you look at a process is not to react to
symptoms, and many of the programs that are well intended by
their sponsors, in fact, are reacting to symptoms without
necessarily getting down to the root cause.
So there are three things to do. First is as planning out
what I think the process is, which is where oftentimes
legislation goes. More importantly is to map a process so that
you can find out what it actually is, and once you know what it
is, then you can organize your effort to change it.
I think in general, following the mantra I shared earlier
about to maximize effectiveness you have to minimize
complexity, usually the first way to address this in a large
organization in a way we would approach it is getting into
common groupings, and especially if they were like the regional
problem that we have shown in Indiana, is put all organizations
under one region (a), but the second piece would be to have
groupings based on families of common activities or common
customers.
For example, you could look at children, parents,
unemployment, education. Again, I am just shooting from the hip
having just seen this for the first time.
But the other thing that I would say is that you want to
move towards an idea of integrating the processes that are, in
fact, helping oftentimes the same customer on multiple programs
to make sure nobody falls through the cracks, and what I would
do in this case is start everybody off on a common single data
model with the idea that eventually these families can be
merged into one what is called a logical data model or a single
customer record.
And for cutting edge businesses that have gone through this
transition, that is the common model where now with 99.99
percent accuracy they can manage and also provide predictive
analytics in modeling on billions of stock keeping units and
hundreds of millions of customers, as well as their employees,
and that would be the beginning point to take it step by step
through a pilot process.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I really appreciate that.
Mr. Lyon, you were nodding your head earlier affirmatively,
and I think in your testimony you mentioned moving certain
services in house into the public school system, for instance,
to try to streamline and better serve those who these programs
are intended to benefit.
Do you want to comment further on this and the complexity
of this chart?
Mr. LYON. I think the complexity of the chart, even when we
look at subcomponents of what we do at the department, we will
find charts that are similar to this, and my comment would be
much of what we do is based upon the Federal guidelines and
Federal requirements. So it will be difficult for us to
simplify until we simplify at the Federal level.
I was nodding quite a bit in agreement because his focus
went right back to people. You focus on children. You focus on,
you know, common needs, and that is exactly what we looked at
when we did our reorganization. I think that is really what we
need to look at going forward.
And it is complex, but we have a great opportunity, and if
we take a step back, we certainly have a chance to do this.
On the data, the one thing I would add is information
technology is extremely complex, and we have a data warehouse
for health systems. We have a data warehouse for our human
services, and we are bringing those together, and we are at the
forefront of really being able to do something cool with data
analytics, to really start assessing and seeing what needs are
and doing some predictive analysis that would help us implement
much better systems.
But until we have a commonality that defines the backbone
of all of these programs, it is going to be very difficult for
States to get there.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank you.
In comparing both Ms. Corrigan and your testimony and some
brief aphorisms or statements you made, you know, better off
working, two better than one, people, not programs, local
solutions, I was struck by the juxtaposition of this chart, and
then at the point of implementation in States, you know, these
types of goals.
So what are we losing by operating this type of Federal
system and, of course, the interaction with States? Could the
two of you comment on that?
What are we losing in all of this?
Ms. CORRIGAN. I believe that what we are losing on this is
human potential, that we waste human potential of our
impoverished clients when we do not ask the bottom line
questions. Are you getting to self-sufficiency? Is this program
really working? What are the metrics?
If you take the questions that TANF asks, for example, I
know when I was State director, my boss, Governor Snyder, was
asking, ``Well, how many people are really getting a job? And
how many people are holding down that job?'' and that was not a
question that we were being asked in the questions that we
answered for TANF.
We need to figure out what the bottom line questions are
that will take advantage of the wonderful gifts of every
precious person in our country.
Chairman BOUSTANY. That takes it right back to people.
And, Geoff, do you want to comment?
Mr. DAVIS. Just to put this at a practical level, I think
if we step back from the numbers for a moment and look at what
the recipient has to do to go through compliance with the
various programs and the importance of this integration, if I
go back to the model, I grew up in with a single mom who has to
work or is trying to get an education in order to work,
oftentimes coordinating something as simple as a medical
appointment for a child if they do not have a car involves a
great deal of complexity, where you have agencies that are not
necessarily communicating with each other, and a ping pong
effect can take place.
I saw this just last week with a friend from church that my
wife was helping, and if there had not been an outside person
to assist with this person going through her needs, in fact,
she would have had significant problems and would not have been
able to get what she wanted to achieve done.
In this case by integrating the records, the different
service providers would have a common set of information and
could simply be triggered to be alerted of a need with an
individual to respond more promptly. It makes it more efficient
in the long run in meeting those needs.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Geoff.
Mr. Lyon, did you want to make a brief comment?
Mr. LYON. Yes. I think the one thing we really lose, I
think there are two things: connectivity with the individuals
and the families. With the complex system, we are not spending
the amount of time we should with families. We are worried more
about process.
And then the overarching goals, as Director Corrigan said,
what are we measuring? What are we really shooting for? What is
the end game? How are we really defining success?
And if it is a check box on a screen and not employment,
the check box on a screen and not a child who can truly learn
in school, we are really foregoing a great opportunity.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
I now yield to the ranking member, Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and to each
of our witnesses for your testimony.
I find the polka dot chart to be very interesting. I think
it includes many programs which have little to do with one
another, from the lower right-hand corner on Pell Grants, a key
to educational opportunity in this country, to one near the
middle, the Ryan-White Act and the opportunities in housing for
people with AIDS, which addresses another really serious
problem in the country, to the breast and cervical cancer
program.
Until you get to the one dot and only one dot out of the
entire chart that deals with the program that is within the
jurisdiction of this Subcommittee, which will expire again,
having gone from one little stop to the next, next month. And
it seems to me that that one percent is where we need to be
focusing because I am not in favor, as the Republican budget
did, of cutting back Pell Grant opportunities and educational
opportunities in this country, nor in some of these other vital
health programs, which would not be on the chart but for the
failure of the States to address these very dire needs on their
own part. And it has been that failure that produced these
programs.
Having said that, I agree there needs to be better
coordination, and when I hear Ms. Corrigan talk about two
siloed programs, I agree. When I hear about coordination and
the need for better coordination that Mr. Lyon voices, I agree.
What I do not agree with is the suggestion that the
solution is to collapse programs into one, either to collapse
all of this chart into one or, as Ms. Corrigan suggested, let
us collapse 11 into one.
The use of the term ``collapse'' is exactly what I am
concerned about, that it will collapse opportunity for those
people who depend on the program.
And I think actually, and Texas may be an even better
example of this, but Michigan provides an example of what I am
concerned about as it relates to the one dot up there that we
are concerned with most immediately, and that is TANF. Because
in 2007, according to the data I have seen, in Michigan, a
third of the Federal dollars that flowed to Michigan under the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program were being used
by the State for the core purposes of TANF to get people to
work.
By the time that we got to 2011, Ms. Corrigan, in your
service there it was down to ten percent, and now under Mr.
Lyon, it is down to 6.7 percent.
You may have used that money with flexibility for other
purposes that are very worthwhile, but my concern is that the
Federal dollars we allocated for getting people from poverty to
work are not being used for that purpose, whether it is through
a workforce commission or something else. Then we are not
fulfilling the goals of this program, particularly when the
overall dollars fall in real purchasing power.
Let me ask you, Mr. Greenstein: is the reason that we
continue to have so many poor people in this country with
children who are not into gainful, long-term employment related
to the fact that we have got 80 dots up there, 80 different
uncoordinated programs?
Is it lack of coordination that is causing this problem?
Mr. GREENSTEIN. Well, I think we can do better with better
coordination, and we really should move in that direction, but
I do not think that is the sole problem or probably even the
main problem.
We have this growing research showing how important
adequate support for poor young children is; that when families
are in deep poverty, there tends to be a higher rate of toxic
stress, which research is now suggesting affects brain
development, and we see differences in brain development even
by age two and more by age five, and we find that when the
support is more adequate, and we are talking about basic
support, cash assistance, SNAP, food stamps, purchasing power,
rental assistance so the family is not on the verge of
homelessness; that these really produce surprisingly large
results.
So I think we have to do more adequately on that front. On
the coordination front, I just think it is important to think
about the fact that coordination can be significantly improved
without collapsing all of the programs, without losing the
mechanism of SNAP that responds to need.
This is what this work support strategies demonstration has
done. It is a mix of red and blue States. They found they had
more flexibility to integrate programs than they thought
because the Federal rules are complicated. You have to have
cross-program expertise.
They have come up with recommendations for further
flexibility the Federal agencies should provide, and they
should, but we can make progress there without in a sense
throwing the baby out with the bath water and losing some of
the fundamental parts of the safety net that are most important
for poor children's development.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired.
I just want to make clear that nobody is suggesting we just
collapse all of this. This is just depicting the complexity,
and I think everybody would agree that this complexity does not
help the situation going forward. We need to clean it up and
coordinate these programs better in order to serve the
individuals most in need.
With that I now yield to Mr. Meehan.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank this distinguished panel for all of your efforts.
Congressman, great to see you back here.
I am struck in a positive way because I think you are all
talking as if you see something here, and we are closer to
making progress. If we start with the very premise Mr.
Greenstein discussed that there is a definable benefit in the
safety net program, so we know we are at a place.
What seems to be is that from this point forward we have
some disconnects for a variety of reasons, not the least of
which are for various reasons this bureaucracy fails to reach
out and work effectively.
Ms. Corrigan and Mr. Lyon, how have your efforts to work
with the individual actually produced successes that have made
a difference, that cut across this territorial maze, the silos,
so to speak, that seem to be an impediment?
And, frankly, we have resources out there. A lot of it
suggests we are not trying to consolidate. We are trying to
align them in a more effective fashion.
This following the individual, how do you do it? How do you
take those resources and make it work, Ms. Corrigan and Mr.
Lyon?
Mr. LYON. Okay. So I think collaboration and alignment are
very important. I am not going to sit and suggest what the
final solution would be or what sort of collapsing should or
should not occur.
I think a couple of things we could point to, and I am
going to defer one to Director Corrigan because it actually
happened under her watch is Pathways to Potential. So I will
let her talk about that.
But one great example that we have is children who come
into our foster care system. Generally, if you think about that
situation, something traumatic has occurred. It is potentially
the abuse and neglect situation, potentially moving out of the
household, and what can we do to work with them through our
behavioral health system, which is funded under Health and
Human Services under SAMHSA? And what can we do under those
qualifications?
And then we work on our managed care organizations, and
they are under CMS for managed care, and by being aligned and
by focusing on what the person is, we start looking at
outcomes. You know, how are they responding to care, not how
quickly are we just seeing them, for example. And I think that
is a huge success.
Ms. CORRIGAN. The Pathways to Potential Program that
Michigan started in its public schools began in 2012 in 21
pilot schools. The problem that we had was school attendance
for children. We had a huge issue across the State of chronic
absenteeism.
In the Pathway to schools, when we sent social workers from
the Department of Human Services into the schools, they worked
on barrier reduction to get children to school, to try to
figure out why is this child not coming to school, not to
create a child protection case, but to figure out how to solve
the problem.
And in the three years the program has been in operation
now in more than 200 impoverished areas, there has been a 33
percent reduction in chronic absenteeism in the Pathways
schools.
Part of the issues is that the system is so complicated
that the school's bureaucracy does not understand the Human
Services bureaucracy. So a school principal or a teacher does
not understand what needs to happen.
Having the social worker on site can translate what needs
to occur and help the problem to get solved. The same thing is
true in the employer setting. In the Employer Resource
Networks, a huge number of people in poverty are working,
attempting to work, but employers lose a lot of single moms
because they have various issues affecting them, like
transportation or child care.
So you send the social worker into the employer and help to
solve the problems, again, translating for the employer. The HR
community does not understand how social services works either.
They do not know transportation resources. They do not know
child care resources. You send that social worker from employer
to employer to employer, and there is a huge benefit to
employers in worker retention. They do not have staff turnover
because they can stabilize the individual, frequently a single
mother with issues. They can stabilize so that that person can
get to work.
And, again, in my testimony it shows huge effects, so much
so that now in Michigan, employers are paying for social
workers for this function out of private money.
Mr. MEEHAN. Can you address just one other issue in my
remaining time? You discussed something about people who are
coming suffering from depression and other kinds of issues. How
do we catch those people on the cusp who have the potential?
This is a prevention model, I suspect, Mr. Lyon, that you
have been discussing. How do we effectively make sure we do not
lose them in that context, to get them back into a place where
they can contribute?
Ms. CORRIGAN. I believe that the law has to have
expectations in it of performance on the part of the
individuals; that when you give an individual merely a check
and that is all that is expected of them in various programs,
that that gives them a certain self-image, the client a certain
self-image that I have small dreams. I have puny dreams, and I
settle for this, and this is all, and that crosses generations.
And to me if we change the expectations in our laws, we
would see a change in behavior, but right now we have
generational poverty and generational despair and depression,
which is what my colleagues are seeing.
Mr. LYON. And the one thing I would say from a system
standpoint is, you know, the colocation, the ability of the
CMH, community mental health system or behavioral health system
or substitute system to be able to interact more effectively
with our case workers and our social workers, absolutely
integral in catching people before they go off any sort of
personal cliff, whether it is substance use or behavioral.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. Thank
you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Holding, you are recognized.
Mr. HOLDING. Congressman Davis, it is always a pleasure to
see you. I wanted to follow up on one thing that you said in
your testimony. You stated that the Child and Family Services
Improvement and Innovation Act and the DATA Act were signed
into law, ensured taxpayer dollars being well spent, and
welfare programs are actually serving those in need, and I
wanted to get your input as to whether these laws are actually
achieving the goal that we intended.
Mr. DAVIS. I think any implementation in a large Federal
organization is a time consuming process. I would defer to
current data. I understand there are some technical fixes, in
particular, in the Department of Health and Human Services,
that probably need to be done to expedite this further.
On a wider standpoint, the reason that I think that it is a
good first step and certainly needs to be carried on, going
back to the other commentary, is that you have false
jurisdictions, if you will, among different agencies, and I
think that thus led to the complexity of the map, where, in
fact, an individual is dealing with oftentimes a housing issue,
secondary effects with an education issue for themselves or a
child, health, job or UI, you know, children support issues,
maybe even finding a deadbeat dad, for that matter, and in this
cash my wish is that two things could happen.
One, we could move to a more expedited implementation of
this, but second of all, ultimately get to a single record and
maybe even a single payment for the individual akin to what is
being done in the private sector right now in very large
organizations to improve the ability to serve and really to
customize the need to that individual client because every
family is different.
The best thing that I found in my mind is where you can
empower local control of that front line service provider with
that client and you have a system that's clearly accountable
back to that record from Federal oversight would be very
efficient.
Mr. HOLDING. Right. If we could put this chart back up,
which is just phenomenal, Ms. Corrigan, I think you've got the
quote of the day, that ``tear down this silo,'' but you know,
as Mr. Gorbachev, ``tear down this wall,'' who do we address
the ``tear down this silo'' to?
When you look at this myriad of programs, you recognize
what the issues are and you can come up with kind of a
generality of tear down this silo or go to a single record
system, but where do you start?
I mean, this looks like that game--what is the game with
all the sticks where you put the sticks up? Jenga, something
like that. So which one do you pull out or where do you start?
Where do you inject the antidote here which will start to
change the whole system?
I will let Ms. Corrigan address that first.
Ms. CORRIGAN. I do not begin to know the answer to that
question in terms of simplifying the maze, but I would suggest
that perhaps it is possible to do something akin to what
happened pre-TANF, in other words, to give States the authority
to experiment, to figure out how do we do it.
As in the Farm Bill pilots on work that went through the
Department of Agriculture last year, could we not ask States
how would you simplify and see what is the most effective
program in getting at these issues?
Mr. HOLDING. Mr. Davis, do you want to take a stab at this?
Mr. DAVIS. I think you start and you identify what the
symptoms are and move from there. I think from an information
perspective, you have common factors that are affecting every
individual, and front line pilots become very important in
this.
And as long as we are capturing, and the reason I mentioned
the logical data model versus the conventional systems, you
know, in many cases what is governing our programs right now
was developed in the 1960s on technology that is, frankly, in
the Stone Age compared to today.
And where I would take this is into a model where you could
merge these records, but base it on empowering people on the
front line to gather that information because the slightest
amount of integration, particularly on a local level, could
create a tremendous amount of improvement and change.
For example, I got with a group of social workers that
became the impetus to when Ranking Member Doggett and I
introduced the Standard DATA Act and asked them this question
in a kind of brainstorming session: how would it improve your
client's life if we could look at an integrated system and find
out that the deadbeat dad has signed up for a hunting license a
la what Michigan has done or was registering a new BMW car in
Ohio but neglecting to pay their financial obligation to their
family?
And their response was it would be revolutionary because it
would do two things. It would reduce the pressure on the
individual by more immediately getting the cash, but more
importantly for the social worker, it would take steps out of
that process.
Imagine if you had to do your job and, well, look at it
this way. You have to walk a quarter of a mile every time you
go to vote. How efficient would your day be if you could vote
at your desk?
And I am not suggesting amending the Constitution, but
removing those steps from the process buys more time for
capacity to perform, and I think looking at these integrations
the right way helps these folks on the front line do their job
and, in fact, improves the lives of the person they are trying
to help.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentlemen.
Mr. Davis, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you for calling this hearing, and I certainly want to
appreciate all of our witnesses, and it is, indeed, good to see
the former chairman of this Committee, my namesake. It was a
pleasure working with you then and it is good to see you now.
Mr. Chairman, I must confess that what we are calling
``welfare programs'' gives me a bit of consternation, and I
want to appreciate Mr. Greenstein during his opening where he
used the terminology ``safety net'' and ``low income.'' I
appreciate that kind of terminology.
It is my feeling that being prepared and having the
opportunity to work, to get a job with adequate wages, that
these are excellent approaches to moving people out of poverty.
I also agree that family structure where there are two
certainly has more impact and more positive impact than
oftentimes where there is one.
Mr. Greenstein, let me ask you. Is TANF providing more or
less Federal help to prepare people for work and support
working parents than it was when we first seriously began to
deal with the concept of implementing welfare reform?
And in 2014, the States spent eight percent of their
Federal and State TANF funds to work activities. Could States
do a better job of coordinating work promotion and work
supports for working, struggling families if they invested more
of their TANF funds to this core purpose?
And I noted that in his opening, Chairman Boustany
mentioned the fact that there were 9.4 million more people in
poverty in 2014 than in 2007. Could I get your reaction to
that?
Mr. GREENSTEIN. Certainly. Let me do the last one first. So
if you look at the official poverty measure, there are 9.4
million more people counted as being below the poverty line in
2014 than in 2007, but most analysts across the political
spectrum do not favor using the official poverty measure to
compare different years because it does not count the earned
income credit or SNAP or anything.
And when you look at the programs that have expanded since
2007, it is primarily things that do not count, like the earned
income credit and the child credit. So when you use the broader
census measure that analysts favor that count those things, you
find that the increase in poverty from 2007 to 2014 is only one
percentage point and is pretty much entirely explained by the
economy. 2007 was the peak year of the prior recovery. In 2014
median income was $1,100 lower in real terms than it was in
2007. Long-term employment was twice as high.
So when we compare apples to apples with the broader
measure of poverty, we do find higher poverty in 2014, but
entirely, I think, as a result of the economy.
On the TANF question, I think what is unfortunate is if you
track the period since TANF's creation, the share of TANF
dollars, TANF and State Maintenance of Effort dollars, going
into work related activities has fallen significantly over the
period. State spending on work from both TANF and State MOE
funds on work related activities adjusted for inflation is
lower now than it was when TANF was first implemented. It has
fallen in most years, and it is actually lower even in nominal
dollars when you do not adjust for inflation.
So I think if we had more adequate State investment in
those activities coupled with some changes in the TANF rules to
deal with, for example, some of the differences in how we have
measures, the kind of outcome measures it uses versus the
process participation measures TANF uses, we could get better
coordination with both more resources and a closer alignment in
which activities count and how we measure them.
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Thank you very much. My time has
expired so I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Just a quick comment. I mean, I think we all agree the goal
here is to get people back to work, and we can quibble about
definitions of poverty and play with statistics, but I think
there is broad agreement that the focus is to get people back
to work, and that is meaningful work.
We will now go to Mr. Dold next.
Mr. DOLD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congressman, always great to see you, and I want to thank
you all for taking your time to come and join us, and frankly,
I want to build off of, Mr. Greenstein, your initial comments,
in which you said that the social safety net can and must be
improved.
And if we can just pull up that chart one more time, I
mean, I think when I go back and talk to constituents, and
certainly I know many of them are sitting around their kitchen
tables and they are aware they are falling behind. We know
poverty rates are up, but when we look at this chart, I mean,
Mr. Holding talked about it being a Jenga game. I look at it
like a game of Twister, and you are going to get tied up into a
ball pretty quickly trying to deal with what we have got here.
I think really what we are all looking to try to do is how
do we improve this system, right? We want a social safety net,
and it can and must be improved. So I guess my first question,
Mr. Greenstein, is: how do we improve this system so that it
does not look like a chart like this, so that it actually is
trying to focus more resources to actually helping people get
out of the social safety net because nobody wants to be there?
We need to have it. It needs to be strong, but we need to
get them, you know, back to work.
Mr. GREENSTEIN. A great question. So on the one hand, a
number of the individual programs have particular merit, and
there are reasons for some of the eligibility criteria or other
aspects they have, but then the tension is, as the whole panel
has been talking about, when it makes coordination really
difficult.
I think that we have really important opportunities. I
think Mr. Davis has been referring to this, really important
opportunities through advances in information technology, with
better data sharing.
So only a few years ago most of these programs had paper
bound systems. Someone would go to an office. They would
provide documents for SNAP. They would go to another office a
month later for Medicaid. Things were not coordinated. People
fell on and off of programs.
With advances in information technology, a number of States
are making really major progress in integrating the data system
so you can collect, for example, the income and verification
and household circumstance data once periodically and use it
for the multiple programs. You can adjust for the differences
in the rules, and then that frees up more case worker time,
instead of, you know, being the bean counter clerks, to be able
to help people get jobs and give them counseling and things
like this.
I would really urge the subcommittee to look at what is
called the Work Support Strategies Demonstration that has made
major strides on this. It is a mix of red and blue States.
There is no ideology or politics there, and with further
advances in information technology and some further flexibility
from Federal agencies, I think a lot more can be done on that
front.
But I think we really have the potential with advances in
information technology to make major advances here to reduce
administrative cost, to make the system easier to navigate, and
to do better coordination.
We also have to look at differing rules across programs, as
I mentioned earlier. When a family is enrolled in a workforce
program but then it does not count towards the TANF work
participation requirement, that discourages agencies to work
together and to put the family into a service that might be
useful for them.
I think some of the changes the committee had in the
discussion draft earlier this year would really make progress
in some of those areas.
Mr. DOLD. Thank you.
Ms. Corrigan, there are a couple of things I wanted to go
over with you. In page 2 of your testimony you highlight that
when you arrived in Michigan at the Human Services Agency in
2011, you felt that the organizational culture was off, was too
focused on signing eligible people up for programs quickly, and
you think it suffered from a lack of real outcome measures.
So I guess my question is: what would you consider to be
the real outcome measures? What are the success points going
forward that we should be looking at?
And then I do want to talk to you real quickly also about
Community Ventures Program and how it is helping employers.
Ms. CORRIGAN. Very well. We were attempting to sign people
up as quickly as possible. I think an example of that would be
SNAP, the pressure to have people receive food assistance as
quickly as possible without asking is this individual getting a
job. You know, has the need for the social services safety net
programs ended? Are they working? Have they found work?
So that to me is a critical question that ought to be asked
across our programs. That is the outcome metric. Are people
getting to self-sufficiency? So that is one thing I would
counsel.
The second thing I want to mention is on the family
formation issue because we know the data on single parenthood
versus married parents, and I think that Ron Haskins and Isabel
Sawhill from Brookings have done valuable work in talking about
the success sequence and getting that word out.
That is not happening, but we know that if you finish high
school, if you get a job, get married, and then have children,
in that order, your odds of being in poverty are reduced so
much, but I am not aware that that family formation program has
been publicized adequately, and I urge the success of that. We
know what works, but it needs to be implemented across our
Nation. So I think that would be critical.
I am not sure if I answered your question yet.
Mr. DOLD. I appreciate it, Ms. Corrigan. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Smith, you are recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to be part of the subcommittee's
work of examining the welfare system. The current maze of
Federal programs creates far too many opportunities for
taxpayer dollars to be wasted due to fraud and abuse.
Some people need help. Others do not. I am extremely
concerned that without changing our approach to lifting people
out of poverty, some people who need help will not be able to
navigate the maze of all the Federal programs to get the
services they qualify for.
It is a major problem when these programs offer benefits to
people who do not need any because those benefits should go on
to those who need it.
A number of welfare programs automatically pay benefits for
a full year before reviewing whether the recipients' needs have
changed.
Mr. Chairman, without objection I would like to submit a
news article titled ``Michigan Woman Who Won $1 Million Lottery
Ticket But Kept Using Food Stamps Loses Benefits'' from 2012
into the record.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you.
The report states that a Michigan woman won $1 million in
the lottery, continued to receive $200 a month in State food
assistance for six months. That is wasteful and ridiculous. She
may have needed benefits before winning the lottery, but single
people who earn a million dollars in any calendar year should
not get food stamps.
Cases like this take away limited resources from people who
really need a hand up. When our programs lack proper
eligibility reviews, we waste precious taxpayer dollars.
It is this simple. If you are not eligible for benefits,
you should not get benefits. There are more reports that detail
how prisoners and even dead people collect millions of dollars
in welfare benefits.
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to introduce into the
record a news article that says ``Massachusetts Audit Finds
Dead Welfare Recipients Collecting Millions of Dollars.''
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Here I have a 2013 news article that detailed a State audit
from Massachusetts where 18 million was distributed in
questionable public assistance benefits. To quote this article,
quote, ``in 1,164 cases, deceased recipients continued to
receive a total of 2.39 million in benefits up to 27 months
after they had been reported dead,'' not a month but 27 months.
Dead people should not get benefits, especially more than
two years after they have been dead. When they do, taxpayers
are defrauded, and the people who need it most suffer.
Mr. Chairman, without objection, I would like to submit one
more article into the record. It is titled ``New Jersey Sent
Welfare Checks to Prisoners.''
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection it will be included.
[The information follows: The Honorable Jason Smith
Submission]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In May of 2013, the New York Times reported in this article
that $24 million in benefits had been paid to ineligible
prisoners. New Jersey has State laws requiring unemployment,
welfare, and pension benefits only go to people available for
work. If you are not available to work and ineligible for
benefits, you should not get benefits.
Again, I am concerned that we are not using our limited
resources efficiently and upset that our programs are not
making it to the people who need it the most.
I could continue to list several examples of waste, fraud
and abuse. It goes on and on. That is why we are here.
Ms. Corrigan, I have a couple questions. In 2011, a GAO
testified that simpler policies, better technology, and more
innovation in evaluation could reduce inefficiencies. Has this
happened?
Ms. CORRIGAN. I do not think it has to the extent that it
should, Congressman. In our State of Michigan, I think we made
great improvements.
I wanted to point out State law was amended around lottery
winnings after the million dollar lottery winner, and last
year's farm bill included provisions on lottery winnings as
well. We worked to get that in.
I totally agree with your point, and we took action to
change it.
Mr. SMITH. Good. So we often also discuss, Ms. Corrigan,
that we need to cut down on bureaucracy and tear down silos at
the State and local levels when it comes to administrating
programs, but what can and should happen at the Federal level?
Ms. CORRIGAN. I believe the same proposition applies here
as well and that across committees there needs to be a look-see
at safety net programs across committees that would tear down
silos.
For example, in Michigan, the biggest barrier our workers
found was transportation. Getting people in rural States to the
worksite is really difficult, and yet that is something that is
not touched on well enough.
So could it be that you would reach out across the
committee silos to look at safety net programs across
committees to see how would it affect a client, you know, what
these various needs are, and how could they be solved?
Mr. SMITH. I agree. On quick question. Do you know of any
States that have model legislation where they are proactively
identifying people who abuse the system?
Ms. CORRIGAN. The State of Maine, Mary Mayhew, the
Commissioner in Maine. I would invite her to be a witness. They
are doing tremendous work on waste, fraud and abuse in Maine.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Crowley, you are recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My colleagues on the other side of the aisle must have
misread their calendar because Halloween, I believe, was on
Saturday. It has come and gone. So if they were trying to scare
people into thinking that there is some epidemic of spending
too much in helping people, I think they missed their mark.
What is really scary is what my colleagues plan to do going
forward, what they propose to do in their budget, and every
time we have had this discussion. Let us start with the premise
of this hearing: that there are supposedly, and I quote, 80-
plus programs to help Americans. They say that as if helping
Americans is something bad.
I am looking at some of the data on the programs that they
are calling into question, and the top ten programs that help
low income Americans: Medicaid, Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program, Supplemental Security Income, the earned
income tax credit, Pell Grants--I am surprised that is on a
welfare list--assistance to seniors on the Medicare Part D
Prescription Drug Program, the additional child tax credit--
that is another one that kind of strikes me as interesting
being considered a welfare program--Section 8 Housing Choice
Vouchers, the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program,
and grants to support education for the disadvantaged.
Far from being duplicative as we have been hearing, I would
say that those seem to cover a pretty wide range of critical
needs, everything from health care to hunger to education and
to housing. It seems my colleagues are not just comparing
apples to oranges. They are comparing apples to the entire
produce department.
But that is a page out of their favorite play book: toss
around scary numbers that are based on misleading data and then
claim we need to cut those programs down. Criticize,
consolidate, and cut, that is what they want to do. We have
seen it time and again.
Words get tossed around like ``coordination,''
``flexibility,'' ``consolidation.'' It all sounds great, but
the effect is always the same. Let us have less of everything,
funding, services, and people served.
I would suggest that this does look complex. It looks
complicated. Life is complicated, quite frankly, but having
said that, this is an over exaggeration. I have circled about a
dozen things that are not even duplicative, some of which are
not even considered welfare by any reasonable standard.
Mr. Greenstein, what have we seen historically when my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle propose consolidating
programs into block grants?
Mr. GREENSTEIN. Well, I mentioned this earlier and talked
about it in my testimony. I would make a distinction between
situations where maybe one or two very similar programs are put
together and it is called a block grant, like low income energy
assistance, and areas where we have very broad block grants.
So there have been 13 broad health-human services or social
services block grants created over recent decades. In 11 of the
13 the funding levels have fallen, in four cases by more than
60 percent. We have actually just completed a new analysis. It
will be out soon where we looked at the funding levels for all
of these broad block grants since their inception, and
basically as I said, 11 of the 13 fell, and if you take all 13
as a group, the funding level in 2015 for the combined funding
level is 28 percent below the 2000 level after adjusting for--
--
Mr. CROWLEY. That is striking, and I am struck in
particular by the example of social service block grant. That
was a bipartisan program that both side of the aisle agree with
to give flexibility to the States to make sure that that money
is being spent properly.
Funding was sharply cut over the years, and in 2012,
Republicans on this Committee tried to eliminate the entire
program saying it was too flexible. It seems step one is
blocking grants. Step two is eliminating them altogether. So I
guess step three will be throwing up our hands and wondering
why States have so much trouble providing necessary social
services to their constituency.
Mr. Greenstein, in your experience is that attack on the
social services block grant typical of block grant programs?
Mr. GREENSTEIN. Well, the social services block grant, in
one sense it is a little bit different in that it is actually a
mandatory funding stream rather than a discretionary
appropriation, but nevertheless, the funding experience has
pretty much been the same. It has gone down very substantially
in real terms.
One of the issues with the very broad block grants is that
the uses of them are so diffuse that it is often unclear what
exactly the crystallized purpose is. How do you measure impact
and how do you document it because it is so diffuse over so
many areas?
And that is probably one of the factors that has
contributed to the funding erosion.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Greenstein, I thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I just note my colleague had mentioned checks
going to prisoners in the State of New Jersey. I just wanted to
point out I believe the study was of 2009 to 2011. I believe
that Governor Christie, Republican governor, is the governor of
the State of New Jersey.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Just to clarify, this chart that we have is actually a
graphic depiction based on a CRS article. We just put it in
graphic form to demonstrate the complexity because I do not
think anybody can deny the level of complexity creates problems
and some waste in the system, and I think there is a way that
this Committee can work to try to take the programs under its
jurisdiction to make them more effective to help the people who
are truly in need.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Chairman, would you yield for one moment?
Chairman BOUSTANY. I will yield.
Mr. CROWLEY. Would you consider Pell Grants welfare?
Chairman BOUSTANY. I consider Pell Grants to be a program
to help low income individuals. This is based on the CRS
article.
Mr. CROWLEY. Do you believe that middle class families
actually receive Pell Grants?
Chairman BOUSTANY. Middle class families do, but again, you
have got to look at the circumstances.
With that we are going to move on. I now go to Mrs. Noem.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I represent the State of South Dakota. So I appreciate all
of you being here. Out of the top 11 counties in the Nation
that are struck with poverty, I have five of them in my State.
Many of them are on tribal lands and hit my Native American
tribes and it is generational poverty.
I believe that a lot of the people in South Dakota face and
utilize programs, but yet it is not necessarily lifting them
out of the programs and getting the results that we truly do
need.
We have a very low unemployment rate in our State, but in
some areas we have 80, 85 percent unemployment just because of
where they are located, lack of economic development, but also
because we have not had the ability to have programs that truly
gave the work force training that we needed and the
infrastructure that we needed to really change their lives.
So I am very interested in reforming these programs so that
we see more results, and I guess, Mr. Davis, I would like to
ask you in particular because of your experience on this
Committee in the past: how many of these program that we see
displayed throughout the committee hearing on the chart have
been evaluated for their effectiveness that you are aware of?
Mr. DAVIS. Well, I think the question is there are
evaluations that take place internally and reports that are
submitted by agencies, but the one problem that I found early
on where Ranking Member Doggett and I chose to take the issue
of data standardization is there were no common systems of
measurement.
And I think one of the areas where the parties can talk
past each other is to say any time the issue of cost control is
raised that we are advocating cutting or elimination of the
programs. When we look at populations in need, there are
processes or gaps that are created that create excessive cost
because of excessive time or the problems that a person has
simply to access those benefits, and this can be heightened in
rural areas simply because of the distance and lack of
proximity to any type of primary care services.
What we found, I think, conclusively, and it really follows
a pattern of any organization that begins to move in this
direction to optimize performance, yes, technically the
commercial term might be ``cutting cost,'' but I think
realistically you are creating capacity and opportunity for
those additional dollars that may be spent for overhead that
can be redirected into other areas.
Mrs. NOEM. I think we all certainly want to make sure that
the taxpayers' dollars are being well spent and that they are
actually beneficial and not being wasted or abused in some
manner like we heard discussed earlier. But I am more
interested in making sure that they actually work, that we do
not continue to spend money that does not work.
So there is not a standardized evaluation system at all
that we see rise to the top in most of these programs. Is there
one that you would recommend or at least three or four
different triggers we should be watching in these programs that
would show this program is effective?
Mr. DAVIS. I would say that each customer area, if you
will, is different and different types of businesses, for
example, that use data warehousing as we discussed earlier and
build these logical data models, they will take, say, each
individual customer who will have 15 to 17,000 attributes in
one file about them, and it is in order to serve them better.
A retail outlet might have a completely different objective
in selling a person clothes than, say, a bank. In a banking
system or in detecting credit card fraud or ways to serve or
sell more services to that customer, data scientists working
with business operations professionals simply develop
algorithms or analytic tools to identify what those needs are
and every time that there is an input in the system, it updates
that central data record.
So I might be an educator and Ms. Corrigan might be a
housing person and an unrelated TANF or SNAP situation happens.
Something is input in that system, and I suddenly realize my
person has lost their job, and I have a child now possibly
moving out of a school district. Is there a way to preempt
that?
She might have there is an issue with housing that has to
be addressed immediately, and rather than, say, making your
person on the tribal land have to drive 50 miles if they have a
car or find that, the time can be overwhelming, and it can
create a situation that causes hopelessness where folks just
give up.
Mrs. NOEM. Yes.
Mr. DAVIS. And I think if we look in our own lives at that,
we have all felt those kinds of pressures in different areas,
and what we are talking about is simply simplifying that
process so that we can serve more effectively.
And I think the rhetoric of eliminate a cut or somehow the
motive is someone on benefits is bad or, you know, the desire
of one side is simply to pour more money is not really the
case. I think we are looking at a very clinical process problem
that once fixed can model much of the best of the commercial
sector.
Mrs. NOEM. So perhaps that first step would be making sure
that we have an area where data can be collected, that all
programs can utilize and look at the same family entity that is
accessing these programs so that we are starting with the same
data point. Is that what you are suggesting?
Mr. DAVIS. Exactly, and then from that place, each agency
could draw the data or the analytics that they needed to serve
more effectively, but it is all populated in one area.
And what would come with that, frankly, is predictive
modeling where you would, in effect, be able to begin to see
trends in advance of the likelihood of, say, a child going into
crisis, potential domestic abusive situations that are going
on, you know, addressing what is done, for example, from a jail
database management process that can not only effect in real
time a do not pay stop on benefits, but if there is a child
involved, it could trigger someone else to make sure that that
child's needs are met effective so that they do not fall
through the system.
And I think creating additional work-arounds is not the
answer. The idea is simplifying this data to get a realistic
picture of what is happening so that the front line workers can
help in real time.
Mrs. NOEM. Well, Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time, but
I do want to talk about the importance of having a sense of
urgency on these programs. Some of my tribes right now are
dealing with a suicide epidemic of their youth because they
feel hopeless, and they have seen these programs continue to be
utilized among their people and not get them out of poverty and
not give them a hope for a future, and that is why I think it
is critical that we do not just have this hearing and talk
about this. It is critical that we take the ideas and
suggestions that we have heard today from our witnesses and
utilize them to reform these programs so that they work and get
people off programs and providing for their families.
With that I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I can assure my colleague that is the
intent, and that is to move forward with policy that will help
Americans in need.
With that, I will now yield to Mr. Young.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all of our panelists for being here today.
A special shout-out to Scott Sanders. I really appreciate your
service as Indiana's State Commissioner for the Department of
Workforce Development. You are now doing us proud nationally,
learning best practices and promulgating those.
You know, our Federal welfare system illustrated by this
chart of various benefits and services to low income
individuals, clearly too convoluted. We need to tear down the
walls. We need to connect the dots and focus more on outcomes
as opposed to inputs. I think that is a bipartisan sentiment.
There are implications not just on our Federal FISC, and
those are very important, but real human impacts that having
suboptimal constellation of programs results in.
So on the fiscal end I will not belabor this point too much
because I am, frankly, more focused on improving people's lives
beyond just the fiscal implications, but I think it is
important to note that our Federal Government devotes roughly
one-sixth of its spending to ten major means tested programs
and tax credits.
And in the four decades since I have been on this earth,
spending on those ten programs has risen tenfold. I do not
think any of us would say that lives have improved tenfold. We
know that spending is expected to continue to grow another 80
percent in the next decade.
So before we spend all of this money and as we continue to
try and improve lives through our Federal social safety net
program, we of course need to improve the whole constellation
of various programs here.
Since 1990, as I understand it, there have only been ten
entire Federal social programs that have been tested using the
so-called gold standard for testing such programs, randomized
controlled trial, multi-site evaluations, and out of those ten
programs, I have been briefed that only one has really had any
sort of even modest effects, positive effects. Nine have shown
weak or no effects.
So this results in capability deprivation, as a Nobel Prize
winning economist once characterized poverty. We need to
harness everyone's capabilities throughout our economy. It will
benefit all of us. It is the right thing to do.
So as we focus on measuring outcomes, not inputs, I am very
interested in the comments of Mr. Lyon and also Judge Corrigan.
It is something both of you in your written testimony made note
of.
How do we incentivize States to experiment with new
approaches, Mr. Lyon, so that we can arrive at better outcomes?
You cited the Michigan example. I wonder whether there
might be some financial incentives that we offer States so that
they can experiment more and we can figure out exactly what
does work, perhaps social impact bonds or performance based
contracting prizes. What are your thoughts on that?
Mr. LYON. I think definitely anything you can do to
incentivize programs that work is integral in this. There are
different funding streams that could do that, you know, a
higher Federal match, for example, for a program that works,
that is preventive, that is evidence based. That is definitely
the way to go, especially if it improves people's lives and
saves money long term.
And when I say ``improved people's lives'' I also mean
works from generation to generation so that we begin to end the
cycle of hopelessness that so negatively impacts our culture.
That is very important.
The first and most important part though is we really have
to agree on what the metrics are. What is the outcome that we
are looking for? Is it employment? Is it health? Is it self-
sufficiency? Is it a customer satisfaction survey? I would
comment it should not be. There should be more solid outcomes,
and that is very important.
Ms. CORRIGAN. I wanted to commend to you, Congressman
Young, a program at the University of Notre Dame conducted by
Professor James Sullivan, the Laboratory for Economic
Opportunity.
Part of the problem that States have in testing to find out
what really works is the expense, and I believe that Professor
Sullivan's program at Notre Dame is creating a model for the
country, in effect, because what they are doing is attempting
to marry up less expensive testing with programs so that we can
find out, yes, you know, with the best means that exist out
there, does this really work or not, and I know you are
familiar with Professor Sullivan.
Mr. YOUNG. I am.
Ms. CORRIGAN. But I want to commend that as a model that
would be helpful to incentivize States to find out what is
working in this area.
Mr. YOUNG. So if the chairman will indulge me, I am
familiar with LEO up at the University of Notre Dame and
Professor Sullivan's good work, and perhaps he would be a
witness in the future that we might bring before this
Subcommittee for testimony.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. We will certainly
take that under consideration.
In closing, a lot has been said about this chart depicting
the complexity of our safety net programs. I just want to
emphasize again that this is simply a graphic that was taken
from a very extensive CRS report entitled ``Federal Benefits
and Services for People with Low Income Programs and
Spending.''
And the intent was to look at the size and composition of
Federal spending directed toward low income people as a focus
of public policy, and my friend from New York raised a question
about the Federal Pell Grant Program. Well, in this report it
simply says, ``The Federal Pell Grant Program is the largest
education program for people with limited incomes accounting
for 58 percent of targeted Federal education spending in fiscal
year 2013 and ranking as the fifth largest program in this
report.''
And so it is for needy students. I mean, these are people
who have need, and the point of all of this is we have to
understand the complexity of this. We have to understand the
inherent problems of coordinating these programs if we are
going to create a safety net system that works for all
Americans because we have far too many Americans in need today.
That is the intent of this hearing. That is the intent of
this Subcommittee in moving forward.
So with that, in closing I want to thank our witnesses for
their tremendous testimony. This has been terrific and has been
very, very helpful to all of us as we try to understand these
important issues. You have shed light on some very important
and complicated issues.
If members have additional questions for the witnesses,
they will submit them to you in writing, and we would
appreciate receiving your responses for the record within two
weeks so we can complete the record.
And with that the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
