- RISING HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RISING HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS
UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 12, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-FC14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-193                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DEVIN NUNES, California              CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            XAVIER BECERRA, California
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina

David Stewart, Staff Director

Nick Gwyn, Minority Chief of Staff

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of July 12, 2016 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Joel White, President, Council for Affordable Health Coverage....     6
Christopher Condeluci, Principal, CC Law & Policy PLLC...........    22
Tom Harte, President, Landmark Benefits, NH......................    37
Peter Lee, Executive Director, Covered California................    51

MEMBER SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Houston Chronicle............................................   112

MEMBER QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Representatives Dold, Noem, Smith of Missouri, Nunes and Black...   121

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Academy of Actuaries, statement.........................   143
HealthPocket, Inc., statement....................................   152

RISING HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS
UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 12, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:10 a.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Kevin
Brady [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. The committee will come to order.
Welcome to the Ways and Means Committee hearing on the
rising cost of health insurance premiums under the Affordable
Care Act.
Over 6 years have passed since President Obama and
Democrats in Congress drafted the Affordable Care Act behind
closed doors and forced it into our homes, our workplaces, and
doctors' offices. Since then, the law has been one broken
promise after another, starting with the promise in its very
title ``affordable.''
Millions of Americans have seen the cost of health care
increase to astonishing levels, while quality, choice, and
access have hit new lows. Meanwhile, the White House refuses to
acknowledge that Obamacare is simply failing ahead of schedule
and that the pain it has inflicted so far may be nothing
compared to what lies ahead for millions of Americans and their
families.
So we are holding this congressional hearing today to make
clear that Obamacare's broken promises have real impacts on
real people. And because we care deeply about providing
Americans with access to high quality affordable health care,
House Republicans have released a detailed credible plan for
repealing the ACA and bringing patient focus care back to the
American people. The truth about this law, it has never
expanded access to affordable high-quality health care of an
individual's choosing and it never will.
Estimates show that increases in 2017 could be double what
we see this year, and in several States, these costs could
spike by more than 50 percent with no end in sight. A 50
percent increase is outrageous. Americans simply cannot afford
to pay 50 percent more for their premiums. One reason costs are
skyrocketing, enrollment is far lower and far more expensive to
cover than projected. That is why, in addition to raising
premiums, many insurers have shrunk their provider network, so
for individuals and families to purchase coverage, it costs
more, and with that more expensive coverage, they get fewer
choices and less access to doctors and providers who best meet
their needs.
Even after raising premiums and narrowing provider
networks, many insurers are still struggling to shoulder the
cost of doing business in the Affordable Care Act's mandate-
ridden marketplaces. Every month we learn of more insurers who
decided to leave the flawed Obamacare exchanges altogether. In
April, United Health Group announced that it would be forced to
exit many of the exchanges it was participating in because it
couldn't sustain the crushing losses. After United leaves, 1.8
million Americans will have only two insurers to choose from,
and over a million will only have one.
And some Americans, including thousands in my home State of
Texas, may not have any insurers to choose from at all. In
fact, BlueCross/BlueShield of Minnesota has announced their
exit from the State after suffering more than a half a billion
dollars in losses over just 3 years.
I, like many of my colleagues, have heard countless stories
from families who are deciding it is just not worth paying the
high prices to get Washington-approved coverage. Instead they
are choosing to pay a stiff tax penalty rather than buy a plan
they can't afford and don't want. And it is not just a few
Americans. In States like New York, Iowa, Colorado, Arkansas,
Minnesota, and South Dakota, more than three out of four people
eligible to purchase exchange plans have found a way not to be
covered in Obamacare.
I have no doubt we will hear today about families getting
health insurance under Obamacare, but the reality for many of
my constituents is that now they have to worry year to year
about access to the right plan, access to the same team of
specialists, and changes to their out-of-pocket costs. What is
the point of expanding coverage if you can't afford or get
access to care?
Over the past year, I have received letters from Texas
families that are caught in the middle of the downward
pressures of Obamacare's regulations and mandates. For example,
especially hospitals my constituents rely on are being squeezed
out of network. I would like to enter into the record two
Houston Chronicle articles highlighting the struggles of
families to get the specialized treatment they need. This is a
direct result of Obamacare's mandates and rigid rules.
Americans have had enough of the Obamacare experiment and
government-run health care. That is why we are dedicated to
repealing this flawed law in advancing patient focused
solutions that truly expand choice and access to high quality
affordable health care.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today. I
look forward to hearing your thoughts on how we can work to
make our healthcare system work better for the American people.
People across our country all want the certainty of knowing
they will have access to the care they need when they need it
most. This is what Americans deserve, and it is what our
committee will keep fighting to deliver. I now yield to the
distinguished Ranking Member from Michigan, Mr. Levin, for the
purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Essentially what we
have heard is the campaign message of the Republican party
against ACA, and that is the purpose of this hearing today,
essentially bringing the campaign attack of the Republican
party within the halls of Congress, and we look forward to that
debate.
We had a situation, 50 million people in this country
without any healthcare coverage. We had skyrocketing costs of
health care, we had skyrocketing increases in premiums, and
essentially what was decided after 50 years of inaction, we
decided to do something about it, and what we decided to do was
experiment with a combined program of expanding Medicaid and
other government-based programs with the private sector of the
United States of America.
We expanded Medicaid, and in Texas, because of the action
of the leadership there, well over a million people did not
benefit from the expansion of Medicaid in your State, Mr.
Chairman. While in the State of Michigan, a Republican governor
decided to take advantage of the expansion of Medicaid and
brought real healthcare coverage to hundreds of thousands of
people in this country in the State who needed it.
The Republicans have never come up with a comprehensive
substitute for ACA. Instead, attack after attack, repeal
effort, after repeal effort, and the number now is what, well
over 60, and so you essentially can mark up today as whatever
the number is, the next effort in the Republican party to
attack and to try to undo the healthcare structure that has
brought coverage to millions of people in this country and also
brought down premiums.
So the experiment, as I said, was with combining public and
private sector. It is controversial, even at times within the
Democratic party. The Republicans essentially wanted to have a
totally private system in this country, including to privatize
Medicaid, privatize everything, and now, essentially, this
hearing is being held to attack what is happening in the
private portion of healthcare reform. Ignoring the millions of
people in this country who have benefitted from the expansion
of health care, millions, millions.
So this debate, this hearing is nothing more than another
part of the political debate in this presidential year. And we
understand the need to address issues relating to premiums. Mr.
Lee will give some background on this, and we will continue to
address this issue.
The Republican party has failed to take steps that would
have been able to address the issue of premium cost where they
are going higher, up higher in some States than in most others.
They fail to do this, and so therefore, they essentially now
are attacking some of the results of their own making.
So take this for what it is worth, we welcome you. We don't
say that you gentleman here today are part of the political
process. You have a distinguished background, but you should
understand, the hearing today is part of the political debate
of this year, and we Democrats welcome the opportunity to
tackle this issue as to how, after 50 years, we began to
address this issue while the Republican party, for all these
years, has been bankrupt and remains bankrupt as to how they
would undertake a major change that would benefit millions of
people who today can go to sleep knowing that they will have
healthcare coverage. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection, all the members' opening
statements will be made part of the record.
Today's witness panel includes four experts, Joel White is
president of the Council for Affordable Health Coverage;
Christopher Condeluci is a principal of CC Law & Policy, PLLC;
Tom Harte is president of Landmark Benefits representing the
National Association of Health Underwriters; Mr. Peter Lee is
executive director of Covered California.
The committee has received your written statements, and
they will all be made part of the formal hearing record. You
each have 5 minutes to deliver your oral remarks. We will begin
today with Mr. White. You may begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF JOEL WHITE, PRESIDENT, COUNCIL FOR AFFORDABLE
HEALTH COVERAGE

Mr. WHITE. Chairman Brady, Ranking Member Levin, Members of
the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Joel White. I am the president of the Council for
Affordable Health Coverage, which is a broad based alliance
with a singular focus, and that is, bringing down the cost of
health care for all Americans.
Our membership reflects a broad range of interests,
organizations representing patients and consumers, small and
large employers, insurers, and physician organizations. We are
concerned that healthcare costs are too high and are rising too
fast. In fact, costs continue to outpace GDP, the economy, and
premiums are increasing about three times as fast as wages. As
a result, by 2030, the typical American family will spend more
than half their income on health care.
As we all know, the ACA made massive changes to health
markets, some positive and some negative. It created new
consumer protections, corrected market imbalances, and reduced
the number of uninsured Americans to historic lows. Yet
overreach by the ACA has also contributed to high and growing
health insurance premiums marked by average double-digit price
increases both this year and next.
For example, this year, average premiums for both bronze
and silver plans, which represent 92 percent of the market,
increased by double-digit rates. Next year, the requested
weighted medium premium will increase 19.2 percent based on
rates already filed. This ranges from a high of 56 percent in
Tennessee to a low of 3.6 percent in Rhode Island.
In addition, cost sharing, including copayments,
coinsurance, deductibles, and the use of these strategies and
formularies is increasing faster than premiums. For example, in
2016, the average silver plan had a $3,000-plus deductible.
That reflects an increase of about 20 percent from 2015. The
factors impacting premium rates and cost sharing increases
include rising medical costs, mandated benefits and regulatory
changes, and a risk pool that is smaller, older, and sicker
than originally projected.
Despite the broad array of available plans on exchanges and
a tax for being uninsured, many of those who have been expected
to sign up for coverage, even those eligible for subsidies,
have not done so. Why? I think simply the point is people don't
want exchange plans at the prices they are being offered. They
are too expensive and have too significant cost-sharing
requirements. In fact, a study that CAHC released last month
shows participation rates vary with the generosity of
subsidies.
Eighty-one percent of those receiving a full premium
subsidy signed up for a plan. Just 2 percent of the nonsubsidy
eligible population enrolled in exchange coverage this year.
As a result, enrollment is only about half of what CBO
originally projected. ACA risk pools are thus smaller and
sicker. So while many Americans with significant health needs
or lower incomes have greater access to coverage now, the
reality is that for millions of others, health coverage is less
affordable and more out of reach than when the ACA was created
6 years ago.
The fact, this fact should spur Congress to enact
bipartisan reforms to help stabilize and improve markets,
making healthcare more affordable and accessible for all
Americans. Increasing premium subsidies to encourage enrollment
is not the answer in my opinion. This approach will shift
costs, not contain them. Remarkably, some are even proposing
fewer choices and less competition through public options and
standardized benefit designs.
The fact is, we have tried the top down approach that
relies on mandates and penalties, and costs have increased
unsustainably as a result. CAHC believes that it is time to try
market-based solutions that expand choice and competition to
lower costs. One of most effective ways to lower premiums on
the exchanges is by broadening and improving the risk pool.
Greater participation rates in exchanges would lower average
costs by spreading risk across a bigger population.
In my written statement, I outline 13 policy proposals to
help achieve these goals. Briefly, these approaches would
create competition across public and private exchanges, allow
subsidy portability so consumers can use their support for
plans they want and need, allow more flexibility for plans and
employers, address medical cost growth, and promote
transparency for plans and providers. I look forward to
responding to any questions you may have. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. White follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Condeluci, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER CONDELUCI, PRINCIPAL, CC LAW & PUBLIC
POLICY PLLC

Mr. CONDELUCI. Thank you, Chairman Brady, Ranking Member
Levin, and Members of the Committee for the opportunity to
speak with you today. My name is Chris Condeluci----
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Condeluci, could you pull that
microphone down just a little bit closer.
Mr. CONDELUCI. Yes, sir.
Chairman BRADY. Perfect.
Mr. CONDELUCI. My name is Chris Condeluci. I am the sole
shareholder of CC Law & Policy, a legal and policy practice
that focuses on issues relating to the Patient Protection
Affordable Care Act, the ACA. Prior to starting my own
practice, I served as counsel to the Senate Finance Committee
where I participated in drafting portions of the ACA, including
the ACA exchanges, the State insurance market reforms, and all
of the taxes under the new law.
In my practice, I provide legal counsel to stakeholders
ranging from employers to insurance carriers to the ACA
exchanges and private exchanges. I also provide policy analysis
on the implementation of the ACA.
It is important to emphasize at the onset of my testimony
that there is no one single event or ACA implementation
decision that has contributed to increased premium rates.
Instead, there are a number of contributing factors that, when
added up in the aggregate, can objectively be viewed as the
causes for the rise in premiums. These factors include but are
not limited to, first, the statutory requirements under the ACA
itself. In particular, the new minimum insurance standards in
addition to the adjusted community premium rating rules.
These statutory requirements constrain an insurance
carrier's ability to develop plan designs for a specific niche
of consumers in the market; for example, young and healthy
consumers who may want coverage of a limited number of medical
services at a very low price tag, along with high risk
individuals with specific chronic illnesses like diabetes or
health disease--or heart disease, excuse me. These statutory
requirements also push premiums higher, discouraging younger
healthier individuals from entering the risk pool.
Second, two ACA implementation decisions that have been
made by the Obama administration. In particular, the
administration's transitional policy, which segmented the risk
pool in certain markets and which has prevented healthier risks
from entered the ACA's newly reformed risk pools. This also
includes HHS' and other State-based exchanges limited
enforcement of the eligibility criteria for enrollment during
certain special enrollment periods.
Third, the failure of the individual mandate penalty tax
having its intended effect of encouraging younger healthier
individuals to purchase insurance coverage. These factors, when
aggregated together, are resulting in an unbalanced risk pool,
and the consequences of an unbalanced risk pool are increased
premiums.
What does it mean to have an unbalanced risk pool? In
short, an unbalanced risk pool arises when the pool is made up
of a number of less healthy, heavy medical utilizers, and a
smaller number of younger healthier individuals. Is the ACA's
newly reformed individual market unbalanced? Data from HHS
indicates that only 28 percent of individual market exchange
plan enrollees are between the age of 18 and 34.
Actuaries have suggested that 40 percent of exchange
enrollees in this age cohort are needed to ensure a balanced
risk pool. The IRS has also indicated that 45 percent of the
7.9 million people who paid the individual mandate penalty tax
in 2014 were under age 35.
Objective analysts have also observed that less healthy
heavy medical utilizers have been attracted to the exchanges,
and much of the increased medical claims in 2014 and 2015 came
from individuals who have enrolled during certain special
enrollment periods.
One logical solution to balancing out the risk pools
attracting more younger and healthier individuals into the
market; however, due to the manner in which the ACA constrains
insurance carriers in developing plan designs that may appeal
to younger and healthier individuals, these consumers are less
likely to enter the market.
In addition, the three to one age variant now required when
developing premium rates increases premiums for younger
healthier individuals, which discourages these good health
risks from obtaining coverage.
Another solution is allowing the individual mandate penalty
tax to achieve its intended result. Unfortunately, to date,
objective analysts have not found that the individual mandate
is causing younger healthier individuals to purchase an
individual market plan, evidenced by the HHS and IRS data that
I referenced earlier. And while the individual mandate penalty
tax increased by 600 percent in just 3 years, the penalty tax
will only be indexed to CPI in 2017 and the 2.5 percent of
income threshold will remain constant. It is unlikely that the
slow growing penalty tax will have a substantive impact in
future years.
If younger and healthier individuals do not enter the
market, the risk pool will remain unbalanced, which will cause
insurance carriers to continually increase premiums. Although I
have laid out some of the factors that have led to an
unbalanced risk pool in the individual market, which have
contributed to premium increases, these are solvable problems.
I look forward to working with the witnesses who appear in
front of you today as well as you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Levin, and
all the Members of the Committee. Thank you for your time. I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Condeluci follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Harte, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF TOM HARTE, PRESIDENT, LANDMARK BENEFITS, NH

Mr. HARTE. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Brady, Ranking
Member Levin, and distinguished members of this committee.
As I mentioned earlier by the chairman, my name is Tom
Harte, and my company is Landmark Benefits. I am an employee
benefits broker. I own a small business. I deal with hundreds
of employers throughout the year on their health insurance
benefits, hundreds of individuals trying to access health
insurance, so I come here today with a very unique perspective,
with conversation I have with my clients every day, every year
with regard to the continued challenges that they have with
access to health care as well as access to affordable plans.
I am also here representing the National Association of
Health Underwriters, which represents well over 100,000
employee benefit professionals like myself that are in the
trenches every single day trying to find these affordable
solutions.
Before I jump into some of my comments with regard to the
challenges that I am seeing, I want to also share with you some
of the successes that we have seen over the past 12 months,
that are welcome from me on the frontline of marketplace,
things like passing the PACE Act. In New Hampshire, that made a
big difference. By allowing our State the opportunity to
determine what size group is best for our insureds, but also
avoiding, as Mr. Condeluci referred to, the rate grids and
three to one ratios by allowing my insurance commissioner to
determine what is the best size group for my State, that has
significantly helped us with was with rate grade overload.
Also, the moratorium on the medical device tax, the
suspension of the health insurance tax, as well has the delay
of the Cadillac tax, those are all very welcome from the
clients that I represent every day.
Ranking Member Levin, you also talked about the uninsured
rate. We love the fact that more people are getting insured. We
love the fact that healthcare trend is coming down. Those are
all welcome signs to us in the industry.
But at the same time, when I talk to my clients, what I
thought it would be helpful for you is if I went to some of the
renewals that we are experiencing over the past couple of
months in 2016, my renewals for my clients in the past couple
of months that we looked at have ranged anywhere from just over
11 percent to just shy of 30 percent. Now, these are small
businesses like mine. I have 20 employees, but some of the
clients that I represent have thousands of employees. Those 30
percent rate increases are not just for a select group of small
businesses. They are also affecting large businesses that we
represent in the New England area.
In addition to that, when I look at my clients and where
their health plans have been over the past few years, I have
seen plans transform themselves. And in my written testimony,
you will see that some clients 10 years ago had $1,000
deductible and today they have a $5,000 deductible. So when I
look at healthcare trend, and again, I welcomed healthcare
trend to continue to come down, healthcare trend does not
necessarily represent the renewals that I am delivering to my
clients.
So if the healthcare trend is, let's just say it is 8
percent, because there is different arguments out there with
healthcare trend, that doesn't take into account utilization,
demographic trends, pooling charges, risk adjustments, and many
of the fees that my clients are paying through the passage of
these premiums.
In addition to that, every single client I sit down with,
they are having a reduction in benefits not by their own
decision. They are seeing primary care office copays go from
$25 to $50, specials copays go from $50 to $100. Some are
paying $500 a month for a 30-day prescription at a retail
pharmacy, and that is unacceptable. So what has happened is,
with our uninsured rate falling, we are seeing a greater issue
of the underinsured.
Now, what I mean by that--and again, in my written
testimony, I provided you several graphs, but I wanted to do,
and I did this over the weekend for you, was to show you the
growth in deductibles for some of my clients. Now, I took one
of my account managers at my company and I took their book of
business, and I said: Over the course of a 9-year period, what
has happened to the deductibles for these particular clients.
So I picked them at random, and what I saw was from 2006 to
2015, over a 9-year period, the deductibles for those clients
increased by 479 percent. Over a 5-year period, they have
increased by 329 percent. Over a 3-year period, 137 percent. So
I am submitting to you that a lot of the employees that we
insure every single day could not afford, 9 years ago, $1,000
deductible, and today, they certainly can't afford a $6,300
deductible. And I have to submit to you also that many of our
larger clients have moved to these higher deductibles, putting
their employees in a place where they can't afford to access
basic general health care.
What I will say to you last, and that is one of the
greatest problems that I have in the health insurance industry
is a lack of transparency. Now, I am fortunate. On my iPhone, I
have access to an app that will show me how much it costs to
have access to health care from one facility to the next. But
what will alarm you is that when you look at the statistics,
and you can look at my home State of the New Hampshire, and all
I did was a 30-mile radius from my hometown of Windham, New
Hampshire, and I found that an MRI of the spine has a 436
percent difference from the least expensive facility to the
most expensive facility. And I can name for you several
different medical procedures that have similar differentials in
healthcare costs, but one of the challenges that we need to
focus is transparency in health care. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harte follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Lee, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF PETER LEE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COVERED CALIFORNIA

Mr. LEE. Good morning, Chairman Brady, Ranking Member
Levin, and distinguished Members of the Committee. It is a
pleasure to be with you today.
My name is Peter Lee, and I am the executive director of
Covered California, the State of California's marketplace
implementing the Affordable Care Act.
And what I would like to speak to briefly, and it is in
more detail in my written remarks is first how the Affordable
Care Act is working today; second, taking a look at what are
the prospects for health insurance premiums in 2017; and third,
some of the tools we are using in California to bring
competition and affordability to California's consumers.
So first, the Affordable Care Act is working on many
levels. Nationally, the share of Americans of all ages who are
uninsured has fallen to the lowest level in history. 9.1
percent at the end of 2015. In California, 8.1 percent.
In addition, Americans have reported that they are spending
less of their money, less struggling to meet their healthcare
expenses than ever before. Now, this means 16 percent of
Americans say they have trouble meeting healthcare bills. That
is still a lot of Americans having trouble, but it is lower
than it has ever been.
As we look ahead, it is important to remember that before
the Affordable Care Act, consumers in the individual market
regularly saw double-digit rate increases, saw increases that
we just heard employers are seeing today, up to 30 percent. But
in the old days, consumers couldn't change, couldn't shop,
couldn't move plans. They now can.
The Affordable Care Act has slowed rate increases, creating
competitive markets that are giving consumers the power to shop
for better value.
Now, in California, last year, our rate increase was, on
average, 4 percent. But if consumers shop to find the lowest
cost plan available to them in their area at the same level,
they would have reduced their cost by 4-and-a-half percent.
That is the power of a marketplace working.
In addition, through the expansion caused by the Affordable
Care Act, of 10 million people having subsidies, those are
generally healthy people lowering costs to all Americans
because they are now part of the risk pool, as you have heard
many of the speakers speak to the importance of the risk pool.
So 2017, let's look ahead. It is going to be a transition
year, and I think that it is important to know the main factors
for that. First, the temporary reinsurance program is going
away. That has been a program that has helped keep premiums low
the last few years. It will have a 1 year impact. Experts
estimate between 4 and 7 percent one time, and then that goes
away.
Second, plans have had trouble pricing, and you have heard
this from a number of the witnesses already, in particular,
States that did not transition to a common risk pool, plans did
not know how to price, to get pricing right is difficult, and
there is a number of plans that are adjusting this year, but by
the end of next year, those transitional plans are going to be
gone, all one risk pool.
Third, a number of plans have struggled with understanding
this special enrollment people coming in. We have seen that
issue being unforeseen by plans. We have also seen new
guidelines and processes, both Federal and State level that
should mitigate those problems in the future.
Trends are going up because healthcare costs are going up,
and a key part of that, especially drug costs and
pharmaceutical costs.
But finally, what is keeping rates down is competition.
Competition drives pricing. Let me speak to you briefly about
what we are doing in California to make sure that consumers are
the drivers of the healthcare marketplace.
First, in California, we actually actively solicit health
plans to participate in our marketplace, but we don't take
everyone. They have to agree to play and try to improve
healthcare delivery. They need to offer standard patient-
centered designs, that make sure when consumers have a
deductible, that deductible doesn't stand in front of a
consumer in getting their primary care, which is never the case
in our standard benefit designs.
It also means, those patient-centered designs, consumers
can truly shop for what they really care about, which is the
networks, the prices, and which doctors are in those networks.
That is what consumers care about. They are able to shop in
California, and that shopping is driving plans to put better
prices on the table.
Now, I would note that, in California, we actually have
from the most recent study from CMS, the lowest risk score,
meaning we have the healthiest risk mix in the Nation. Risk mix
is a core part of what we all have to be doing. That requires
extensive marketing like we are doing, working with insurance
agencies we have been doing, and having the subsidies that
bring people to the table. But also, we have to be changing the
underlying cost of health care.
The fundamental issue we have is health care is too
expensive in America. Covered California has as part of our
contracts with our health plans, requirements that they do
things like make sure a consumer has a doctor within 60 days.
That is a new requirement starting this next year. Making sure
that they are paying differently to align with that work to
actually improve the quality of care, which is the real driver
of health care.
Our job is not done. I look forward to taking your
questions now, but I also look forward to the work that we are
all doing to improve on the Affordable Care Act. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you all for your excellent testimony.
We will now proceed to the question and answer session, and I
will begin.
I know it is sort of common to just claim Republicans are
fighting against Obamacare, but in our view, we are fighting
for patients and local businesses who have been hurt by this
law. I have a constituent in Huntsville who purchased coverage
for his family on the Federal exchange. He wrote to me: My
health insurance costs $989 a month. That is almost a 1,000
percent increase in healthcare costs. So much for being
affordable, but what can we do?
Another constituent from the Woodlands where I live writes:
The second year in a row, BlueCross/BlueShield is canceling my
policy. Further, for 2016, no insurance carrier in Texas is
offering individual PPO policies. So much for choice. My
insurance premiums for the closest of coverage to what I have
now, going up $200 a month after going up $900 a month in 2015.
So much for insurance rates going down. So much for more
choice.
Now, look, many of my constituents are worse off now than
they were before this law was passed. Certainly those who like
their healthcare plan, many of them couldn't keep to them at
all. Mr. White, some of the work your organizations have been
done, I think it is worth highlighting, when the ACA was being
debated, we were told by CBO that over 20 million people would
want to enroll in the individual exchanges. That has not proven
to be true at all. It is less than half of that number who
actually enrolled.
We also were told young healthy people are signing up at
much lower levels than expected. As you pointed out, only 37
percent of people, of those who enrolled, were under the age of
34.
So why are so few people enrolling in these plans? And in
New York, one out of five that could get help in those
exchanges are in the exchange, one out of five are in there.
Mr. WHITE. I believe it is a combination of factors, but we
believe the primary factor is cost. These are just not
producing the value for people in ways that they want to sign
up for these plans. They are very high deductibles, very high
cost-sharing amounts, and coupled with the premium, I mean, in
your example, the $900 a month, that individual is spending
more than $10,000, right, a year on the premium, probably with
a significant deductible. Some of what we are seeing in the
marketplace is 5, 6, 7, $10,000 deductibles. So if you are
paying $10,000 on the premium and a $10,000 deductibles, you
wonder does that actually make sense, or would I just pay the
individual mandate tax penalty and self-insure us, in effect.
Chairman BRADY. Yeah. Thank you. Mr. Condeluci, do you
think--are you surprised enrollment was so much lower than
predicted? Do you see any change?
Mr. CONDELUCI. I think there are two reasons for the lower
than anticipated enrollment. One is the transitional policy
that I cited, as Mr. Lee spoke about. In short, the
transitional policy allowed not only individuals in the
individual market but employees of small employers to stay on
nonACA compliant plans.
So while the Congressional Budget Office, for example,
expected a number of smaller employers to drop coverage, those
small employers did not drop coverage and send their
individuals to the individual market exchange market due to the
fact that they could stay on their nonACA compliant plan.
Now, not every State has adopted this transitional policy,
but for my count, there are about 35 to 40 States that have
indeed adopted a transitional policy both in the individual
market as well as the small group market. So I think that is
one of the reasons why you are not seeing as much enrollment.
The other is, we touched on it, I spoke about it in my
testimony, is the younger and healthier folks are not finding
insurance appealing, and the minimum insurance standards and
the adjusted community rating rules, while consumer protections
that were arguably needed in the marketplace are carrying with
them higher costs. It is just the nature of how it works. If
you have a health plan that is covering more benefits for
medical services, that is going to become more expensive. So
the carriers, in an effort to try to develop premium rates that
are reasonable, had to increase the cost sharing, so shift more
costs onto the policyholder, as well as narrow the networks by
pushing out some of the providers or reducing the provider
payments for those doctors and hospitals that are in that
network. And those actions are making insurance unattractive,
in addition to the cost increases that you might see.
The last point is, I do recognize that the premium subsidy
for those folks who are subsidy eligible, between 100 percent
of the Federal poverty level and 400 percent of the poverty
level, do get a premium subsidy if they are purchasing an
individual market plan through an exchange, and that does blunt
much of the premium increases.
But younger folks are still paying a percentage of income
out of their own pocket for a policy. That is what the statute
requires, and that also is not enough to convince a younger,
healthier individual to purchase a plan when you are balancing
that or balancing that up against a fairly low individual
mandate penalty tax.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Harte, you looked at trends
with your real world people that you are trying to cover in
their plans. So do you see anything changing? I mean, do you
see costs continuing to increase? Do you see networks
continuing to narrow going forward?
Mr. HARTE. Even if we just looked at medical trend and just
said that premium increases were a direct correlation to
medical trend at 8 percent, that means that health insurance
premiums will double in about 7--I am sorry, 9 years. That is
unacceptable. So I have always preached from the choir. I have
talked so much about it. Health insurance is expensive because
health care is expensive.
Now, within the ACA, medical loss ratio is built in there,
and it was a safeguard from insurance companies, from taking
and collecting too much in premium and not paying enough out in
health care. So when I talk to folks all over the country, I
say, well, why don't we start focussing in on, as ACA
determined, the 80 to 85 percent of premium dollars that go to
pay for health care.
So when I talk about transparency or when I talk about
wellness initiatives and other ways to reduce the cost of
health care, that is the real solutions for us to start
considering in having a long-term impact on employer solutions.
So in answer to your question, Chairman Brady, I don't see
any light at the end of the tunnel based upon current
regulations, current legislation, current environments, and on
all the issues that this panel has talked about today with
losing carriers and increased premiums, I, myself, see my
clients continue to be faced with double-digit rate increases
for the next 5 years.
Chairman BRADY. Yeah. Well, we were promised that families
would have lower premiums by $2,500 a year. I haven't found one
family in my district do that. When medical trend costs are 8
percent but some States are facing 50 percent increases in
premiums, there is a deeper problem here, in my view.
So I now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member from
Michigan, Mr. Levin, for your questions.
Mr. LEVIN. Now, Mr. Chairman, remember that 85 percent of
the people in the marketplace are receiving some assistance to
obtain health care. So for them, their premiums are lower than
it otherwise would be.
Mr. Condeluci, you are shaking your head yes. I mean, look
at the whole picture. Look at the whole picture. You don't want
to do that, including in Texas. And you said the number of
people in the marketplace is less than expected. There were
various estimates. But how many people are in the marketplace
who otherwise would not be? We are talking about what, 10
million? And the majority sat here for years in the majority
and never did anything at all to address the disgraceful fact
in this country, 50 million people going to sleep every night
without any healthcare coverage in terms of insurance.
And how much were premiums going up before ACA, Mr. Harte?
How much were they going up annually, before ACA?
Mr. HARTE. Before ACA, double digits every year.
Mr. LEVIN. Okay. So you just do that over your 5-year
period. So you had premium increases before ACA, double digit,
they were something like 14, 15 percent a year on average,
right?
Mr. HARTE. Yeah.
Mr. LEVIN. And yet the Republican majority sat here doing
nothing. So let's, Mr. Lee, talk a bit about the risk pool
issue, because we all knew it was a factor, and in fact, when
we had whatever you want to call it, the penalty or the
provision, there was debate as to where it would set to try to
stimulate people to be covered.
We also should remember, in terms of younger people, how
many people are now covered through their parents' insurance
who were not covered before. Anybody know, on the panel, the
number of people covered as a result of that? Mr. Lee.
Mr. LEE. I believe about 2-and-a-half million? Under 26-
year-olds are on their parents' policies.
Mr. LEVIN. So Mr. Lee, you want to comment on this issue in
terms of the risk pool and others, because my guess is, at
least in terms of some of you, you might be willing to sit down
and discuss how we make ACA work even better. I am not sure how
much you are part and parcel reel of this repeal or rip up ACA
effort by the majority here. So let's talk for just a minute. I
have just under 2 minutes.
Mr. Lee, how do we address the issue of more and more
younger people coming in? There has been some discussion,
eliminate the minimum standards. I don't think you want to do
that entirely. Right, Mr. Condeluci, you don't want to do that?
Mr. CONDELUCI. Yes, sir. I am not suggesting that you
eliminate the minimum insurance standards, but from at least my
perspective, my opinion, of course, those minimum standards are
a bit constraining. The essential health benefits, for example,
and the actuary value requirement, which is tied to the
essential health benefits, essentially require plans to cover
benefits and services that many policyholders don't want or
need, depending on the type of individual, but those
individuals still have to pay for those services.
Mr. LEVIN. Okay. So as we continue to improve ACA, we will
discuss that. Mr. Lee, you want to comment?
Mr. LEE. Yeah, a couple of things. One is it is really
important for, in the marketplace, where we are providing
subsidies, as you know, to California, about 90 percent of the
people that enroll, it is about affordability, and we are still
new in this venture of educating and doing outreach.
We spend, in California $100,000,000 to do marketing and
outreach. We are selling insurance. Because even with the
subsidy, people are making a choice to use some of their hard-
earned dollars to buy insurance.
And the issue about the penalty has come up, but I want to
be clear. We have done a lot of market testing, surveying, the
big issue is can people afford it on a day-to-day basis, and
the penalty is part of the equation, but I think the issue
about affordability is critical, the issue about doing
effective marketing and outreach is vital.
In California, last year, 38 percent of our enrollment was
in that targeted age range. It takes time to change from a
culture of people just coping and thinking they cannot get
coverage to having a culture of coverage, and that is what we
are moving into, and it is going to take ongoing effort.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. All time is expired.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, thanks to
Obamacare, my constituents are facing rapidly rising health
insurance premiums, as well as, problems accessing care.
Earlier this year, NBC 5 in Dallas ran a story about a
Plano couple by the name of Cris and William Lyle who bought
health insurance through healthcare.gov. Their plan cost $435 a
month, but here is the thing. The Lyles had a problem finding a
doctor according--and that is happening again today. According
to the news piece, they reached out to about 20 doctors, but
not one of these docs took their insurance. Ultimately they
were able to find a doctor, and they were also concerned about
finding a specialist.
Mr. Condeluci and Mr. White, the Lyle story is becoming all
too common as health insurers are narrowing their networks in
an attempt to keep costs down. In fact, a recent study found
that over half the plans on the exchanges were narrow network
plans like HMOs.
So first with you, Mr. Condeluci, doesn't that make it
harder for consumers, such as the Lyles, to actually see the
doctors they want and get the care they need in a timely
manner?
Mr. CONDELUCI. I will answer your question, sir, and say
yes, generally speaking. The other kind of caveat to that is,
you know, some folks don't mind, let's say, handcuffing
themselves to a particular provider or a particular health
system. So in that case, maybe that consumer is okay with
having a narrow network which does carry with it lower cost.
But there are other policyholders, and as we all know, everyone
has different needs, different desires, different aversion to
risk, and those individuals might not want to handcuff
themselves to just that particular health system or healthcare
provider, and that limits the choice for that particular
individual, which then, I would argue, makes insurance
unappealing. If you add the added cost, as we have discussed,
and just as a followup to Mr. Levin's question, with these
minimum standards, again, they carry with it increased cost.
There are new premium rating rules that actually increase
cost for younger healthier individuals. It is those type of new
minimum standards, while very good consumer protections, are a
bit constraining that if they were loosened up, could allow an
insurance carrier to let's say offer more broad networks at a
reasonable price point as opposed to being forced into the
position to narrowing that network in order to lower cost to
offer it to consumers.
Mr. JOHNSON. Mr. White, do you agree with that?
Mr. WHITE. I do agree with that. I think this is a logical
response to the constraints of the law. The Affordable Care Act
basically says you have got to cover all these benefits, you
have got to offer it within these metal tiers, and you can't
use the premium rating tools that you would normally use pre-
ACA. And so there are only a few places that the insurers could
go to compete based on a premium price point, and that was
largely on a cost-sharing side and then on the narrow network
side.
And so they tried to use those tools to negotiate rates
through the narrow networks, and that was an important tactic,
I think, early on in the ACA.
What we are seeing now is fewer PPOs on the exchanges, so
there are more narrow networks definitely emerging, and then
off exchange, we are seeing a lot more broader networks, a lot
more access to specialists and other types of providers.
So this is a logical response to the law. It is
unfortunate, but you know, we believe it can be addressed
through additional flexibility on the exchanges.
Mr. JOHNSON. Is it true, in your opinion, that some people
may only have access to one insurer or access to a plan with
limited networks?
Mr. WHITE. Yes, sir. What we are expecting, according to a
Kaiser analysis, is about 650 counties, maybe more, with only
one plan. One plan is not a choice of plans, and so that is
very concerning. As competition decreases, we see premium rates
increase.
Mr. JOHNSON. Is that getting better or worse?
Mr. WHITE. Excuse me, sir?
Mr. JOHNSON. Is it getting better or worse?
Mr. WHITE. That is a worsening development. We are seeing
these counties with one plans emerge, largely in rural areas,
and is not good for consumers. It is not good for competition.
It is its not good ultimately for costs for subsidies, and for
the U.S. Treasury.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Rangel, you are recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for calling this hearing.
I was wondering why we were having this, but then I
recognize we are about to have our national conventions, and so
I assume this is to sharpen up our skills for the convention.
First of all, if there is a problem with the Affordable
Care Act as it relates to premiums, it would just seem to me,
it would make a lot of sense to have the administration here to
explain why we have this problem, but since you saw to select
three witnesses that are not a part of the administration,
let's find out who they are.
Now, Mr. White, you used to work for the leadership in the
Senate, the Republican leadership doing what? Mr. White, did
you work for the House, the Senate or----
Mr. WHITE. I worked for this committee for 6 years, sir.
Mr. RANGEL. Under whose--what committee?
Mr. WHITE. The Ways and Means Committee.
Mr. RANGEL. Who was the chairman?
Mr. WHITE. Chairman Bill Thomas, from 2001 to 2007.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. Now, what did you do before you came to
work for the Ways and Means Committee?
Mr. WHITE. Before that, I worked for 2 years with
Congressman Jim Greenwood from Pennsylvania, and before that, I
worked for Congressman Chris Shays for 4 years from
Connecticut.
Mr. RANGEL. All Republicans, right?
Mr. WHITE. All Republicans, correct.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. Now, you are in charge of a--president
and counsel for Affordable Health Coverage?
Mr. WHITE. Yes, sir.
Mr. RANGEL. Is that a for-profit organization?
Mr. WHITE. It is a nonprofit 501(c)(6).
Mr. RANGEL. And how long did it take before you left the
Congress that you head up this organization?
Mr. WHITE. I left in January of 2007, and I became
president of CAHC in December of 2008, so that was----
Mr. RANGEL. So it wasn't you went from the Congress to this
organization.
Mr. WHITE. Right.
Mr. RANGEL. Now, Mr. Condeluci, is your outfit a for-profit
or not-for-profit?
Mr. CONDELUCI. I run my own practice, sir, which is a for-
profit legal and policy practice.
Mr. RANGEL. What did you do before you ran this outfit?
Mr. CONDELUCI. Prior to that, I was an attorney with a law
firm, and prior to that, I was counsel to the Senate Finance
Committee. Prior to that----
Mr. RANGEL. How long were you with the Senate Finance
Committee?
Mr. CONDELUCI. April of 2007 to September of 2010.
Mr. RANGEL. Who was the chairman?
Mr. CONDELUCI. Chairman Baucus was--or Max Baucus was the
chairman at the time. I was on the Republican professional
staff, and at the time, Senator Grassley was the Ranking
Member.
Mr. RANGEL. So okay. You worked for Republicans. How long
was it before you left the Congress that you joined the PLLC in
Washington?
Mr. CONDELUCI. When I left the committee in September 2010,
I went back to the law firm to practice law.
Mr. RANGEL. How long was it before you went from the time I
am talking about leaving the Congress and----
Mr. CONDELUCI. I started my CC Law & Policy practice in----
Mr. RANGEL. How long was it?
Mr. CONDELUCI [continuing]. September of 2014, so 6 years.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you. Mr. Harte, you were president of
some National Association of Health Underwriters.
Mr. HARTE. That is correct.
Mr. RANGEL. Is that insurance agents?
Mr. HARTE. Yes.
Mr. RANGEL. Brokers?
Mr. HARTE. Yes.
Mr. RANGEL. So you represent the insurance business, right?
Mr. HARTE. We like to say that we represent the American
consumer for health insurance, but our membership is
predominantly agents, brokers, and consultants who represent
corporations.
Mr. RANGEL. But you were lauded for what you were doing for
the brokers and insurance company when you got elected, right?
I mean, for----
Mr. HARTE. I believe I received recognition for addressing
the escalating cost of health care. That is what I am known for
is dealing with health insurance premiums.
Mr. RANGEL. Well, anyway, with all due respect to you
gentlemen, I really don't see how we can get to the core of the
problem we face as a Congress and as a Nation.
Mr. Chairman, it would seem to me that these are qualified
people respecting their constituency, but our constituency are
not insurance agencies, they are not employers, it is the
people that are trying to gain access to health care. If for
any reason we find higher premiums than we expected, I really
don't expect these gentlemen to have the answers to the
problems.
The answer has to be with who made the mistakes and how can
we correct it, and it would seem to me it is done by law and
not by those people that are engaged in for-profit for good
reason and mature-ish reasons, efforts. So I am ready for
Philadelphia, I hope you are ready for Cleveland, but I just
don't see what relationship this hearing has for improving the
quality of care for American citizens. Thank you. I yield back
whatever balance of the time I have remaining.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you for establishing the credentials
of our witnesses, and God forbid we hear from real people about
real problems in health care because they are serious ones.
Mr. Tiberi, you are recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
having this hearing today. You know, if I am back home
watching, I can't imagine what our constituents think.
It would have taken us back to when we were the majority
and then in the minority, and you all passed the Affordable
Care Act, I sat down there, and we talked about those 40 to 50
million people who didn't have health care, we talked about the
fact that they access the most expensive coverage by walking
into an emergency room, and that the Affordable Care Act was
going to help them. We also talked about, or the President
talked about if you like what you have you can keep it, okay.
And I sometimes get frustrated because I know in my heart that
when the Affordable Care Act was passed, it was done with good
intentions. I really believe that.
But I also know and have seen that a lot of Americans
actually like the health care they have--they had and now
don't, and we simply have a difficult time communicating with
each other to recognize the challenges of what the new law
created to try to help the 40 to 50 million people who didn't
have health care.
The irony is, as chairman of the health subcommittee in
visiting hospitals in is my district, there are still people
who are accessing the emergency room as their primary care,
which is the most expensive care.
We have a building boom of emergency room departments
freestanding in America today, which is a whole other
discussion. But I want to associate myself with the chairman's
remarks because real people are experiencing problems in their
health care who didn't have problems before. You have created
new problems because of the health care bill, all maybe
unintentionally, by the way.
Let me tell you about Mr. and Mrs. Dean Wagner of
Westerville, Ohio. They worked their entire lives. They both
retired, and since the Affordable Care Act has passed, they
have experienced 75 percent--75 percent increase in premiums,
75 percent. Ms. Dianne Smothers in Johnstown, Ohio sacrificed
higher premiums in order to keep the doctor she wanted to keep,
and then she finds out that her doctor was suddenly canceled
with no warning when a coop in my district, and now a majority
of coops have failed, coops created by the Affordable Care Act.
When that coop failed, she and her husband's out-of-pocket
expenses were $16,500 more than they had ever been before the
Affordable Care Act had passed. These are regular middle class
folks.
Unfortunately, for the Wagners and the Smothers, they are
not the only constituents that I have talked to who have
contacted my office that are facing outrageous premium
increases, outrageous out-of-pocket expenses like they have
never experienced before, and now going to a doctor that they
didn't want to go to because they can't go to the doctor they
had, which they were promised over and over again.
Mr. White and Mr. Condeluci, I wanted to ask you about a
specific failure of the ACA that has been reported widely now.
The coop program. I was here when that was discussed, and it
was a nod to the public option for some Democrats who wanted
the public option. I believe 8 of the 23 that began remain, and
one of those, as I said, was InHealth that failed in Ohio.
22,000 lives were covered, and these people were left
devastated.
So instead what was supposed to happen with these coops was
to create competition. It seems that the coops badly mispriced
premiums, artificially creating a lower market, underpricing
the market, and in doing so artificially, did it hold down
premiums initially? Meaning, you know, there was a lot of
ballyhoo about premiums didn't go up immediately. Is that
because the coops provided this artificial floor?
Mr. WHITE. I will take the first shot at this, I guess.
So according to the Government Accountability Office, they
did a report, they looked at the premium rates and basically
said that in about half the rating areas the premium rates were
substantially below market rates. So they were coming in with a
below market rate. Of course, they had significant taxpayer
support in establishing the coops and getting off the ground,
but were trying to attract enrollment through those lower
premium rates.
And I think what happened was the premium rate, the
experience, cost experience, quickly outpaced the premiums that
they were charging, and the vast majority of the coops, as you
know, have since failed. And the insurers that remain in the
markets had to pick up and cover those folks who lost their
coverage through the coops. Significant problem in Ohio, Iowa,
other areas, as the committee knows.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Dr. McDermott, you are
recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I always love to
come to these propaganda hearings before the elections, and it
is obvious we are trying to hold the insurance companies
harmless here. Premiums go up because of the Affordable Care
Act, that is why they go up.
But I lived for 45 years with a father who was an insurance
underwriter, so I know a little bit about what goes on.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And if you look at why the premiums go up,
it is either because the company misjudged and made a bad rate
to charge people or the costs of the medical profession have
gone up uncontrollably.
Mr. Lee, what percentage of those two things do you think
is bringing the premiums up? Is it misjudgment by the insurance
companies or is it that medicine is jacking up the costs?
Mr. LEE. I think it varies by locale. I think in much of
the country, it is because the plans, whether co-ops or for-
profit or nonprofit plans, got their risk mix wrong, and they
underpriced and are now jacking it up to catch up on the real
costs.
But underlying this, and we have heard this from all the
witnesses, the driver of healthcare costs is the underlying
cost of what it costs to deliver health care to Americans. And
that is one of things I think the Affordable Care Act provides
some tools for, but we need to be focusing on.
In California, we have not seen consumers whipsawed by big
price changes. They have been pretty constant. But costs are
still going up and we need to address those with tools of
transparency and others.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Let me take an example, because we hear a
lot of examples given up here. They give these horror stories
of Mr. Johnson or Mrs. Williams or whatever and her problem.
Let's take Texas. Now, if you were an insurance company in
Texas and you were trying to set the rates for Texas, and you
had 1,314,000 people uncovered by insurance in your market who
have access to the emergency rooms, and they go in, they get
sick, and they get taken care of and their costs are unpaid for
by any insurance company, how does an insurance company factor
in that number of people? I mean, the Governor of Texas said: I
don't care about those people. I am not going to take Medicaid
for them. They are floating around in Texas.
How does the insurance company take that into account?
Mr. LEE. Again, how insurance companies I believe take that
into account is by what they are going to get charged by
providers. And what happens with uncompensated care is
hospitals or doctors make it up on the other side. So those
costs for the uncompensated care is right now being paid in
Texas by employers, by individuals, et cetera, where those
costs are being spread.
Where you have expanded coverage, like in California and
the 35 other States or more that have expanded Medicaid, is
every American is benefiting by having coverage, because you
aren't then having the cost shift, which it is called, of
everyone, employer-based, people, individuals, picking up the
costs of the uncovered, which hospitals pass that through to
the health insurance companies and their rates.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Lee, you might be confused. Dr.
McDermott asked about those who would be covered by Medicaid.
They aren't in the exchanges. Why would an insurer plug that in
if they are covered by Medicaid?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Reclaiming my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LEE. My point is, as I was understanding the example of
Texas of a million people that do not have coverage, when they
show up at an ER at a hospital, they are uncompensated care,
and that cost is passed on to insurance companies or employer-
based coverage, et cetera.
Chairman BRADY. But you agree those who aren't covered on
Medicaid are not in the exchanges, they are not factored in.
Mr. LEE. Absolutely right. Absolutely right. That is what I
understood the question to be. Did I get the question wrong?
Chairman BRADY. We will give you some more time, Dr.
McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I think the chairman has really put a sharp
point on it. The Governor of Texas decided he didn't want
health care coverage for 1.2 million or 1,314,000 people. So
they still get sick, and their costs are factored into the
system, and the insurance company jacks up the prices to cover
for what isn't paid for in other places.
Chairman BRADY. That is not accurate, Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I mean, hospitals do that. They add a couple
of dollars on the room rate to cover for their unaccounted
costs.
Now, I have another question, though. We have in the Part
D, we had risk corridors to control the costs for the drug
companies or the people who were putting out the drug coverage.
We had it also in the ACA. In the Part D, it is still working.
In Part A they have cut it out. It seems to me that we have
undermined the ACA by cutting out that money in those risk
corridors.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman BRADY. I just want to clarify, those who are in
Medicaid are not in the exchanges, they are not factored in the
insurance premiums. Now, the more than a million Texans who
decided to pay the tax rather than go to a plan they don't want
and can't afford, that is another story.
Mr. LEVIN. Can he answer that since you took the time?
Chairman BRADY. Sure. Are those who are covered in Medicaid
factored into the insurance exchanges?
Mr. LEVIN. Of course they are factored in.
Mr. LEE. The cost of uninsured are basically borne by
everyone, both in marketplaces and in employer-based coverage,
because the hospitals pick up those costs and others can----
Chairman BRADY. We are not taking about employer-based. We
are talking about the exchanges and the insurance premiums.
They are not covered in that package? Are they reflected in the
Medicaid rates?
Mr. LEE. The uninsured that have uncompensated care,
hospitals, other providers, build that into their rates that
are charged to people in marketplaces or in employer-based
care, and that is a factor in terms of raising costs.
Chairman BRADY. You are confusing the Medicaid populations
with the insurance agents.
Mr. LEVIN. No, he is not. You are the one who is confused,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Reichert, you are recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So let's deal in some facts. ObamaCare has proven time and
time that promises made were not kept. The President promised
affordability, yet the law continues to drive up premiums and
deductible costs.
We need to look no further than my home State for evidence.
Insurers in Washington have requested an average of 13.5
percent increase. That is for individual plans for next year,
with at least one insurer requesting increases of almost 20
percent.
The President promised Americans that if they liked their
plan they could keep it, if they liked their doctor they could
keep their doctor. Well, that turned out not to be true.
And I was in a meeting 6 years ago, as were a lot of the
Republicans, when the President was asked to come and speak to
us, and he was asked the question: Can you keep your health
plan? Can you keep your doctor? And he said: Well, you know,
there might have been some language snuck into the bill that
runs contrary to that promise. The President said that.
Premera Blue Cross and LifeWise Health Plan of Washington,
a subsidiary of Premera, announced that they will completely
withdraw from Washington Health Benefit Exchange in 12 counties
in Washington State. The result is thousands of my constituents
will lose their health plan and be forced into another whether
they like it or not or they will be taxed for failing to sign
up for a healthcare plan.
So my question is for Mr. White. What do you think is
causing insurers to exit the market? And how do you think that
will impact the choice and access to care for constituents like
mine, especially in rural communities?
Mr. WHITE. I think your experience is not unlike other
State experiences in terms of the double-digit premium
increases and the exit of certain insurers from the
marketplace. I think the insurers are leaving the marketplaces
because they are losing money. And probably the most prominent
example of that is United Health Group. But there are other
insurers in the marketplace who are looking at various
geographic-based markets and saying: We can't afford to stay
there.
Now, Congressman McDermott made the comparison to Part D
and having risk corridors and risk adjustment and reinsurance,
and I would note, in the Part D market, where the model is
based on a competitive model, there are 800 or so plans
available nationwide. In the average marketplace you have
approximately a choice of about 34 plans. The ACA experience is
opposite that. It is marked by fewer plan choices, plans
exiting markets, and premiums that are not stable but are going
up significantly.
Mr. REICHERT. So you said there were 600 counties in the
country that will be down to one choice?
Mr. WHITE. According to a Kaiser Family Foundation
analysis.
Mr. REICHERT. Three of those will be in the district that I
represent. What is the answer to----
Mr. WHITE. Well, it raises interesting questions, right?
Like the subsidy is supposed to be tied to the second-lowest-
cost Silver plan under the law. And if there is only one plan,
what is that second-lowest-cost option? The other thing is that
having a choice of one is no real choice at all, right?
So in my opinion, flexing up the market, allowing some
competition in the exchanges, and perhaps allowing consumers to
take their subsidy, make it portable, and allow them to leave
the ACA exchanges to buy a plan off exchange, I think Chairman
Brady has called this concept like a subsidy backpack, but
being able to carry that outside to really use that subsidy and
that assistance off the exchange we think is a very important
reform that would generate competition and hopefully encourage
more insurers to get back in the market.
Mr. REICHERT. Current law doesn't allow that to happen.
Mr. WHITE. Current law does not allow the subsidy to be
used off exchange. There is some flexibility----
Mr. REICHERT. I am sorry. The ACA, then, is in violation of
its own law which requires that you have at least two choices.
Is that what I heard you say?
Mr. WHITE. I would defer to maybe Chris or, you know, a
legal opinion on that. But it creates some interesting
questions, let's say, in the various marketplaces.
Mr. CONDELUCI. Sir, in the exchanges, if a carrier is
participating, the statute does require the carrier to offer a
Silver-level plan, as well as a Gold-level plan. So that is
just a requirement that a carrier wanting to participate in the
exchange has to meet.
But when it comes to other carriers being a part of that
market, there is not that similar requirement. Carrier Chris
might say: Hey, I am fine, I will offer a Silver and a Gold.
Carrier Joel might go: You know what? I don't want to enter the
market for a myriad of reasons.
So that, I hope, is an explanation of that.
Mr. REICHERT. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis, you are recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lee, 20 million people have been covered by the
Affordable Care Act and we have a historically low number of
uninsured Americans. How does reducing the number of uninsured
impact premiums in the employer-sponsored insurance market?
Mr. LEE. The relationship there is that providers, in
particular hospitals, will take uncompensated care and build
that into the rates they charge individuals or people that have
employer-based coverage. And so that raises the cost of
insurance, whether it is in an individual market or in
employer-based coverage. So the expansion of coverage that we
have seen through both exchange coverage and through the
Medicaid expansion has been a factor in lowering what premiums
would have been otherwise.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Lee, could you tell us what is the impact of
competition on insurance rates in your State, the State of
California?
Mr. LEE. Yeah. We think competition is vitally important. I
think everyone up here on this panel would agree with that, is
that for the 90 percent of Americans that have three plans or
more to choose from--and in California it is far more than 90
percent--plan competition is what drives premiums. The plans
know that consumers want the lowest price plan, and they will
shop for that. And that is the main driver of keeping costs
down.
And so I think everything we can do to foster a competitive
marketplace and to give consumers an ability to make informed
decisions between plans is vital. In California, we have had
both of those. We have had a vibrant competition across the
vast majority of the State. And consumers know when they are
choosing plan A versus plan B it is not because of some quirk
on deductibles. It is because of a different network. So they
know what they are buying. We think that has contributed to our
good risk mix.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Lee, in my district, in the city of Atlanta,
HIV infection rates are very concerning. From your testimony,
it seemed that you have experience in reducing healthcare and
insurance costs to consumers. What action or policies can make
it easier for people, especially those living with HIV and
AIDS, to access and afford the medication they need?
Mr. LEE. Well, I think one of the most important things the
Affordable Care Act has done is change the rules of the game
for insurance companies to not be about avoiding sick people,
but now getting people who are sick the care they need when
they need it.
Part of what we have done in California is have in our
patient-centered benefit designs limits on cost of high-cost
specialty drugs, which are a major concern into the drive in
expense, but we want people that have to get specialty drugs to
not have their copay be a barrier between them and getting
those drugs.
So we both require for people with HIV a mix of drugs at
lower formulary tiers, but also for the most expensive drugs,
that may cost $60,000 a year, that a consumer would only have
$250 a month they would need to spend for their share of the
costs.
And this is part of the balancing act we need to wrestle
with as a Nation, is we need to be addressing the rising costs
of pharmaceuticals, the rising cost of specialty drugs. But
let's not do that in ways that don't give lifesaving drugs to
consumers because of their high cost. And that is a balancing
act we have struck in our patient-centered designs in
California.
Mr. LEWIS. And, Mr. Lee, I for one want to thank you for
all of your great and good work, and for your vision in helping
to provide health care, not just for the people of California,
but for the people of our Nation.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Boustany, you are recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. White, I am going to step back and ask some very, very
basic questions. Do you believe we have a functioning market in
health care today? Is it a functional market?
Mr. WHITE. I believe there are a lot of warts in the
market. It functions for some people and I think it doesn't
work for a lot----
Mr. BOUSTANY. Okay. So it is a poorly functioning market.
Mr. WHITE. Poorly functioning would be the phrase I would
use.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Poorly functioning market.
I noted that the President just within the last 24 hours, I
believe, admitted that it is a poorly functioning market as a
result of this law, ObamaCare, when he called for a renewed
effort to put forth a public option and to raise subsidies. I
think that is a pretty tacit admission that the market is
failing. Is that correct?
Mr. WHITE. I think it highlights some of those warts. And I
think other people have suggested that we need to expand cost-
sharing subsidies to fill in these very large cost-sharing
requirements on the exchanges. And that also is a recognition
that these things are growing like crazy.
Mr. BOUSTANY. And just a moment ago you referenced the fact
that we are seeing significant consolidation in the insurance
marketplace, which means fewer choices, correct?
Mr. WHITE. It may mean fewer choices. It may not. So what
we are seeing in the exchanges right now is there are choices
of plans available in most markets. I think the average is
somewhere around six or seven. It may be different in
California.
So there are still choices. What I am suggesting is that
there is consolidation on both the insurer side and the
provider side----
Mr. BOUSTANY. Correct.
Mr. WHITE [continuing]. And that those raise trend on
medical costs questions in different directions.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Exactly. And if you have a functioning
market, there are certain characteristics that are required--
information, transparency about provider quality, about cost,
about insurance coverage. I see contraction in what is going on
there as a result of fewer choices, less information. We still
don't have the kind of information we need to really have a
good functioning market, both on the provider side and on the
insurance side.
And then information choice and control ultimately.
Shouldn't the consumer decide and have the information to be
able to make decisions to have a really truly functioning
market?
Mr. WHITE. Yeah. I think information is the lifeblood of a
functioning marketplace. We don't see those on exchanges today.
In December of 2015, we did a report card on exchanges and
graded the exchanges from A to F. We looked at all the State
exchanges in healthcare.gov, and healthcare.gov was solidly at
a C level, which hopefully they will improve next year. But
they are not providing basic information on is the provider in
the network, is the drug on the formulary, how much is the
patient facing out of pocket for that formulary drug, is there
is a smart plan sorting tool, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So we need better information on the exchanges. For
example, with these very high deductibles, can we say the plan
is HSA qualified or not. We need better information on the
providers as well. Are they high quality? Are they efficient?
Can I pay lower costs if I go to provider Chris versus provider
Boustany.
Mr. BOUSTANY. So the trend lines in all these areas are
very disturbing, in my mind, as a physician who has been around
health care for quite a long time. And if you agree that
coverage, for whatever it is worth or whatever it is, is the
gateway to the service, high-quality health care, and I think
the focus needs to be on quality, then we have a poorly
functioning market that is rapidly failing. And I think the
President's admission just in the last 24 hours sort of
verifies that in my mind.
We have to take substantive steps to change this. Less
choice, less information, less control. This is disastrous for
health care. I think it is truly pathetic. I am really upset. I
am angry about what is happening to my beloved profession,
medicine. And at the same time, as a patient, the husband of a
patient, the father of patients, I am really worried about what
this is doing.
And we are seeing the costs going up. And of course what
the President is proposing is higher taxpayer liability on top
of this, on type of higher premiums, higher copays, out-of-
pocket expenses.
We are going in the wrong direction. This is a failure. And
we better recognize it as such and take steps.
Mr. WHITE. I agree, Congressman. We have presented 13
different policy options in our testimony to you today. We want
to work with both sides of the aisle to see if we can make some
improvements here, because the market is not working the way it
should.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Neal, you are recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just quickly a response to my friend, Dr. Boustany. I think
there is general agreement from all the panelists here that
conventional economics don't work when applied to health care.
People age, people get sick, and sometimes they get sick in a
catastrophic manner, and the rest of the system, in terms of
implied shared risk, is what is supposed to absorb some of
those costs. That is the whole notion of the ACA.
And I think that one of things that is left out
conveniently in the argument is the ACA was really a compromise
in the sense that you were going to try to keep the private
sector alive to discipline price. That was the idea. And I
think just to discuss that with the suggestion that somehow
that it is a poorly functioning market, how would we have
described it before the ACA? An efficiently functioning market?
I mean, the reason that we have Medicare and Medicaid is
because conventional economics don't apply to health care.
People simply get old and they get sicker as they get older.
That is part of the challenge that we face.
But in any event, Mr. Lee, when Massachusetts implemented
our State-level healthcare reform plan, or as we fondly called
it those days, RomneyCare, we recognized that that consumer
education and outreach were key to the success of the program.
Community assistance programs made this work. It was not just
getting consumers in the door, but having them find value in
the insurance product and to use the healthcare system in a
new, thoughtful way.
The State partnered with the Red Sox, as one example, to
educate residents about the new law and to entice them into
enrollment. Then the State partnered with issuers and local
organizations to educate newly covered individuals about how to
use coverage and access services with the new plan for
insurance.
Just before you talk about how California has done this,
Mr. Lee, in terms of educating its citizens, in Massachusetts
it really was Governor Romney, the whole notion of the Heritage
Foundation's mandate. I mean, David John's picture is at the
end of that photograph. Governor Romney signs the legislation.
Ted Kennedy is standing behind him. But it was the business
community in Massachusetts that put the plan together with
Governor Romney.
So perhaps in the 2\1/2\ minutes you have in response to my
question, Mr. Lee, could you talk about what California has
done to educate citizens about these opportunities?
Mr. LEE. Thank you very much. I just do need to underscore
your initial comment, if I may, about the prior market failures
in health care. Because before the Affordable Care Act,
remember, the individual market was one where insurance
companies could and did turn people away regularly. And once
you were in, you couldn't shop and choose. It is absolutely an
imperfect market today, but I think it is a vastly improved one
that needs to be built upon.
And California did a lot of learning from Massachusetts,
actually, and I think we learned from other States, we learned
from the Federal marketplace. We are seeing across the Nation
efforts to make sure we get everyone enrolled.
And a couple of examples I would give are, first, in
California there are more than 500 storefronts, huge stores
with our logo, Covered California, on it. Those aren't State
stores. Those are stores run by insurance agents who are
members of CAHU, I mean the California Association of Health
Underwriters. These are individual small-business people who
are members of their community saying: We want to use this
platform to sell insurance, to make insurance available.
Because it is about not just signing people up for
insurance. It is then helping them understand how to use it.
And I think that question is spot on, because what we have seen
from many of the people coming into exchanges across the Nation
is getting in is only the first step.
And this is why we in California believe patient-centered
designs are so important. If you have not had insurance before
or you are a young healthy guy and you show up at the doctor
and say, ``Sorry, you have got $3,000 you have got to spend
before you get this as a covered benefit,'' are you going to
leave coverage? Absolutely.
Patient-centered design is part of the education to say,
when you get sick, you go see a primary care doc, it is a
covered benefit right out of the gate. And that is part of the
reason we have patient-centered designs, because we think
educating people about how to use insurance is also having an
insurance design that works for all consumers.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Roskam, you are recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A quick word about today, a quick look back, and then a
question.
Mr. McDermott suggested that this is a hearing today about
holding the insurance companies harmless. That hearing was last
week when the administration came before the Oversight
Subcommittee and essentially was arguing for subsidies through
the Cost Sharing Reduction Program for the insurance companies.
So the administration was here advocating for insurance
subsidies last week.
A word about maybe why we don't need to hear from the
administration on every problem and that we can hear from four
fresh voices is this. Last week at the same subcommittee
meeting on Thursday, we heard from the administration. Mr.
Mazur, the Treasury assistant secretary for tax policy, said
this about a very controversial thing that they are doing. He
said this: If Congress doesn't want the money appropriated,
they could pass a law that specifically says don't appropriate
the money from that account.
So that is the wisdom and constitutional insight. Of course
that runs completely counter to the explicit language of the
Constitution that says: ``No money shall be drawn from the
Treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law.''
So, look, the administration has a very big microphone, and
they can fend for themselves.
A quick look back. 2008, the country had made up its mind,
I think, after President Obama was elected, around two things
as it relates to health care. The first was that health care
was too expensive. And the second thing, we were scandalized,
basically, as a country with the fact that preexisting
conditions precluded people from having access to an insurance
pool. That, I think, was the opportunity. That is where the
national consensus was, to move forward on that basis. I think
it would have been the smart move all the way around. And I
think the nature of the discussion that we would be having to
day would be fundamentally different.
But the administration made a different decision. It is
their prerogative. But they decided to go basically all in on
the Affordable Care Act. And that is where the problem
happened.
Now, this business never works when an expectation is
created here and the result is here. So the chaffing, the level
of anxiety, and the feeling that people have right now is like:
Oh, no, no, everyone said this was going to be great. So when
Mr. Lewis is talking, for example, about HIV problems in the
inner city of Atlanta, no, it was basically ObamaCare was the
remedy, this was all going to be great.
And I think, Mr. Lee, part of the challenge now is you
talked about something like a culture of coverage. Even a
culture of coverage is a suggestion that somehow this gets
better the longer we wait. So I am not encouraged by that.
And I want to get to the coverage question. I actually have
a question for Mr. Harte. So there is an illusion here, and I
think the illusion is that coverage is the goal. Well, coverage
is simply: I will do this. You can get a library card that
says: Here is a library care. But you walk in to try and check
books out of the library and there is no books.
Can you speak to this notion of coverage versus access and
give us some word about how we should be evaluating the concept
of coverage as opposed to actual access to health care? Mr.
Harte, do you have an insight on that?
Mr. HARTE. Absolutely. You will all define access
completely differently. Some of you may say access is about
being able to have access to a health insurance plan. And as
Mr. White has indicated, in several States we have lost a lot
of health insurance companies and co-ops are failing. So a lot
of your constituents across the country are losing access to
those plans.
Some may also say: I don't have access to my doctor, for
many reasons. Number one, maybe it is just too expensive, maybe
access to an MRI, they simply can't afford it, or, as we have
talked about earlier, these bifurcated networks.
So I live in New Hampshire and all of the health insurance
plans on the marketplace are limited networks. All of my health
care is being done in Boston. All of my surgical procedures are
done at Mass General or Brigham and Women's. I do not have
access to care in Boston under a marketplace plan. And that is
a huge problem if you want to cross the border and get into
Massachusetts or, quite frankly, in any other state where you
may want to have access to better care.
So in answer to your question, access to health insurance
plans is a huge challenge. Access to affordable plans, access
to affordable health care, and access to your own doctor is a
continued problem in the post-ACA world.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Doggett, you are recognized.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And to each of our witnesses, I believe that there are many
factors contributing to these hikes and surges in health
insurance premiums, and one of the major factors is the failure
of this House and this Congress to do anything but engage in
obstructionist tactics concerning the Affordable Care Act.
Whenever there is the discussion of the slightest
improvement--how can we make the Affordable Care Act work more
efficiently, how can we make it more fair, how can it be
better--there is nothing but repeal, repeal, repeal. And that
has some effect on the administration, because instead of
noting an area where there is a shortcoming and a need for
legislative action, the administration is placed on a defensive
posture with now over 60 attempts to repeal.
And of course the original cry in this committee when it
acted back in January of the new Congress coming into effect
was that it would repeal and replace. But it never offered any
replacement in a meaningful way to address these needs. So that
failure, that obstructionism certainly has an impact on
premiums.
The second aspect of this that has already been referred to
that I have seen personally is the impact of the indifference
of the State of Texas and a number of other States to the needs
of its poorest citizens; in all, 1.3 million Texans. And this
indifference and this refusal to take 100 cents on a Federal
dollar to pay for the expansion of healthcare coverage has been
a subject that has been raised by business leaders, by
hospitals, by elected officials, all saying how important it is
to achieve the full promise of the Affordable Care Act by
including those citizens who would be covered through Medicaid.
I have looked personally in the eyes of families who have
come in San Antonio in order to sign up for the Affordable Care
Act and to have to tell them: I am sorry, you are too poor to
achieve access to the Affordable Care Act. You cannot sign up
in the exchange. Your remedy is through Medicaid, which they
have been denied.
And anyone who thinks that denying health insurance
coverage in the hope of getting for the first time a family
doctor to these families means that they do not have an impact
on health insurance premiums is ignoring reality. Yes,
actually, in many cases these folks do not receive the
healthcare coverage they need. And so eventually, when things
get so bad, they are forced into the emergency room.
We had estimates before the Affordable Care Act that the
impact of the unpaid-for care of the poor was hiking insurance
premiums for the family that has an insurance policy by over
$1,000 a family. That has an impact for employer-provided care,
but it absolutely has an impact on the premiums being paid
through the exchanges. They are not excluded from the impact of
the cost of covering the uninsured poor people, many of whom I
have seen personally denied the opportunity we thought would be
forthcoming, and paying for it both in pain and in the cost to
health insurance premiums.
There is another factor, Mr. Lee, we haven't touched on
that I think is really significant, you refer to it in your
testimony, and that is the impact of pharmaceutical prices and
price gouging by pharmaceutical manufacturers. This committee,
just as with improvements to the Affordable Care Act, has
refused to even conduct a hearing about this problem and it has
been ignored.
You referred to the discussion of Express Scripts on the
impact on specialty drugs. But they have also reported that in
2015 alone, that increases in the average price of brand name
drugs were at about 16.2 percent. That is consistent with other
reports of organizations, like Kaiser Family Foundation, that
prescription drug costs now amount to 19 percent of health
spending by employer health insurance plans. On brand name
drugs, we don't have the transparency or the competition that
you have suggested is a problem with some health insurance
markets.
Do you believe, Mr. Lee, that pharmaceutical prices are
contributing to premium increases and that more transparency
and competition here would help us address premium increases?
Mr. LEE. There is absolutely no doubt that a significant
factor in California and across the Nation of rising healthcare
costs have been pharmaceutical costs increasing at a far higher
rate than underlying medical trend, in particular, the cost of
specialty drugs, which in 2015 rose by about 18 percent. But we
are seeing this in our discussion with our health plans in
California. They are highlighting the fact that those costs are
a major driver. And for many consumers, it is a very opaque
market. Transparency would be a huge boon for consumers.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Price, you are recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Look, let's be clear. The reason that we are here today is
not because of all these wonderful stories that the other side
tells. The reason that we are here today is because the
American people are hurting because of the healthcare program
that the Federal Government put in place.
Twenty-six percent of the American people say they have
been harmed by this law. If we had any other law where one out
of every four Americans said they had been harmed by it, we
would be having hearing after hearing after hearing and bill
after bill after bill to fix it. Four out of 10 Americans say
that they have a positive view of this law. That means 6 out of
10 say: No, help us.
Now why is that? Our job as policymakers is to figure out
the why. And let me suggest that the why is because this law
violates the principles that every American holds dear when it
comes to health care. We all want a system that is accessible
for everybody. We want a system that is affordable for
everybody. We want a system of the highest quality. We want a
system where patients have choices. The fact of the matter is
that this law violates those principles, regardless of what
your ideological stripe is.
Mr. White, you said that the current law has made health
care less affordable and more out of reach than before.
Affordability, accessibility, significantly harmed.
Mr. WHITE. Yes, sir.
Mr. PRICE. This hearing is about increased premium costs.
Mr. Harte, you were asked a question about what the premium
increases were before ObamaCare, and you said that there were
double-digit increases every single year. So what was ObamaCare
supposed to do? What was the ACA supposed to do? Stop that,
right? That is what the President said. Costs won't be going
up, they will be going down.
The fact of the matter is that the administration spent
over $1 trillion on a broken Medicaid system and on subsidies
that are forcing people to buy insurance that they don't want,
raiding Medicaid for $800 billion, increasing taxes by a
trillion dollars. And what do we have? We have double-digit
inflation in premiums.
And it is not just premiums. The deductibles are out of
site. Mr. Harte, you identified that. I was stunned by your
figures. Four hundred and eighty percent increase over the past
9 years in deductibles, 140 percent over just the past 3 years,
which means people have coverage, but they don't have care.
I used to practice orthopedic surgery. My former colleagues
call me and they are distraught because of the patients who
come into their office, they recommend something that needs to
be done, and the patient says: I am sorry, Doc, I can't afford
that, my deductible is thousands of dollars. This is a system
that is not working for the American people.
A fellow in my district, Mickey Roberts, 59 years old. In
2013, his premium was 500 bucks a month--500 bucks a month. Now
it is 1,200 bucks a month. Example after example after example.
I have a cancer survivor who can't get a screening MRI
following her cancer because you have non-medical people making
medical decisions. That is part of ObamaCare.
Families harmed. Family of five in my district whose
premiums just 3 years ago, premiums were 330 bucks a month. Now
they are 1,365 bucks a month. I have another family whose
premiums have increased 30 percent over the past 2 years.
Deductible went from 6,500 to 12,500. And now their health
insurance costs are higher than their mortgage. The highest
cost that they have in their family budget is their health
insurance. This is craziness.
So what we invite our friends on the other side of the
aisle to do is to please recognize that there are people that
are hurting, and that they need help, which is why what we have
tried to do is to put forward positive solutions. Our friends
say we don't have a plan. We have put forward A Better Way, a
better way to address the challenges that we face in all sorts
of areas, not the least of which is health care. And in health
care, a better way means that patients and families and doctors
are making medical decisions and nobody else.
Mr. Lee, you highlighted this cost shifting that you talked
about. Cost shifting ended decades ago. There is no cost
shifting anymore. I am a third-generation physician. The fact
of the matter is that cost shifting doesn't exist. The
government is setting the prices. Physicians, hospitals, they
aren't able to pick the prices that they charge. In fact, what
they are being paid today for Medicaid and Medicaid services
oftentimes doesn't even cover the cost of the service being
provided.
This is a system that is broken, and it needs to be fixed.
And I urge my colleagues on the other side of the aisle to join
us in A Better Way.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Larson, you are recognized.
Mr. LARSON. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And certainly I want to thank our witnesses here today,
because I really did appreciate the comments that you made, the
thoroughness, and a number of the good ideas that you are
suggesting. But you, of course, know that you are part of
theater. You are not part of getting anything done. This is all
about messaging. It has nothing to do with solving the problems
that the American people face.
This matter has been taken before the public in 2010, in
2012, in 2014, and it again will be front and center in 2016.
Fifty-eight times or more in the Congress this act has been
repealed by the House of Representatives. There is no
substitute, there is no alternative, there is no score that has
been given to any meaningful program that would address the
issues as you have thoughtfully outlined or as California is
diligently doing, because this is a farce, it is a play that we
have all become a part of. Where is the solution?
Yeah, there are a lot of things that are wrong about the
Affordable Care Act that need correcting, and when thoughtful
people put their minds together and are able to address these
issues, you can make these changes. But there has been no
serious attempt to make any change other than to message
against this bill and its flaws, its warts and blemishes,
instead of looking at the constructs of the bill, as Mr. Neal
outlined, and how they can be successfully managed, as they are
in California and as they were by the business community in
Massachusetts, as they are being done in Connecticut.
Instead, we are like this great ostrich with our head in
the sand here, prevailing upon you to come before the committee
so that we can try to convince the public that people are
hurting out there. And they are. But this Congress isn't doing
anything about it.
It is no different than leaving Congress this week without
doing anything about gun violence. It is happening all around
us. It is happening at a devastating rate. It is happening in a
way that we should be ashamed of ourselves. We will message on
it, but we won't take a vote, we won't sit down and
constructively work towards coming up with a solution for the
American people.
And that is what the American people are fed up with. That
is why the American people believe that there is a wall that is
going to be built and the Mexicans are going to pay for it. And
that is why people believe in these promises that are never
going to come to fruition.
It is long overdue that we, as Americans, roll up our
sleeves and sit down. This committee is fully capable and
talented on both sides of this aisle of resolving these issues
in a nanosecond by coming together and working through these
concerns. But it is more convenient to have a message that you
can pound home in a campaign. Very successfully done in 2010. A
Presidential campaign was waged on it in 2012. And ever since
2010, 2012, 2014, and now in 2016, the American people have
been told this is a God-awful plan, but they haven't had one
solution from the other side.
I apologize to you for being here today, not because you
haven't provided thoughtful information, you have, but you must
understand by now that you are just part of theater.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Smith, you are recognized.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our panel as well.
Listening to all of the various comments here, it is quite
interesting. It is frustrating. I hear some of the messaging
from my colleague who spoke just previous to my remarks here.
These are serious issues. I don't have to tell any of you that.
I get frustrated when we hear that competition is alive and
well from Mr. Lee, and that is not what I hear from my
constituents. I hear from constituents, for example, one of
them, one of my constituents who has lost her coverage three
times. And they had a plan that they wished they could have
kept, and of course they were promised they could keep it. I
won't belabor that point too much, Mr. Lee, but that is one of
those promises that is very frustrating.
I know you worked for Secretary Sebelius. Is that accurate?
And we hear various numbers of individuals who are now covered
with insurance who didn't previously have insurance. That makes
me wonder how accurate those numbers are when I hear from
constituents who have lost their plans, who had a plan,
obviously. And so maybe the constituent who lost her coverage
three times, has she been counted three different times as
though the plan is wildly successful because she signed up for
three different plans on three different occasions, and not by
her own choosing?
But I worry that there are fewer choices for consumers out
there rather than more choices. I worry that there is less
competition. I worry that we have the risk corridor issue that
is out there. The assumptions were that there would be a
balance between plans losing money and plans making money. That
hasn't taken place obviously. The co-ops, I mean, the Nebraska,
Iowa CoOpportunity Health was the first co-op to collapse,
120,000 people. I wonder how many times those people have been
counted in these numbers we hear tossed around in terms of the
number of individuals covered.
We have also seen how many insurers are choosing to pull
out of various markets, not just the failure of co-ops, but
various markets that insurers are pulling out of.
Mr. White and Mr. Condeluci, how were the bill's drafters
and HHS so wrong about the risk corridor program?
Mr. CONDELUCI. I will jump in to say, when the drafters
were drafting the ACA it was well established that the
individual market pre-ACA was dysfunctional. So the drafters
endeavored to incorporate minimum standards, a guarantee issue
which allows access to folks with preexisting conditions, to
make the market a much more functional market.
Sadly, as I think has been established by the witnesses
here and the discussion today, it is not a functional market.
It is functioning, but it is not a functional market, even
post-ACA.
But to your question, and the reason why I bring up the
drafters, is due to the reforms, the drafters knew that there
would be significant disruption in the individual market. So as
a result, they created the stabilization programs, the risk
corridor, risk adjustment, and reinsurance program.
Risk corridor, the drafters did expect, and I believe, as
did HHS expect, that there would indeed be the same amount of
carriers asking for a risk corridor payment or making a request
for a risk corridor payment due to their losses associated with
insuring higher risk individuals, which would be balanced out
by carriers that would be insuring younger, healthier
individuals. And due to the fact that, as we have established,
younger and healthier individuals have not entered the risk
pool, the insurance carriers had suffered the losses, and more
significant losses compared to insuring those better risks.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Okay. Shifting gears just a little
bit because of the interest of time here, we now know that the
President is calling for a public option. Secretary Clinton is
now calling for a public option.
With the wild failure of the co-ops within ObamaCare
occurring, I mean, is there any reason we would believe that
somehow that would be a better situation? I struggle to think
that it would be. I mean, with the Federal backstop that was
out there spending gobs of money, taxpayer dollars, to try to
prop up these plans, I just fear that we would see a different
kind of failure within a public option.
My time has expired. I regret that. But if you would care
to respond in writing, perhaps, I would be happy to hear each
of your perspectives. We have folks on both sides of the issue
here. I would love to hear more in terms of what your
perspectives are moving forward. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Pascrell, you are recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple of points before I ask the question. A, we can't
blame, and I don't think any of you are, every problem in
healthcare costs on the ACA, I think we have to make that very
clear, like we came from a perfect system to an imperfect
system. In fact, as I recall, your history shows that
regardless of what party you are affiliated with, which is
immaterial to me right now, that you were all advocating some
changes because the system was broken. It was broken. So that
is A.
B, in order to change anything here, whether you are
talking about trade, whether you are talking about anything,
you need bipartisan support to make a lasting change. We have
done that in Medicare, we have done that in Social Security,
and we have done it in Medicaid, with very different parties at
the helm at the White House. It can be done.
I didn't hear from any of you, through the chair, that we
should dump the ACA. Am I mishearing? Before I go on to my next
question, is anyone here on the panel advocating getting rid of
the ACA altogether as it now is?
Mr. CONDELUCI. From my perspective, sir, no.
Mr. WHITE. We are not.
Mr. HARTE. I am not.
Mr. LEE. No.
Mr. PASCRELL. Let's make that clear, Mr. Chairman. Let's
make it clear. Very important. Very significant. You not only
have good panelists, you have honest panelists. They are
dangerous. No question about it.
Mr. CONDELUCI. If you will indulge me, sir, there are some
caveats.
Mr. PASCRELL. Of course. You want to have some changes and
so do I.
Now, some of you emphasized the unbalanced risk pool. Major
problem. How do you get those 18 to 35s into the pool? You
can't arrest them and put them into the pool. We need to do
something about that. California has, and we will get to that
in a second.
So the unbalanced risk. This is something we need to take a
look at very, very, very closely. All of you have mentioned
other things that are contributing to the cost. There are no
two ways about it. How do you track younger, healthier
individuals?
And the last point I would make before I ask the question
is, the uninsured rate--Mr. Harte, you mentioned this--the
uninsured rate is falling, but there is an increase in
deductibles. That, you said, was one of the main reasons--many
of you said this--what those deductibles were before the ACA,
what the deductibles percentage-wise are now. We need to take a
look at that. There is no question. Transparency, you talked
about it also.
So I would like to add just one thing, by the way, to the
cost, and that is we have a growing emphasis in this society on
consolidation and merging. In fact, there was a report out last
December about how that is contributing to the higher cost of
health care.
So now we have 250 million people that are covered either
by their employer, by the ACA, Medicaid, whatever. Have
250,000.
And I want to ask this quick question. Are we simply
talking about then, if 85 percent of the people are covered in
the ACA, these 20 million people, they get subsidies, are we
basically talking about the 15 percent that don't get
subsidies? Is that how I understood all of you saying?
Mr. CONDELUCI. I would offer this, sir, that in the
individual market there are about 20 million people. Right now
there are about 11.1 million who are enrolled through an
exchange, and 85 percent of that 11.1 million are receiving
subsidies. So that is 9 million people receiving subsidies.
So you take, let's say, the 9 million people who are not in
the exchange, and you can make an argument that that is a
population that is experiencing these premium increases without
any subsidization, and you hear the stories that you have
heard.
Mr. PASCRELL. I would be happy, and my last question is
this. Mr. Lee, my time has run out, what I'd like you to
discuss, you can't do it now, some of the tactics that Covered
California has used to limit out-of-pocket costs. I find them
to be very interesting. Perhaps you could share them with your
colleagues here and the rest of us in dealing with a very
important issue. This is important for everybody.
And, Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by asking how in God's
name do we have a panel without the HHS Secretary.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Ms. Burwell has been invited a
number of times to discuss the Affordable Care Act with us,
including the shifting of money illegally to fund health
insurance companies, which the hearing was last week.
All time has expired.
We will be going to two to one to make sure we can cover
all the members here.
So, Mrs. Black, you are recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
having this very important hearing.
The issue of rising premium costs is something that,
unfortunately, our constituents are facing every day. I
certainly hear it constantly in my district. And across America
folks are being forced to choose between paying more for less
coverage in smaller networks or just foregoing health insurance
altogether. Again, this is what I am hearing in my district
continuously.
And it is hard for me to believe that my colleagues across
the aisle aren't hearing a very similar story. And if they are
not hearing any of this, I am really curious about what is
going on in their State that is causing them not to hear from
their constituents that the Affordable Care Act has impacted
the quality of care, the accessibility, the sustainability of
health insurance in this country.
So in my home State of Tennessee, premium rates in the
marketplace are expected to increase by 62 percent--62 percent
in 2017. So for anybody to say, ``Well, costs aren't going up,
they are being contained,'' it just amazes me. I expect the
Obama administration would tout this as a nonissue, however,
since 80 percent of the marketplace enrollees in Tennessee are
eligible for subsidies.
But I have to ask, is this how we want our health care
system to work, with costs rising astronomically for this
mediocre care that is being given, where you can't choose your
doctor, you can't choose your facility, you can't choose your
specialty? ObamaCare is forcing more and more Americans to
accept the government subsidies to afford even the most basic
coverage.
Now, I want to read to you very quickly a letter that I
just received this week, which is not uncommon to get this kind
of letter.
``Hello, Mrs. Black. I am 32 years old. I am a married
mother of three. I have no preexisting conditions, I don't
smoke, and I live a very healthy lifestyle. Why, then, with the
Affordable Care Act, is my insurance company canceling my great
low deductible, low premium multibenefit plan next year and
forcing me to choose a plan that offers less coverage, triple
the deductible, triple out-of-pocket expenses, with a much
higher premium?
``Now it will be less expensive for me to pay a yearly tax
fine, and I will have to give up my insurance that I have had
for 7 years that I am happy with. I am well aware of the so-
called tax credit available to people such as myself, but I
have paid for my own insurance for many years without the
government's help, and if my premiums were to remain
reasonable, I wouldn't need a tax credit.''
So my question is, is it the role of the government to
force people out of the health insurance that they like and
that they can afford and they have used for years into a plan
that would require taxpayer-funded subsidies to afford the most
basic coverage? Shouldn't we be removing those barriers and
mandates to encourage people to actually control their own
health care and allow the open markets to keep the plans
competitive and affordable and accessible?
Mr. White, I would like to start with you. I know I only
have 2 minutes left. So if you could address those.
And then, Mr. Condeluci, and then, Mr. Harte, if you would
address those, I would appreciate it.
Mr. WHITE. Yeah, I think the scenario that you outlined in
that letter is exactly the scenario that a lot of people are
facing in deciding whether or not to enroll in the exchanges.
And a lot of those people are saying: No, it doesn't make sense
for me financially or otherwise, with or without subsidies.
So CHAC is advocating for market-based reforms that improve
flexibility, that create additional options for consumers,
using those subsidies on and off the exchanges to create a
market for competing for those lives.
Mrs. BLACK. And it will allow people to get what they want
and what they need as opposed to what the government is telling
them they want or need.
How about you, Mr. Condeluci?
Mr. CONDELUCI. As I have suggested, the minimum insurance
standards, the adjusted community rating rules, the new rules
that came in to make the individual market a much more
functional market are driving up costs. That is just the nature
of how these reforms have impacted the insurance market.
I would suggest that insurance carriers be allowed
additional flexibility to come up with more creative plan
designs, creative plan designs that could be targeted to
different cohorts of the population. As I indicated earlier,
obviously the young and healthy, but, in addition, folks that
have chronic illnesses, like diabetes, heart disease.
If carriers were able to better manage that care, that
helps folks across the board from an insurance perspective, but
the drafters of the ACA wanting to, let's say, require that
everyone have an adequate level of coverage, has, I don't want
to use the word ``overreached,'' but it just has increased
cost.
And if you pull that back, I am not suggesting that we get
rid of the minimum standards or guaranteed issue, for example,
which I am a fan of, if you loosen them up, I believe you can
reduce premiums.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Harte, you have 15 seconds. I apologize.
Mr. HARTE. Thank you.
All I will say to you is, we have to look through a prism
of are the decisions that we are making going to make health
insurance more affordable? I don't know if it makes you
comfortable or uncomfortable, but I deal with the issues of
plan changes every single day, and I have to share those
changes with thousands of people every year. So you are not
alone, and that is what we need to focus on.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly, you are recognized.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
I come from the private sector, and I was not here whenever
the healthcare law was debated and then passed, but I can tell
you as a person who actually provides insurance for the people
that I work with, we have seen premiums--this is for a family,
a mom and dad with a couple children--it has gone from about
$800 a month to $1,150 a month. That is the premium.
Now, maybe you all can explain this, because I am just
looking at this as a business model right now. When you take in
$1 in premium and pay out $1.20 in claims, that is not a
sustainable business model. So I think, rather than going after
the insurance companies and saying, ``Hey, you guys are trying
to make money,'' I mean, if you don't make money, you go out of
business, I kind of get that from my life experience, but the
copays and the deductibles are also part of health care.
So when I talk to people--and with ours right now it is
$3,000 in deductibles before insurance kicks in--they have
heavy copays. And if you go to the emergency room, that is
another charge on top of it. So most of the folks I talk to
back home are saying: Yes, I do have insurance, but I don't
have coverage until I go past a certain point.
Now, I am understanding some of the people that I
represent, some of their increases are going to be 38 to 40
percent. That is what they are going to ask for it. They are
not going to get that, but they are going to get something. And
then the question comes down to, well, that is not as big of a
problem on the premiums because there are going to be subsidies
that are going to take care of that.
So Mr. White, Mr. Condeluci, Mr. Harte, Mr. Lee, who is
going to pay for the subsidies?
Mr. WHITE. Taxpayers will. And that is the problem, right?
We are shifting costs, we are not lowering them. We need some
strategies to lower the costs.
The other issue I would say on the deductibles is that only
half of Americans have enough liquid assets to meet higher
deductibles, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.
Now, the problem with the ACA exchanges is that in many
instances they are masking the availability of account-based
plans like health savings accounts. If people knew and were
informed that HSAs could help them fill in deductibles on a
tax-preferred basis, we might get some help in meeting some of
those deductibles.
Unfortunately, we are also seeing some policies come out in
the regulatory front that are discouraging the use of HSAs on
the exchanges, either healthcare.gov or at the State level.
And so there are tax tools that we can use to help fill in
these deductibles. They are just not being employed very
effectively.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Condeluci.
Mr. CONDELUCI. Briefly, the premium subsidies, as we all
know, shield some of the policyholders from the premium
increases, and that has been established----
Mr. KELLY. If I can interrupt you one second, though. But
the subsidy doesn't change the actual cost.
Mr. CONDELUCI. It does not.
Mr. KELLY. I think that is the problem, we get into this
idea that somehow the subsidy is going to make it okay. Because
at the end of the day, somebody still has to pick up the tab on
it.
Mr. CONDELUCI. Right.
Mr. KELLY. The answer is hardworking American taxpayers.
Listen, oftentimes our hearts are willing but our wallets
are weak. We are putting such a heavy burden on the private
sector right now and the people that provide this, believe me,
because I am one of them. I provide that for the people I work
with.
See, the sustainable business model is the thing I think we
are turning away from. It is not that we don't want to make
sure that people have health care.
By the way, we are not talking about sick Republicans, sick
Democrats, sick Independents, or sick Libertarians. We are
talking about sick Americans that need help. I want to make
sure that we don't make it a thing about our parties, but about
our people.
So the sustainability of it is where we have to go on this,
and that is where I am seeing the disconnect.
Mr. CONDELUCI. Because as the premiums go up, the
government shields those premium increases in the form of
higher government spending, which is in the form of the premium
subsidy, that is. So there is a tension between increased
premiums, how the subsidy works, and how they shield consumers
from those premium increases.
It is not the consumer that has generally experienced that
premium increase, instead it is the government, and at a point
you might have an unsustainable situation from a spending
perspective.
Mr. KELLY. We keep using the term ``the government.'' The
government doesn't pick up the tab on anything. The government
collects money from hardworking American taxpayers and
redeploys it where the government thinks it should go.
So we take the decision out of the individual's hands of
how they are going to purchase products, and we say this is how
you are going to do it, and if it is too steep, we will
subsidize it without saying: By the way, you are going to pay
for the subsidy.
Mr. Harte, if you could just weigh in. I am almost out of
time. But this is critical people understand. This is an
unsustainable business model. It has nothing to do with wanting
to provide people with health care. It is to the point that it
is going to reach that we can't do it and taxpayers can't be
burdened every time we want to do something.
Mr. HARTE. They simply can't afford it. You are absolutely
right. Those subsidies are coming from my business, from my
employees, from your employees, and everyone across the country
to pay for these taxes.
But you are actually pretty lucky. For someone in your
company to have a $3,000 deductible and a $1,100 premium, that
is pretty good. Where I come from, where healthcare costs are
soaring, we have to pay three times that. We have families who
are paying over the Cadillac tax limit already for an average
health insurance plan. So you are right, I am concerned just
like you, very concerned.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. CONDELUCI. To clarify, Mr. Chairman, my reference to
government was taxpayers.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Davis, you are recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
certainly want to thank our witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Lee, opponents of the Affordable Care Act have been
trying any tactic that they can think of to discredit the law
or to make consumers look unfavorably on it. One of the red
herrings opponents have used is try to make consumers think
that the law is unaffordable due to premium increases. It is my
recollection that premiums were going up, increasing before the
Affordable Care Act. Is that not true?
Mr. LEE. That is definitely true.
Mr. DAVIS. Now we have, with the ACA, what I would call a
pretty significant improvement. For example, consumers are
guaranteed critical protections when they purchase insurance,
limits on rating based on age, requirements insurers must spend
a certain amount on care. And also State officials have
stronger tools to review unreasonable rate increases, along
with transparency, so that the public knows which insurers are
jacking up prices and why.
Could you comment on this environment?
Mr. LEE. Yeah. The main comment is that it is absolutely
the case that the post-Affordable Care Act insurance
marketplace is a reformed but still imperfect marketplace, but
it is in a marketplace now where insurers have to compete on
price to get consumers who cannot be turned away. It is a
different marketplace, and there is transparency. And many
consumers--not all--have many choices that they can exercise to
make that marketplace work.
It is also the case, if I may, that many of the problems we
are hearing about are not Affordable Care Act problems. They
are health care in America problems. Issues of rising
healthcare costs, as we heard from Mr. Harte, of rising costs
of up to 30 percent on people's employer-based care. This is
the range of what small businesses, large businesses,
individuals are facing that we all need to get our arms around.
Mr. DAVIS. While we laud the California experience,
Illinois hasn't done too badly itself, the State that I come
from. What caused California to be able to accomplish what we
all know and believe it has accomplished?
Mr. LEE. I think, well, first, I want to be very clear,
there have been a number of States that have been very
effective in implementing the Affordable Care Act. You can look
at the State of Connecticut, you can look at Illinois, you can
look at Washington. There are a lot of States.
The thing that they have in common is--and I know this is a
hard thing to say in this environment--but they put politics to
the side. And in California, our working has been with
Republican members of our State legislature, have been with
every single district elected office, it is with people who
have said this is the law now, let's make it work.
And so the issue of having effective outreach and
education. I have said this a couple of times, but health
insurance doesn't sell itself. And we are out there spending a
lot of money because people that need to sign up for health
insurance say: Maybe I don't want to.
The ones we need to convince most are the ones who need it
the least who will benefit the risk pool, which requires
ongoing, very significant marketing, outreach, partnerships
with agents, et cetera. And that is something that the States
that have been most successful have consistently leaned in on
those outreach efforts.
Because those people that get subsidies, which in
California is about a million, and there are about a million
people in the individual market without subsidies, those
nonsubsidized people benefit from the people who get subsidies
because they are part of the better risk pool, they are part of
keeping premiums down for everybody.
So it really is a win-win when we get subsidized people in
to help keep the premiums down for those even that don't have
subsidies.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. And I think that was part
of the intent from the beginning that many people discount. I
think the reality is that it is working much better than many
people would have us believe.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Renacci, you are recognized.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the witnesses for being here with us
here today and presenting the information. This hearing is
really extremely important, and I appreciate your expertise.
I, like one of my earlier colleagues, believe that when
those that voted for the Affordable Care Act, they sincerely
believed they were helping. Let's face it, I am sure that was
their thought process when they voted for it. But it is
disingenuous today to ignore the fact that there are problems.
Unfortunately, since the passage of the Affordable Care Act
the access to affordable care has significantly dropped. There
is no denying that since the ACA premiums are rising,
deductibles are rising, and many people can no longer afford
their healthcare plans. And we are hearing the proposed rate
filings for 2017 on the Federal marketplace are projected to
increase a median of 19 percent.
I go back in my district and I have meetings with
employees. Every time I meet with an employer, I want to meet
with the employees. I ask the same question: Are you happy with
the Affordable Care Act? Are costs okay? How are things going?
I am going to have to bring some of my colleagues from the
other side with me because I get very few people put up their
hand and say they like it.
Now, some people do. I am not going to lie and say it is
not 100 percent. But it is a very, very small portion of the
people in the crowd, and I am talking about hundreds and
hundreds of people. So I always ask them a question: Tell me
what tissues are. Tell me what the problems are. I try and
learn from it.
Look, no law passed is going to be 100 percent perfect. But
I go back to my colleague last year, John Carney. He tried to
pass H.R. 4414, which was a fix to the Affordable Care Act, and
we got that passed. The sad thing was that the majority of
Democrats, over 133 Democrats, even came to the floor and said:
We can't change anything because if we change it, we are going
to open up the doors to changing more things.
So 133 people even voted against a simple change, ignoring
the fact that there are problems, and those are the things we
have to fix. Just last month, in my home State of over Ohio, we
had the 13th co-op, InHealth Mutual, announced it was going out
of business. This was 1 of 23 co-ops created under the ACA, had
received 129 million in taxpayer funds, had left nearly 22,000
Ohioans with fewer choices and, unfortunately, once again,
searching for new health insurance.
So again, we know there are problems out there. We can say
we don't, we can talk about how great the Affordable Care Act,
it has problems, and we have to start looking at those
problems.
I have had people in my district, Brian from Westlake,
saying he has lost his choices. I have another constituent,
Scott from Dalton, saying his plan jumped from $314 in 2013 to
$920 in 2016. He simply couldn't afford to continue with this
plan and he had to go to a higher deductible. I had another
individual, John, a registered Democrat from Brewster, who said
he now calls the ACA the Unaffordable Care Act. So these are
real people, real lives, real things affected.
But the saddest story I ever had was a woman walking up to
me at a restaurant saying: Congressman, I just had my hours
reduced to 29 hours, and now my premiums are going up and I
have a deductible I can't afford. Help me. That was the saddest
moment when it came to the Affordable Care Act--help me--and
that is what we need to do.
So I want to talk a little bit about this deductible,
because we have talked about premiums. Nobody can argue that
premiums are going up. They are going up. Everybody knows that.
They are going up again this year. But we are getting people
insurance, and I have an individual in my district who has
fully subsidized insurance, but came to me and said:
Congressman, thank you for allowing me to get insurance.
I said: Well, I wasn't part of the vote for the Affordable
Care Act. But she says: I can't use it anyway because I have a
$6,000 deductible that I now can't use. The insurance is
worthless for me. I need surgery, and I can't get it done
because I can't afford that.
Mr. White, can you talk a little bit about the
deductibility, how this deductibility is affecting people and
the size of it and how that hurts people getting health
insurance?
Mr. WHITE. It is massive, and it is not just the
deductibles. So the deductibles are increasing on average by
about 20 percent, or they increased 20 percent this year. So
the average Silver plan has about a $3,000 deductible, the
average Bronze plan has about a $6,000 deductible, but $10,000,
$12,000 deductibles are not uncommon.
And the reason these deductibles are at that level is that
it allows the insurer to lower the price point, the premium
rate that they sell on the exchange. A lot of consumers will
shop for a plan based on the premium, not necessarily the
deductible.
Mr. RENACCI. So you would agree that, because of the
Affordable Care Act and because premiums are going up, the only
way to reduce the premiums is to raise the deductible, which in
the end, who pays? The American people.
Mr. WHITE. The consumer, absolutely. And it is not good,
because, as you indicated, when you have these massive
deductibles, you are not accessing care. So you are not getting
maybe the diabetes care, the coach management, the preventive
care, the well baby care, the things that you really need to
stay out of the hospital, out of expensive settings. It is
unsustainable over the long term.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
A vote has been called. We would like to finish with Mr.
Meehan and Mr. Holding.
Mr. Meehan, you are recognized.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to say at the outset, just to comment, I know
some of the commentary from the other side of the aisle
regarding that part of the problem is that insurers are
miscalculating. We sat here last week and listened to the
design of a plan in which over $7 billion was illegally
transferred to the insurance companies and still not capable of
holding down these costs. That was what the record
demonstrated.
But I want to follow up on Mr. Renacci's questions with the
panel because it is really going to the issue. We hear a lot
about people saying we have more people insured. What I am
seeing in mid district are the underinsured. These are people
who are working, who have been watching the explosion of the
various factors. You named them. It is the copays, the higher
premiums.
And the biggest problem is, just like many seniors now
split their medications by taking half and do away with the
effect, we are having people that won't use health care at
certain times, and situations are getting worse.
Mr. White, I went back through the written testimony of
each of you. I was very impressed with lots of it. You had some
things to say about the special enrollment periods influencing
this, Mr. White. And can you tell me about what you see as the
reforms in the special enrollment periods quickly, if you can,
and whether what the administration is currently doing is going
to be sufficient to impact that?
Mr. WHITE. I am not sure what the administration is doing
is sufficient. I think what needs to be done is that you need
to clamp down on some of the abuses that are taking place
because of the special enrollment periods. People are jumping
into and out of these risk pools, gaming the system in effect,
and the enforcement is not rigorous enough to prevent that type
of gaming.
So having prospective eligibility is probably--let me put
it this way. I think you don't automatically get the person in
the plan until you can verify that they actually meet the
requirements of the special enrollment period, and then you can
make their coverage retroactive to cover the claims expenses.
You don't just do that at the outset, though.
Mr. MEEHAN. You think it was a rush, so to speak, just to
get numbers, but they are not appropriately overseeing the
entrance into the program?
Mr. WHITE. Yeah. It was a big problem. I think there were
40-some-odd special enrollment periods. One insurer that we
work with quite a bit in our coalition said it, added about 3
percent to the premium that they have got to carry into next
year. So this is a real impact on people.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you.
And, Mr. Harte, you spent some time, you laid out a number
of things, but again, I go back to the issue of the uninsured.
And this was the point that was being made, I think so
eloquently, by my colleague Mr. Renacci.
I am watching in Pennsylvania, 21 percent reported that
deductibles and 18 percent reported that premiums were their
greatest financial challenge. So we are seeing that these are
the things that are impacting people. The rate of uninsured is
going down, but the costs associated with those that have it is
skyrocketing.
So what combination of reform should be advanced to address
the challenges of individuals and families with insurance? They
have insurance, but they can't afford health care. What would
you recommend?
Mr. HARTE. So if I can first say, my clients, when I sit
down with them and they are faced with a 29 percent rate
increase, as I testified to earlier, my job with that client is
to say: What can we do to cut costs?
So the first thing we have to look at is: Okay, you have a
$3,000 deductible today, how much can we save to go to a $4,000
deductible? And that is about 10 percent. And then we say: What
is it going to take you to go to a $5,000 deductible? It might
be another 5 percent.
And then we start looking at the prescription drug costs,
and the traditional drug plan would be $10 for generic and $25
or $40 for brand name. Today, the health insurance companies
have moved away from that entire equation, especially for small
employers, and told the employees that they insure: Well, you
are now going to pay a percentage of the brand name
prescription cost.
Now, this is New England, okay, but it is happening all
over the country. Now they are having to pay 30, 40, 50 percent
of the monthly cost of that prescription up to a monthly cost
share of $500. That is significant.
So when you talk about the underinsured, we are not just
talking about access to doctor's office visits or primary care,
specialty care, physical therapy, emergency rooms,
hospitalization, it is the entire healthcare equation that
people are underinsured.
So the question is, what can we do, that is your final
question. As I said earlier, health insurance is expensive
because health care is expensive. And as much as we talk about
the Affordable Care Act and that the issue is all about health
insurance or health insurance companies, it is really a
financing mechanism.
When you look at health insurance, we are taking 80 to 85
percent of that money and paying for healthcare expenses. So
the reason why health insurance premiums continue to escalate
at such an alarming rate is because healthcare costs continue
to soar out of control.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Harte.
Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Holding, you are recognized.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to give a little state of play in North
Carolina. Our largest insurer in the State has been approved
for an average rate increase of 25 percent in 2015 and 34
percent in 2016 and 18 percent in 2017. But even with these
consistent double-digit rate increases, BlueCross BlueShield,
the insurer I reference, has lost over $400 million in the last
2 years.
And even though they have been given these rate increases,
yeah, it doesn't ensure that they are going to stay and
continue to offer plans throughout North Carolina. And we are
looking at a potential situation where 60 out of our 100
counties might be left without a single ACA plan offered.
I would like to pick up where Mr. Smith from Kansas left
off. You hear this argument that, well, the public option, if
that is put in place, it cures all these problems.
Mr. White, could you address the public option and whether
or not it would cure the ills that we see with the ACA as it
exists today?
Mr. WHITE. I think the public option is a bad option. I
think that it is government coming in to promote competition in
a market in which they have basically evaporated competition.
So this is a problem that was caused by government
inflexibility that made insurers leave the market. They are
losing money. We are seeing it in co-ops. We are seeing it in
North Carolina. We are seeing it in other markets across the
country.
So the proposed solution is let's have the government run a
plan in that marketplace so that people have choices. Well,
they had choices before, right? So how do we flex up the
market, how do we create a competitive environment so that the
insurers will want to go back in? Tennessee had a very
significant experience in this in the Medicaid market.
I mean, like, this isn't necessarily rocket science. We
ought to let the market operate in a way that fosters
competition and an environment to offer products.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I will yield back so
that we are not late for our vote.
Chairman BRADY. You are kind, Mr. Holding. Thank you very
much.
I would like to thank our witnesses for appearing before us
today. Please be advised, members have 2 weeks to submit
written questions to be answered later in writing, and those
questions and your answers will be made part of the formal
hearing record.
With that, the committee stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:32 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

Member Submissions for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
