- USING EVIDENCE TO HELP LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES GET AHEAD

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

USING EVIDENCE TO HELP LOW-INCOME
INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES GET AHEAD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2015

__________

Serial 114-HR02

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-282                          WASHINGTON : 2016
________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan,
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
DEVIN NUNES, California              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  XAVIER BECERRA, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               RON KIND, Wisconsin
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri

Joyce Myer, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM REED, New York                   JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota            JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of March 17, 2015 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

John Bridgeland, CEO, Civic Enterprises..........................     7
Joan Entmacher, Vice President for Family Economic Security,
National Women's Law Center....................................    40
David Muhlhausen, Research Fellow in Empirical Policy Analysis,
The Heritage Foundation........................................    27
Grover J. ``Russ'' Whitehurst, Director, Brown Center on
Education Policy, The Brookings Institution....................    18

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Charles Boustany...................................    75
The Honorable Danny Davis, submission 1..........................    80
The Honorable Danny Davis, submission 2..........................    83

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Evaluation Association, statement.......................    84
Campaign to End Obesity: Action Fund, statement 3/17/15..........    86
Campaign to End Obesity: Action Fund, statement 1/23/14..........    90
Campaign to End Obesity: Action Fund, statement 12/13............    92
Center for the Study of Social Policy, statement.................    96
H& R Block, statement............................................   102
Knowledge Alliance, statement....................................   121
National Association for Relationship and Marriage Education,
statement......................................................   123
Fishbein/Wollman/Biglan, statement...............................   131
Nurse-Family Partnership, statement..............................   139
Robin Hood Foundation, statement.................................   143
The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy,
statement......................................................   148

USING EVIDENCE TO HELP LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES GET AHEAD

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 17, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m. in
Room B-318 Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Charles
W. Boustany, Jr. [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. The subcommittee will come to order. And
I want to welcome everybody to today's hearing. Happy St.
Patrick's Day to everyone.
This is the second in our hearing series on welfare reform.
And today we will explore what we know about the effectiveness
of programs designed to help low-income families get ahead. We
have a very talented set of witnesses with us to review what we
know about current programs and how they perform, how we can
improve that performance to help more families and individuals
move up the economic ladder.
But, unfortunately, as we will hear in today's testimony,
while we all want to know about whether programs are working or
not, and to what extent they are working, what we actually know
is quite limited. We just don't have the data. According to two
former White House officials--one Republican and one Democrat--
I quote--``Based on our rough calculations, less than $1 out of
every $100 of government spending is backed by even the most
basic evidence that the money is being spent wisely.''
And among the few programs that have been rigorously
evaluated, the evidence suggests most don't work, and don't
meet the intended goals. According to nonpartisan experts,
since 1990 there have been 10 instances in which an entire
federal social program has been evaluated using the scientific
``gold standard method'' of random assignment. And of those 10
programs that were evaluated, 9 were found to have weak or no
positive effects.
Some programs do worse than just waste money; they may
actually harm those they are meant to help. For example, the
former Mentoring Children of Prisoners program was intended to
support children with an incarcerated parent. However, one in
five mentorships lasted less than six months, and research
showed such short-term mentoring relationships reinforce
feelings of insecurity and abandonment, likely leaving children
worse off than they would have been without this so-called
benefit. Another program designed to prevent juvenile crime
actually increased the chances that participants were later
incarcerated. And these are disturbing instances.
Having and using data, data that would not only let us
direct taxpayer funds to better uses, but prevent us from
causing unintended harm to the very people we want to help, is
critically important. Think about the information that many use
every day to make the best decisions with their own money.
For instance, if you're my age and your family's washing
machine breaks, or you have a car that you want to buy, you
might turn to Consumer Reports to find out a reliable
replacement. You will be--at least have information to base
your decision-making on. Many people might check online rating
services to find the right phone or car for them in today's
Internet age. In both cases, consumers have a wealth of data to
compare one brand to another, and to make an informed judgement
about where their money is best spent. Yet policymakers don't
have the same sort of data about the effectiveness of
government programs, which millions of families depend upon for
both basic financial needs and for the hope of a better life
for themselves and their children. And that is just not good
enough. We have got to do better.
We are left with more questions than answers. Is the money
we are spending today on the best mix of policies and programs
to help people get ahead? What are we spending money on now
that could be better reinvested elsewhere to get better
results? If we had more money to invest, where should we put
it? More often than not, we just don't know the answers to
these very basic questions.
The bottom line is this: We need to evaluate every program,
determine what works, and focus resources on effective programs
so more people will benefit from these programs. Low-income
individuals and taxpayers alike deserve programs that are
effective in promoting opportunity and helping people improve
their lives. This effort to fund what works is not about
ideology or about cutting spending. It is about doing what is
right, it is about a moral imperative, especially for those who
need help the most, the help that we are equipped to give, but
we need to make sure that that help is effective.
So, I look forward to the testimony from our very
accomplished witnesses today.
And, with that, I will turn to my friend and colleague, Mr.
Doggett, the ranking member, to make an opening statement.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and to our
witnesses. I welcome the opportunity to explore evidence-based
policies. Indeed, when I first arrived here on Capitol Hill, an
old Capitol Hill staffer told me to remember that here, in
Congress, every Member is entitled to their own facts. And,
through the years, I found that to be increasingly true, that
we operate in a largely fact-free environment, where ideology
and perhaps political mythology really tends to predominate.
If the question is whether comprehensive immigration reform
will grow our economy, we have significant evidence. If the
question is whether tax cuts pay for themselves or only add to
our public debt, we have significant experience and evidence.
If the question is whether human-induced climate change is a
serious threat to America, we have significant scientific
evidence. And yet, some feel the best policy is to deny it, to
prohibit its study, and, in some places, even to prohibit
uttering the words ``climate change,'' or ``global warming.''
Or, in the social service area, we have significant evidence on
a program such as Abstinence-Only Education, that it is one of
the best ways to increase teen pregnancy, rather than to reduce
it.
We have the facts. What is not--we are not lacking
evidence. What we are lacking is political will to overcome
ideology and rely and act on the evidence.
We also have ample evidence regarding the most effective
ways to deliver federal funds to accomplish purposes that we
agree upon. If, for example, you want to increase the quality
of public education, we have experience in Texas that if you
send federal funds to the State of Texas and you have no
federal guidelines, and no meaningful requirements that Texas
use those dollars to accomplish the intended purpose, that the
state will simply use the funds to fill its budget gaps and
provide corporate tax breaks.
And the same thing is true if the goal is to increase
reimbursements to health care providers under the Medicaid
program, that Texas will use all--or at least much--of the
federal dollars provided not to accomplish the objective, but
to fulfill its immediate budget needs. And, while Texas may be
an extreme example, the experience that we have had with TANF
and the way federal TANF monies have been used by the states to
accomplish purposes other than lifting people out of poverty,
Texas is not unique.
The approach taken in the bill that is on the floor before
us now--not today, but it has been there and it is set to come
back--on education, if we repeal effectively the civil rights
provision of the education--the secondary--Elementary and
Secondary Education Act, Title I, and simply give that money to
the states to do with as they wish, and not maintain effort, we
see a decline in public education quality, not an increase.
As for successful interventions that could come under the
jurisdiction of this Subcommittee, I think there are several
additional considerations that are important, as we hear from
the witnesses.
The first is that we look to the preponderance of the
evidence. There will always be outlier studies. But the studies
themselves need to be reviewed. And we need--just as we do with
global warming information--to look at where is the
preponderance of the evidence.
The second consideration is that, by its very nature,
evidence-based is longitudinal. It is historic. It will tell us
how things have worked in the past. It will not necessarily
incorporate innovative ideas. For example, we heard from Ron
Haskins at our last hearing very compelling testimony about
evidence-based support for the Nurse-Family Partnership
Program, which I think we certainly need. But that is old
evidence, and that doesn't mean that that partnership doesn't
need to continue to innovate with technology, like use of
Skype, use of other devices that might be available, short of
actually having to send a nurse to each family.
And then, that naturally leads to a third consideration,
and that is the need for innovation, generally. While we want
evidence-based policies, we need to allow, in our funding
choices, for some new programs that innovate, that give us new
ways to deal with these problems.
And, finally, I think we have to keep into consideration
that consulting is a multi-billion dollar industry in this
town, and that there is an evidence-based consulting industry.
They can bring much value, but we don't want to see dollars
devoted only to studying what needs to be done; we want to
actually do it. Because evidence is clear on one point: We have
a widening gap of inequality in this country, and we need
policies to address it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Without
objection, each Member will have the opportunity to submit a
written statement and have it included in the record.
And I also want to welcome our witnesses, remind them that
limit--please limit your oral statements to five minutes. We
have your written testimony. And, without objection, all
written testimony will be made part of the permanent record.
So, this morning we have some very distinguished witnesses
here, who will give us the state of play with regard to
evidence and how it is being used or not used in these various
programs.
Today we are joined by John Bridgeland, CEO of Civic
Enterprises; David Muhlhausen, Research Fellow in Empirical
Policy Analysis at The Heritage Foundation; Grover J. ``Russ''
Whitehurst, Director of Brown Center on Education Policy, The
Brookings Institution; and Joan Entmacher, Vice President for
Family Economic Security, National Women's Law Center.
We welcome you all, and we look forward to a robust
dialogue today. And, with that, Mr. Bridgeland, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BRIDGELAND, CEO, CIVIC ENTERPRISES

Mr. Bridgeland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Chairman Boustany,
Ranking Member Doggett, and other distinguished members of this
Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
the important subject of using evidence to inform budget and
policy decisions that can expand opportunity for low-income
individuals and their families.
I am a senior advisor to Results for America, a non-profit,
bipartisan organization committed to improving the lives of
young people and their families through better data and
evidence at all levels of government. I also draw my experience
as former director of the White House Domestic Policy Council
for President Bush, and a former member of the White House
Community Solutions Council for President Obama.
At Results for America, we believe all levels of government
should follow three principles: first, build evidence about the
practices, policies, and programs that achieve the most
effective results; second, invest limited taxpayer dollars in
what works; and, third, direct funds away from those efforts
that consistently fail to achieve measurable outcomes. More
than 100 local and national leaders, including U.S. Senators,
support these principles.
According to a 2013 GAO report, only 37 percent of program
managers said an evaluation of their programs had been
completed in the last five years. And another 40 percent did
not know whether such an evaluation had even been conducted.
The former OMB directors in our coalition estimate that only
one percent of federal non-defense discretionary spending is
backed by evidence. These and other statistics in my written
testimony highlight the bipartisan opportunity to do more to
ensure limited resources support solutions that improve
outcomes for young people and their families.
When I co-chaired the White House Task Force for
Disadvantaged Youth in 2003, we discovered 339 federal programs
administered by 12 departments and agencies at a cost of $224
billion, annually. Although government was collecting data on
how much programs cost, and how many people they served, we
wanted to know more about how programs were helping to increase
opportunity and improve lives. Where evidence was stronger, the
President proposed state of the union initiatives that this
Congress supported to help disadvantaged youth.
We make the following specific recommendations to build on
the bipartisan history of improving government performance.
First, Congress should authorize agencies to invest one
percent of their total discretionary funds for program
evaluations, subject to congressional oversight, to improve how
the other 99 percent of dollars in an agency are spent. The
Administration's recent budget request seeks this authority for
the U.S. Department of Labor, and also for a particular program
within the Department of Health and Human Services. And other
agencies should have it, too. If chief evaluation officers were
appointed at each agency and held accountable, they would help
create a stronger culture of using evidence to inform decision-
making.
Second, government should create what-works clearinghouses
at agencies to inform better decision-making, and signal the
importance of evaluations. I know, from my own experience in
working to address the high school dropout challenge, that the
what-works clearinghouse and increasingly sophisticated data at
the U.S. Department of Education and National Center for
Education statistics have helped foster reforms that follow
evidence and generate better results. High school graduation
rates have reached an all-time high, nationally. And those who
have disproportionately have had the lowest graduation rates
are now driving the most significant gains.
Third, Congress can encourage the use of rapid low-cost
tools, including low-cost, randomized control trials to
increase the effectiveness of social spending by using data
already collected by the Federal Government to measure key
outcomes of a particular program, rather than engaging in
costly original data collection.
Fourth, Congress should consider a tiered-evidence approach
that gives higher levels of funding to grantees with better
evidence of impact, and lower levels of funding to promising
programs that need to be tested further. Because low-income
youth and their families deserve supports that are truly
helping them.
Fifth, Congress should encourage programs to first improve,
and eventually direct funds away from those that consistently
fail to achieve outcomes. Bipartisan Head Start reauthorization
required low-performing grantees to recompete for funding.
There are other examples of other programs that consistently
failed to boost opportunity for youth, and were finally
eliminated. But too often, government is flying blind, or
failing to use evaluations to expand, alter, or terminate
programs.
Finally, Congress should foster a spirit of innovation and
learning, not simply pull the on or off funding switch when the
evidence isn't clear. When I served on the White House Council
for Community Solutions in 2011, we discovered that youth
opportunity grants had been eliminated before an evaluation was
completed. Evidence later showed the program had increased
youth in school, employment rates, and hourly wages. Our
council had lost a key tool, both to improve the lives of
disconnected youth, and save taxpayers money.
Our bipartisan Moneyball for Government book, and Ron
Haskins's ``Show Me the Evidence'' book contain many
recommendations to build evidence.
Finally, our Results for America coalition is pleased to
announce today our strong support for the Evidence-Based Policy
Commission we understand Chairman Ryan and Senator Murray will
be proposing, and for the bipartisan Social Impact Partnership
Act sponsored by Congressman Young and Congressman Delaney.
Given the opportunity gaps in our society, the millions of
vulnerable children and families in our country, the time could
not be better to put evidence at the center of policymaking.
Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of John Bridgeland follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitehurst, you have five minutes.

GROVER J. ``RUSS'' WHITEHURST, DIRECTOR, BROWN CENTER ON
EDUCATION POLICY, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Mr. Whitehurst. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, Members of the Committee. Let me tell you a story.
In a career I had a couple of careers ago, I was a
developmental psychologist working in Head Start centers. And
one evening I went to a Head Start center at the beginning of
the year to make a pitch for parents to sign up their kids to
be in one of my studies. I saw a mom in the audience. And, as I
was leaving the center in my car, I saw her walking down the
road. She had her four-year-old, who she had brought to the
center, in hand. She had a two-year-old in a stroller. She had
a big bag of materials she had picked up at the meeting. And it
was 85 degrees, and she was struggling.
So, I offered her a ride home. She accepted. I thought it
would be a few blocks. It was a couple of miles. I asked her
had she walked all the way to the Head Start center with her
kids. She said she had. I said, ``That's a long way to walk;
why did you do it?'' And she said, ``I just want what is best
for my babies.''
I knew that particular Head Start center pretty well, and
it was not providing what was best for her babies. I think
there is a moral proposition. You stated it, Mr. Chairman, that
we need to provide people who need help programs that work. And
we are frequently not doing so. We need to use evidence to move
in that direction. I have got some recommendations. I think
they are very much in line with what Mr. Bridgeland has just
said, and they speak to supply utilization and what the federal
role is in using evidence.
On the supply side, in keeping with comments already made,
I think we need to fund the evaluation effort better. I think
there needs to be a healthy set-aside in every significant
funding program to allow that program to be evaluated. If we
are spending only as we did in the U.S. Department of
Education, less than one percent of the appropriation to find
out what works, we are destined to be involved in a faith-based
enterprise that is never self-correcting. So an evaluation set-
aside is important.
I think we need independence for those who are doing the
evaluations. Most federal evaluations are carried out by people
who are responsible to and reporting to the political
apparatus, and are in the same programs that are implementing
the programs that need to be evaluated. That is a conflict of
interest. I think we should give each federal agency an
evaluation officer, and they have the--should have the
independence we give to the inspector general in those offices.
I think we need greater access to the--linking access to
existing data sets, so we can speed up the rate of progress
here. You know, Google conducts about 20,000 experiments a
year. During the eight years I was in the U.S. Department of
Education, we mounted about 20 experiments around education. So
we need more. We need more quantity. One way to do that is to
use existing data. It is there, we just don't have a way of
putting it together.
The Ryan-Murray Evidence-Based Policy Commission intends,
if it is passed into law, to tackle that problem. I think that
is perfect, that is the way we need to go. With regard to that
Commission, I think its role could be expanded to serve some
other functions, if it were a standing commission, and those
functions lie in the realm of utilization.
So we need to know what works. And we have some entities
embedded in some agencies that are supposed to do that. But the
issues with poverty and people in disadvantage are not easily
siloed at agencies. They span agencies. And so I think it would
be a great idea of the Commission were responsible for
collecting and disseminating information on what works with
regard to economic opportunity in ways that would inform
policymakers, inform Congress, and inform the nation.
And, in that regard, they might make an annual report to
Congress indicating what works, what doesn't, what needs
correcting. I think this would be useful, politically. Some of
you may have been involved in trying to close the military
base. You know how hard that is. Try to close a popular social
program, and you will find a really tough problem. So some
outside advice might be useful.
On the federal role, just because something works, I don't
think it is the federal role to push it down and to say that
states or people have to use that particular service. I think
the ideal role is to find out what works, provide information,
and to provide incentives that it is utilized, that it would be
utilized at the local level. And one way to do that is to
empower consumers to shop for what they want.
I am in favor of, rather than giving most of the money to
states or localities, figure out a way to give it to
individuals. The Earned Income Tax Credit is one way to do
that. Vouchers are another way to do that. Food stamp is a
voucher. And then provide the kind of information that, Mr.
Chairman, you said you could get in Consumer Reports if you are
buying a washing machine, provide that information to
consumers, so they can spend those vouchers and those transfer
funds correctly.
I think, if you do that, you will generate a marketplace,
and people will get not what has been decided at the state
level that they should have, but they will get, for example, in
child care services, what they need to serve their needs, and
that will produce the kind of innovation and progress that we
very badly need. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Grover J. ``Russ'' Whitehurst
follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Muhlhausen.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MUHLHAUSEN, RESEARCH FELLOW IN EMPIRICAL
POLICY ANALYSIS, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Muhlhausen. My name is David Muhlhausen, and I am a
research fellow in empirical policy analysis in the Center for
Data Analysis at The Heritage Foundation.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Muhlhausen, that microphone on, if
you don't mind.
Mr. Muhlhausen. I thank Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member
Doggett, and the rest of the subcommittee for the opportunity
to testify today on evidence-based policymaking. The views I
express in my testimony are my own, and should not be construed
as representing any official position of The Heritage
Foundation.
My testimony is largely based on my book, ``Do Federal
Social Programs Work?'' My spoken testimony will focus on four
points.
First, the effectiveness of federal social programs is far
too often unknown. That is why the notion of evidence-based
policymaking is so important to finding out what works and what
does not work. The use of scientifically rigorous impact
evaluations greatly improve policy decisions. The best method
for assessing the effectiveness of federal social programs is
large-scale, multi-site experimental valuations that use random
assignment.
Unfortunately, these scientifically rigorous studies are
rarely done. When Congress creates social programs, the funded
activities are intended to be spread out across the nation. For
this reason, federal social programs should be assessed for
their national effectiveness. While an individual program
operating at a single site may undergo an experimental
evaluation, this small-scale, single-site evaluation will not
inform policymakers of the general effectiveness of the broader
national program.
The success of a single program that serves a particular
jurisdiction or population does not necessarily mean that the
program will achieve similar success in other jurisdictions or
among different populations. Thus, small-scale evaluations are
poor substitutes for large-scale multi-site evaluations.
A multi-site evaluation that examines the performance of a
program operating in numerous and diverse settings will produce
results that are more--the policymakers. Multi-site
experimental evaluations are the best method for assessing the
effectiveness of federal programs. Yet, to date, this method
has been done on only a handful of federal programs.
Second, the Federal Government does not have a good record
of replicating successful programs on a national scale.
Policymakers and advocates often assume the social program that
is effective in one setting will automatically produce the same
results in other settings. This is a faulty assumption.
For example, for the Center for Employment Training
replication, the Federal Government attempted to replicate the
successful outcomes of a youth job training program in San
Jose, California in 12 locations throughout the United States.
A multi-site experiment evaluation found that the Federal
Government was unable to replicate the successful outcomes in
these other sites. Just because an innovative program appears
to have worked in one location does not mean the program can be
effectively implemented on a larger scale.
Third, policymakers should be mindful that federal social
programs do occasionally produce harmful impacts on
participants. However, social program advocates too frequently
ignore these findings. Nevertheless, Congress should be aware
of these harmful impacts. Here are just two examples.
For the three-year-old--Head Start Impact Study,
kindergarten teachers reported that the math abilities of the
children given access to Head Start were worse than similar
children not given access to the program.
Students participating in school educational activities
under the 21st Century Community Learning Centers program were
more likely to have disciplinary and behavioral problems, such
as getting suspended from school. Further, these students were
less likely to achieve at high levels in class, and were less
likely to put forth effort in English classes.
Last, the adoption of the evidence-based policymaking is an
important step in helping Congress become wise stewards of the
federal purse. With the federal debt reaching staggering
heights, Congress needs to ensure that it is spending taxpayer
dollars wisely. The creation of the Evidence-Based Policy
Commission, as proposed by Representative Ryan and Senator
Murray, is a step in the right direction. I thank the committee
for the opportunity to testify today.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Ms. Entmacher.
Ms. Entmacher. Entmacher.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Entmacher. Thank you. You may proceed.
[The prepared statement of David Muhlhausen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF JOAN ENTMACHER, VICE PRESIDENT FOR FAMILY ECONOMIC
SECURITY, NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER

Ms. Entmacher. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Doggett, and Members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for giving me the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the National Women's Law Center.
Millions of women struggle every day to support their
families and give their children a chance at a better life. And
safety net programs work, and help them lift their families out
of poverty.
For example, the Earned Income Tax Credit lifted more than
five million people, more than half of them children, out of
poverty. SNAP, formerly food stamps, lifted more than 3.6
million people above the poverty line. But the EITC and SNAP
don't count as income under the official poverty measure, so
the effectiveness of the safety net in reducing poverty is
often underestimated.
Research shows multi-generational and lasting impacts from
programs that alleviate poverty. For example, the EITC
encourages increased work, particularly among single mothers,
and leads to higher wages. Moreover, children whose families
receive more income from refundable tax credits are healthier,
more successful in school, and have increased earnings as
adults. Children whose families receive food stamps were
healthier, more likely to graduate from high school, and more
self-sufficient as adults. And SNAP is an increasingly
important work support for low-income workers and their
families.
However, there are major gaps in safety net and work
support programs. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,
TANF, is the core safety net for poor families with children.
When it was enacted in 1996, 2 out of 3 poor families with
children received assistance. By 2013, only 1 in 4 did. TANF
benefits are insufficient to bring a family's income above 50
percent of poverty in any state. So TANF does little to reduce
poverty, or even bring children out of deep poverty. When
millions of jobs disappeared in the great recession, the
response from TANF was weak.
When Congress overhauled the welfare program in 1996, it
recognized that parents of young children need child care to be
able to work. But federal funding for child care assistance has
dropped below the level it was in 2001, taking inflation into
account. And the number of children served is at its lowest
level since 1998. Only one in six children eligible for federal
child care assistance receives it.
Mr. Whitehurst testified about a mother who walked miles to
a Head Start center to give her babies what was best. I will
take his word for it, that this center that they were going to
was not adequate. The key question is, what should policymakers
do in response?
I think Congress and the George W. Bush Administration had
the right approach when they reauthorized Head Start in 2007.
They didn't turn it into a voucher program. We actually have a
voucher program, CCDBG, and it was reauthorized last year on a
bipartisan basis because it wasn't giving parents access to
quality care. But what happened after the Head Start
reauthorization was that measures were instituted to improve
quality and accountability, as described in my written
testimony. And the Obama Administration is continuing the
efforts to try, learn from efforts, and hold programs
accountable.
But implementing and sustaining quality improvements takes
adequate and stable resources. Budget cuts, short-term funding
bills, and the threat of sequestration are not conducive to
investing in quality. Here are a few examples of programs
within the jurisdiction of the Ways and Means Committee where
solid evidence calls for increased investments.
One, make the improvements in the EITC and Refundable Child
Tax Credits permanent. Failing to do so will push about 16
million people, including 8 million children, into or deeper
into poverty.
Two, improve the EITC for childless adults, to increase
their work participation and income. That is an idea with
bipartisan support.
Three, reauthorize the home visiting program. There is
widespread evidence of its effectiveness, yet it is set to
expire in just two weeks.
And, third, provide adequate funding to implement the
reforms in last year's bipartisan reauthorization of the child
care program, so states can improve the health and safety of
children and child care without cutting back on the number of
children they serve.
These things take money. Where can we find it? Well, we
could subject tax expenditures to the same level of scrutiny
that is being called for on social programs. According to CBO,
the Federal Government spends 1.5 trillion--with a T--dollars a
year on tax expenditures, more than it spends on Social
Security, Medicare, or Defense. And the benefits, according to
CBO, disproportionately go to the wealthiest households and
large corporations. Trimming tax expenditures by just one
percent equals 15 billion a year, or $150 billion over 10
years. And careful scrutiny would likely produce additional
savings.
In short, we have evidence that works, and the resources
necessary to make the investments that will help families get
ahead.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Joan Entmacher follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. And, for the record, I want
to mention that yesterday Representative Dave Reichert and I
introduced the Home Visiting Extension Act of 2015. We are
going to reauthorize that.
Ms. Entmacher. Thank you----
Chairman BOUSTANY. Because it is a program that is showing
promise. And we are hoping to get data toward the end of the
year to truly prove that case. So I just wanted to make sure
that goes on the record.
I think there is a lot of room for bipartisan agreement
here. This is an area that we can make a difference in the
lives of many Americans who are struggling. But I think it is--
we have a moral imperative to look at the facts, and to really
start to make, you know, heads or tails--to make sense out of
these programs, and what is working.
And I could tell you my previous life was in medicine. I
was a cardio-thoracic surgeon. And I remember in 1988 there was
an article that came out in the New York Times looking at
cardiac surgery programs in the State of New York. And the
mortality and morbidity statistics were all over the map. And
one of the finest institutions in New York State had some of
the worst outcomes, based on that analysis. But it turned out
that the analysis was faulty, because they weren't doing risk
adjustment. And that particular institution was getting all the
difficult cases.
We have, I think, a moral imperative to look at the
scientific basis behind this, and to get the data, get the
evidence, and use it appropriately. Because, at the end of the
day, those on this side of the aisle and those on this side of
the aisle want to have programs that work. We owe it to the
taxpayer and we owe it to those who are most in need.
Mr. Bridgeland, in your testimony you laid out six points.
You have talked at length in your testimony, and you described
these in your chapter in Moneyball for Government. But--and
these all make complete sense to me. I think they are common-
sense approaches. But, given your experience in the Bush
Administration, and now, in your current capacity, working with
Results for America on the Moneyball project, help us
understand. What are the one or two steps we can start with to
really get the ball rolling on this?
Mr. Bridgeland. Well, first, let me say congratulations on
the new information about the expansion of home visiting. We
discovered David Olds in Baltimore actually built in evidence
at the very beginning of the Nurse Family Partnership Program.
Because he did that, because it was subject to randomized
control trials, the program has been expanded in 31 states. And
now $1.5 billion across the United States goes to help boost
the life incomes--outcomes for newborn children, their mothers,
their health, their employment.
I would say that the nice thing about all the testimony,
including your opening statements, is that we need to build an
evidence base and be serious about it. Every sector in our
country invests billions of dollars in research and
development. You talk about Consumer Reports, trying to
understand what is it that is going to actually help the people
we are trying to serve.
In 2005 I was contacted by the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and asked if we could look at a--the first-ever
national cross-sample of the more than million young people in
this country who drop out of high school every year. And we did
a survey and we discovered remarkable things: that most could
have made it; that there were significant life challenges that
caused them to drop out; that they had big dreams, just like
other children.
And I think, Joan, you mentioned in your testimony the
power of actually listening to the people that we are trying to
help, to see what is the intersection between what a young
person faces in school, and why they decide to drop out. And
what does the evidence tell us about what will help them stay
in school?
I mentioned, obviously, investing one percent--and that is
a significant investment. Imagine if, across every department
and agency, we actually had one percent of funds, discretionary
funds, invested in evidence base and evaluations. You would
eventually have a Consumer Reports and an annual update to the
nation on how programs across government are helping to serve
low-income youth and families.
Joan mentioned SNAP. I was completely taken by the 2014
longitudinal study. Mr. Doggett, you mentioned the power of
longitudinal studies. So SNAP not only helps address severe
malnutrition, and give access to alleviate hunger, we now know,
from a longitudinal study in the 1970s--tracked those who had
the program to the present day--that high school graduation
rates have increased by 18 percentage points, that the
employment rates of the mothers is much higher, and that the
welfare receipts are much lower.
You talk about the moral and societal imperative, Mr.
Chairman. I would just close by saying there is also an
economic and taxpayer imperative. When the White House Council
for Community Solutions, we discovered 6.7 million opportunity
youth--young people disconnected from school and work,
representing tremendous loss to--human capital--to the country,
they cost taxpayers $93 billion every year if we fail to
reconnect them. So there is a social, moral, and economic
imperative to do better. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Yes. Longitudinal studies are important,
because they go beyond just simply a snapshot.
Mr. Bridgeland. Right.
Chairman BOUSTANY. They give you real trends, and they
allow policymakers to use that information for quality
improvement.
Mr. Whitehurst, I--one of the things that came out of that
newspaper article in the New York Times about thoracic surgery
programs was the creation of a database that 90 percent of
cardiac surgeons participate in now. And I used that, and I had
to fight some obstructionists. But in my early days of my
practice, we used that to actually implement significant cost
savings and quality enhancement in the hospitals where I
worked, achieving a top 100 status in the country for our heart
program.
And one of the steps Mr. Bridgeland mentions in his
testimony is setting up what-works clearinghouses at each
agency to build evidence around interventions that are
effective and those that are not. And you have done this. You
have gone through this at the Department of Education. So could
you talk to me about some of the challenges you faced as you
went through this process?
Mr. Whitehurst. I am glad to try to do that. There were
significant challenges.
The first was to convince people there was any reason to do
this. There was an assumption that we know what works in
education, we just need to spend on it. And, in fact, we knew
almost nothing about what works. And that was one of the
challenges of creating the what-works clearinghouse.
Mr. Bridgeland and I were talking before the meeting, that
Secretary Spellings for a while called it the nothing-works
clearinghouse, because we were spending a lot of money on it,
and weren't finding anything that worked. So the first
challenge is convincing people that, actually, evidence is
extremely important. And it is a first-order investment, if you
are delivering social and education programs.
The second challenge was to build something that was--could
survive the almost-certain attacks that would come from those
whose oxes [sic] were gored. And so, we couldn't have just a
bunch of people sitting around a table, talking about it, and
deciding, based on their own views, that this program works and
that program doesn't. So we had to build a rule-based system
that was reliable, such that anybody could take the same rules,
and, if they were well trained, come to the same conclusions.
And that wasn't an easy technical job.
The third challenge was to create an interface to this
information that people would actually access and use. And I
think that continues to be a challenge for the what-works
clearinghouse. I haven't been associated with it for six years
now. It is better than it used to be, but it is still written
more for researchers than it is for ordinary consumers.
And I think the final challenge is to pull together and
make some sense not only of whether particular programs or
interventions work, one by one, but what is the appropriate
policy stance to take with respect to those findings. And it is
difficult for a Federal Government agency to do that, because
you are going beyond strictly the information given to
recommendations that are, essentially, political, as to what
needs to be done with that.
So, you know, I think that is a missing element here, and
maybe is something that a Commission on Evidence-Based Policy
could address, that an individual agency-based what-works
clearinghouse could not. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is a new report
out this morning from the Center for Budget and Public Policy
Priorities, indicating that the safety net lifted 39 million
Americans out of poverty in 2013.
And I would ask that a summary of that report be made a
part of that record.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection.
[The information follows: The Honorable Mr. Doggett
Submission]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DOGGETT. And let me ask you, Ms. Entmacher, about that.
For all of the problems, the inefficiencies, and the need to
seek improvement, what is the effect likely to be of having
substantial cuts to that safety net program of the type that--
we will get shortly the Republican budget for this year--but
the Republican budget for last year had, I believe, some 69
percent of its cuts from these low-income programs, including
the SNAP program we have heard about this morning. What would
be the effect on the inequality gap that this country has
already, and on those poor families, if we make those type of
cuts in the budget?
Ms. Entmacher. It is really frightening to contemplate what
the effect would be. I mean the first thing we know is that
cuts that focus on programs for low-income people would fall
most heavily on women and children who are the large majority
of poor people in this country, and the people who rely most on
these safety net programs.
I talked about deep poverty. These are families who are
living with incomes below 50 percent of the poverty line. For
many of them, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families does not
exist. It is gone. The only thing they had when they couldn't
find jobs during the great recession, and they couldn't get
unemployment insurance because they didn't qualify, or it had
run out, and they couldn't get TANF, all they had was SNAP. And
SNAP helped. It really was effective, because it was
automatically there when need increased. And during part of the
great recession, benefits were increased, so at least these
families could get food on the table.
It is really frightening to imagine what will happen when
that goes away. And we have heard--Mr. Bridgeland just talked
about what a difference it makes to have children and people
who are trying to get jobs have an adequate diet. You can't go
to work if you are hungry, if your kids are hungry. You can't
go to work with a child in tow. You can't, you know, take a
baby to a job interview. You are not going to get hired. So we
really need to maintain a strong safety net if we want families
to get ahead.
Mr. DOGGETT. And I suppose, just generally, the question on
evidence-based evaluations is whether the goal is to enhance,
to strengthen, to improve, see that the taxpayer's money is
well spent, and we accomplish the maximum good, or whether it
is the conclusion that it is just not worth spending any money
in this area, and the goal is to terminate, cancel, and cut,
which seems to be the approach taken in this unfortunate
Republican budget.
Let me ask you also--several of you referred to the family
visiting programs, and I am pleased to hear for the first time
that the chairman and the former chairman of this Committee
intend authorization legislation. It was a real struggle to get
the funding for that program through the next two weeks last
year. We couldn't get more than another year extension. And now
we are two weeks away from a program that has broad support,
and all that is being suggested, unlike the permanent answer
for health care providers in the proposed SGR fix, is another
two years.
Does this stop-start lack of certainty about a program that
does enjoy broad support, evidence-based support--even though
we don't have the final evaluation in that was originally
incorporated in the legislation, we do have other evidence of
it--what is the effect on programs like home visiting, family
visiting, of approaching its funding in that way?
Ms. Entmacher. Well, actually, Mr. Chairman, I am not as
familiar with the home visiting program as I am with the Head
Start program, where the National Women's Law Center went back
and documented the effect of sequestration, which actually
happened in 2013. And programs, first of all, had to turn away
increased numbers of children. They had to cut back on the
number of staff. They had to cut back on the supplies, books,
and instructional materials they had for children. They had to
cut back on the number of hours that they were open. And we
know that additional instructional time is very important to
children's success in these programs.
So, having--you know, when we find what is important to a
program's success, it is important to have both adequate
resources and stable resources, so programs can improve.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Before I turn to Mr. Young I just want
to offer a little bit of clarification. We have heard some
suggestion that this is all about a budgeting cutting exercise,
and I cannot be more emphatic that it is not about simply that.
We have a moral obligation, as policymakers, to help those in
need, and to make sure that the programs that we are using
taxpayer dollars for actually work, and get the intended
effect.
And we are not going to do this overnight; this is going to
be a long-haul process, which I think has largely been
neglected over a number of years. So we start with evidence,
and we start with how to use it, and hopefully start to move
the needle to getting effective programs to really help those
who are in need.
And, with that, I will turn to Mr. Young.
Mr. YOUNG. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is an
essential hearing. It is one that, frankly, I wouldn't mind if
it lasted all day. I find it so important. I think members of
staff and some of the other attendees would be less enamored of
that idea. But I appreciate all of you being here today.
So, our focus is, as the chairman said, trying to figure
out how we can get the most return on our investment, to the
benefit of the beneficiaries and, really, to the benefit of
broader society. And so, let me emphasize the extent to which
we could all benefit from focusing more on the evidence about
what works, what doesn't work, rigorously evaluating all these
programs in the future.
I read Robert Putnam's book over the weekend, his new ``Our
Kids'' book. He's a communitarian, he teaches at Harvard School
of Public Policy, and has some interesting perspectives on
different things. And I thought he made a compelling point in
there. Perhaps I found it compelling because I just wrote a
column on the very same topic, which will appear in National
Review. And I know my good colleagues will be reading that in
coming days.
[Laughter.]
Mr. YOUNG. But the point is, to distill it in sort of my
language, I will borrow from John F. Kennedy, ``A rising tide
lifts all boats.'' So I think, to the extent we can get the
economy moving more quickly, that is the best thing we can do
to benefit all our children, all individuals in this country,
and so forth, whatever their circumstances.
But some boats do need patching, right, to get them
involved in this growth that we hope we will enjoy in the
future. And, to the extent that we can get more of those boats
rising, the tide will actually begin to rise faster, as more
people get involved in productive activities, as they can make
their own way in life, and realize their own human potential.
So, that goes back to a point about using evidence. I
actually think--and I am speaking only for myself in this
regard--but if I have compelling evidence that a program works,
I am prepared to spend more money on that program in the
future, if it is a real positive ROI. So this could be a
revenue-neutral exercise. I don't anticipate this to be a
budget-cutting exercise. I actually think the argument becomes
more compelling to invest in effective social programs in the
future.
Now, that will only be possible if we get our economy
moving faster. It is going to require some structural changes
to other policies, like tax reform. It is going to require that
we make some very tough decisions related to making the largest
programs of government solvent. And so we need some leadership
from all sides on those issues. So they are all interconnected.
What happens--I will pose this question to Mr. Bridgeland
in my limited time remaining here--what happens when a program
doesn't work? Is it improved, in your experience? Is it ended?
Do we continue to fund it? Maybe you could share one example
for speaking generally to that issue.
Mr. Bridgeland. I just have to say Dr. Putnam is a member
of our policy council, we work very closely with him. And ``Our
Kids'' is actually a frightening indictment of the state of the
access to the American Dream, and I hope required reading for
all of us.
Thank you for your question. I think, consistent with what
the chairman and Mr. Doggett have said, we want to create an
environment of continuous learning, and not too quickly just
pull on and off switches. I think it is important to look at
the quality and sophistication of the evaluations. But there
are examples. I will give you one.
I worked a lot in prison reform and with children of
incarcerated parents. And this Scared Straight program had
multiple evaluations across many sites, showing that those
young people at risk have actually--entering the juvenile
justice system--when they met with inmates the evidence showed
that they had a 28 percent higher rate of committing crime,
higher rates of recidivism. And the studies were sound, so
sound that the U.S. Department of Justice actually issued
guidance across the country that funding for Scared Straight
ought not to continue.
There was another program where I thought the evidence was
strong, but the program could have been improved before it got
eliminated. The Even Start Family literacy program was the
subject of three national evaluations. It showed that those in
the treatment group who actually had the literacy interventions
with their parents did no better than the control group. That
program went on to spend $1 billion over the next 8 years. And
think about the opportunity cost to young people. I wish that
investment had been made in the Reading Recovery program,
which, since 1984, has reached 2 million young people, and
boosted their literacy rate significantly.
So, when the chairman talks about this isn't a budget-
cutting exercise, he is exactly right. It also can be a
bipartisan exercise, looking at the programs that are
effective, and then also those programs that clearly aren't
working, and perhaps redirect funds from those programs into
those that do.
Mr. YOUNG. So, to take that term, ``opportunity cost,'' you
are essentially saying that, by continuing to invest in a sub-
optimal program, we are actually--as any economist would view
this--we are hurting----
Mr. Bridgeland. Correct.
Mr. YOUNG [continuing]. Other recipients of better
programs. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Meehan.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to attach
myself to the chairman's words underscoring that our objective
here is not just simply to cut spending, but to find the most
effective way we can use those resources.
I had a great experience in an earlier, prior life as a
county district attorney working with intervention programs.
And many of these things do work, and it was attaching to those
that can have an impact, as we are working through. But I also
remember in college reading the institutional imperative. Once
something is created in government, it continues to exist on
its own. So, finding the sweet spot here is really a key thing.
And I am intrigued by this discussion.
One of the programs that I often hear discussed is the Head
Start the early intervention with the children. My school
teachers tell me that it is an effective program, and really
important because, if they could do one thing, it would be to
intervene at that age. But later--it catches up.
Mr. Whitehurst, what is there about the program that is
good, and what is problematic?
Mr. Whitehurst. Actually, very strong research on Head
Start, the National Head Start Impact Study, which was planned
in the Clinton Administration, carried out in the Bush
Administration, reported in the Obama Administration,
nationally representative, every Head Start center was
represented in the draw of participants, if they were over-
subscribed--that is, if there were more families who wanted to
get in than not, and there was random assignment based on that
over-subscription.
There were some effects, modest effects, at the end of the
Head Start year, whether it was for three-year-olds or four-
year-olds. But, in kindergarten through third grade, nothing.
So, just no impacts at all----
Mr. MEEHAN. And those students did not----
Mr. Whitehurst. Do better.
Mr. MEEHAN [continuing]. Ahead, they did not do better
after third grade?
Mr. Whitehurst. They didn't do better after kindergarten,
and they were followed through third grade. And no positive
effects. No difference between the kids who were randomized
and--versus those who lost the lottery and had to get whatever
they could get on their own resources.
So, that is a great disappointment. I helped plan the
study, and I thought we would find positive effects. We did
not. And so it suggests, I think, that we need to look very
carefully at that investment.
Mr. MEEHAN. How do we--the problem when we are dealing with
children at that critical age is we lose more if we continue to
try to figure out what is work--what will--how do we find out,
and do these kinds of testing in a real way, so that we can
take advantage of the programs that work in a timely fashion?
Mr. Whitehurst. Sure. I think that some states are leading
in the effort to tie children's school readiness when they
begin kindergarten to the experiences they had in center-based
care during the pre-K period, so they can identify the centers
that are doing a good job, and shut down the ones that are
doing a bad job. I think that is important.
I think if we knew that, and made that information
available to parents, so they could shop for a good child care
center, just as they can shop for a car or a cell phone plan--
--
Mr. MEEHAN. But a lot of these are school-based. I mean it
is very, very difficult to have a program that may or may not
be consumed by the students.
Mr. Whitehurst. Well, in the pre-school period, actually,
most of the providers are not school-based. They are non-
profits, and some for-profits, and--who----
Mr. MEEHAN. Well, that variable there, is that part of the
problem, that you have got a lot of different providers
operating them in different fashions?
Mr. Whitehurst. I think certainly the variability in
quality is a huge problem. We actually don't know much about
it. This is an area in which we know almost nothing. We have no
information systems, we don't collect data. And so we are left
with people having strong views, but not a strong basis on
which to improve what is out there.
Mr. MEEHAN. I just have two more inquiries. One just
generally for the panel, and then, Ms. Entmacher, I have a
closing request for you.
Is there--unfortunately, a lot of times we look at programs
in isolation. And the children are being exposed to a broad
spectrum of things. As we have said, the safety net has good
parts and bad parts. How do you isolate and determine what
works and what does not when you have an overall package of
goods?
Mr. Whitehurst. Well, you do it through a randomized trial,
or the best approximation you can. So, with the Head Start
National Impact study, all these kids were subject to and
supported by the safety net. Some got access to Head Start, and
very equivalent children and families did not. And so that is
how you start to tease out the effect of the particular
components of the overall safety net.
This is not to say that pre-K for four-year-olds--that the
service for four-year-olds is unimportant; it is very
important. It is to say, however, that Head Start doesn't seem
to be doing the job of preparing children for school as we
think it does.
Mr. MEEHAN. Mr. Bridgeland, you may answer that. But, Ms.
Entmacher, I--one of the issues that concerns me when I look at
this--and we looked at programs--the biggest factor, as I
understand it, is a child growing up in a single-parent
household. And that is the biggest challenge, because so many
other factors impact it. What are we doing about the spouse who
is not the caregiver, and responsibility on that part, so that
there is a continuing obligation on the non-custodial spouse to
play a role and be responsible for some of the outcomes for the
children?
Ms. Entmacher. Thank you. Actually, child support
enforcement was one of the issues that I worked on starting 20
years ago, when I first came to Washington. And the program, at
that point, was very ineffective in helping get support from
the non-custodial parent. And----
Mr. MEEHAN. Effective?
Ms. Entmacher. Ineffective. Fewer than one in three
children who are in the program received any support from the
other parent. And there was a long process. I testified before
this Subcommittee on a number of occasions, talking about what
was needed to improve the programs. There had been commissions
that identified the problem of interstate child support
enforcement. Parent moved to another state, state programs
didn't have a way of tracking it.
So, Congress addressed that issue with a number of mandates
that required states to collect and share information; learned
from states what were the best practices in collection,
automatic wage withholding, required states to implement that.
The improvements were part of the 1996 law. They had an effect,
but not quite enough.
In 1998 Congress looked at the incentives in the program
and said, ``We need better performance indicators, and
performance indicators that will drive collections for the
hardest-to-serve children, children whose parents were never
married, who were poor, and reward states for those
incentives.'' That was adopted, the program continued to
improve. And the biggest collection gains were for low-income
children.
Unfortunately, Congress let lapse some of the increased
incentive rewards that had helped drive those performance
indicators. But I think, you know, we are--you know, we have
made progress in trying to get children support from both
parents. But, clearly, it is much tougher to be both the
primary breadwinner and caregiver, and we need to support those
families.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired. We
will go to Mr. Davis next.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let me
thank you for calling this hearing.
As one of the authors of the evidence-based provisions of
MIECH, the home visiting program, I am delighted to have a
discussion on how policy helps to shape decisions. I must begin
by stressing that Congress should extend the MIECH program as a
part of the upcoming doc fix, as we call it.
In Fiscal Year 2014, home visiting programs served
approximately 115,000 parents and children, 514 of whom engaged
with the Southside Early Learning Network program in my
congressional district, one of the six MIECH sites in Illinois.
In addition to directly helping almost 1,000 parents and
children in Illinois, a remarkable success of MIECH is the
outstanding coordinated home visiting system in the state. We
must continue to fund this historic investment in evidence-
based policy, and I am delighted to know that we are
approaching reauthorization.
I also mentioned two evidence-based programs on which I am
working. In line with the goal of this hearing, I have a bill
that requests the National Academy of Sciences to make
recommendations to reduce child poverty, based on the evidence
of what works. By charging the National Academy with
recommendations, we take the politics out of it, and focus more
directly on the science. This model worked well on criminal
justice reform, and I think applying it to child poverty makes
a great deal of common sense.
Further, I have a bill that draws on what works in teen
pregnancy prevention, to reduce teen pregnancies among foster
youth to help delay pregnancy until the youth are ready to be
parents. Nearly half of all teen girls in foster care have been
pregnant by age 19, compared to only 27 percent of their non-
foster care peers. Moreover, youth in care are more likely than
their peers to have a second pregnancy by age 19. Despite these
numbers, federal child welfare policy lacks evidence-based
interventions to help these youth delay pregnancy until they
are ready to be parents.
Ms. Entmacher, could you comment on this evidence-based
approach, and how policy to support low-income youth and
families through programs like home visiting, child poverty
reduction, reduction, and teen pregnancy prevention [sic]?
Ms. Entmacher. Yes. The evidence shows, just looking at the
reduction in teen pregnancy, that there are, you know,
effective interventions. Certainly providing family planning
services free of cost to low-income people has been remarkably
effective.
And a recent evaluation of family planning services for
low-income women found that not only was it effective in
reducing unintended pregnancy, which was the primary goal,
there were multiple other health benefits which produced cost
savings that people who did not have multiple pregnancies that
they did not want, they--the women were in better health, the
babies that they did have intentionally were in better health.
And, again, those early health outcomes helped them succeed
better in life, as well as providing more economic security for
their families, because they were able to avoid unintended
pregnancy.
On the other hand, as Mr. Doggett has indicated, the
success of abstinence-only programs, you know, it was--you
know, those programs have not been proven effective. So I
think, clearly, that one of the provisions of the Affordable
Care Act, you know, would ensure that contraceptive services
are available. Some of the most effective provide long-term
contraceptives, if that is what women want, so that they can
truly intentionally decide when they are ready to have a baby.
They cost a little more up front, but could be extremely cost-
effective in the long term. So I think this is why that
provision is important, and supporting it is important.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. And, Mr. Chairman, I am
very pleased to hear you and other Members of the Committee
emphasize that this is not a budget-cutting exercise, although
we expect to receive, and I guess we may be receiving at any
minute, the budget that is being proposed. And I can't help but
remember that last year 69 percent of the proposed cuts would
have come from programs that are designed to assist low-income
individuals and families. So I appreciate your emphasis that
this is not about budget cutting, but finding the best
solutions and the best results.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Mrs. Noem, you
are recognized.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a very important
hearing, specifically, because not only are we looking at our
programs, but then we are trying to identify some solutions,
and then hold the programs accountable to those solutions.
I live in the state of South Dakota. Our state unemployment
is around three percent, so very low. But I have portions of my
state that have 90 percent unemployment. And those are mostly
on Native American reservations that have struggled for decades
to be successful and stimulate economic development and help
their families get to a position to where they can truly
provide for themselves and their children.
And so, for me, this is critically important, that we not
just continue to rubber-stamp programs, but that we evaluate
them to see if they are fulfilling goals and actually helping
people not just create a better situation for them and their
children, but for their grandchildren, and their
grandchildren's children, because that is how long these
communities and these families have been in poverty and have
struggled.
And I was very interested to hear Mr. Whitehurst talk a
little bit about how he had a vision for some federal programs
that currently are operating right now changing to somewhat of
a voucher system, just because what I have seen in South Dakota
many times--is not only does a lot of the dollars in a federal
program get eaten up administratively at the federal level, but
if we send them to the states at times, the states can eat up a
certain portion, as well, that doesn't reach people. And even
if you send them to local governments, then a portion of those
dollars are gone, and they never touch the individuals,
particularly, that need it the most. And it is so watered down
by the time it gets there, that it is not enough to truly make
a difference.
So, I was wondering if you would identify a program for me
that you think really could work in that kind of a system,
where it could be a program established by Congress or today
that is working--or, not necessarily working, but funded--that
could work better or be much more effective, potentially, as an
individual voucher program.
Mr. Whitehurst. Sure. The Elementary and Secondary
Education Act is up for reauthorization. You know, I would like
to see the federal dollars that currently go to states and
districts to support low-income children, I would like to see
that voucherized. A more popular term is a ``scholarship.'' But
the point is that the money follows the student to a school
that the parents want for their child. And--and this is an
important ``and''--and that is accompanied by information that
helps parents know where the good schools are, and provides
access to them. I think that could be important.
I would like to see Head Start work that way. The Child
Care Development Block Grant program is an effective voucher.
But by the time the states are done with it, there is often not
enough money that gets to the parents for them to shop for
adequate services. So they buy child care on the cheap, and
there are consequences of doing that.
There is roughly $22 billion a year that the Federal
Government spends on early child care for the disadvantaged.
But it is spread through over 40 programs. The money gets eaten
up and distorted and pushed in directions that don't really
help the families. And I think people can shop, if you give
them the resources to shop, and information. And we get
innovation out of that, that we don't get out of ossified
government programs that will change, if they ever change, over
a 25-year period.
So, I--you know, my approach is to try to think of how a
marketplace could solve the problem. It will be a marketplace
that needs regulation and information, and sometimes won't
work. But I don't think we tried that in a lot of social
programs, and I think we should.
Mrs. NOEM. Well, I think it is interesting, because, in
some of the areas that I am speaking about, there is not
necessarily those services there today. There may be an early
childhood program that is failing right now, but there is not
necessarily another entity there to create that kind of
competition. But if there was children there, and families who
had vouchers that could give their kids a choice of where to do
it, there may be more services come into that area because of
that situation.
Mr. Whitehurst. Yes, I think so.
Mrs. NOEM. And that is a definite change that I think would
be generational.
Mr. Whitehurst. Yes.
Mrs. NOEM. Mr. Bridgeland, I would like to ask you,
particularly. Do you think that programs, when they are
established, have goals? And when they do have those goals,
what percentage of them tend to stay true to the goals under
which they were established? Or what is the percentage of
failure rate?
Mr. Bridgeland. I am so glad you asked that, because we
talk so much about the power of evaluation and evidence. But
when the performance assessment rating tool was developed by
the Office of Management and Budget in 2003, we looked at more
than 1,000 programs. And it wasn't just, ``Does this particular
program have an evidence base?'' We actually wanted to know
what is the concrete goal of the program, what is the strategy
to actually meet that goal, what is the implementation plan,
who will be managing this program, and then, what does the
evidence tell us about the effectiveness of not just the policy
and the practice, but the strategy to reach the goal.
The other thing I wanted to highlight, to reinforce what
Mr. Whitehurst said, and your excellent point about having
these programs and policies actually reach children and
families, is that when I was on the White House Council for
Community Solutions under President Obama, we visited 36
communities across the country, and we asked them, ``What do
you need most from the Federal Government?''
And, honestly, I expected people to say more funding. And
in every single community they said, ``The eligibility
requirements, the use of funds, the government oversight, the
rules and regulations are paralyzing us. If we could actually
have a more holistic approach, and look at these young people
we are trying to help in a way that is not so siloed and so
programmatic, we could do a better job boosting their
outcome.''
So, I think Russ's--Mr. Whitehurst's idea of having
linkages between what-works clearinghouses across departments
and agencies that look at the intersection of various programs,
whether it is home visiting with early childhood, with dropout
prevention programs, would be a more effective way for the
government to analyze effectiveness.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Holding, you are recognized.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The--Mr. Bridgeland,
you have referenced in your answer to a previous question, you
know, two programs that you found, Scared Straight and the Even
Start family literacy program, as two that, you know, evidence
showed, you know, were not working. What happened to those
programs, at the end of the day?
Mr. Bridgeland. Yes. So the Scared Straight program is
still in existence, although the U.S. Department of Justice has
issued guidance highlighting the evidence from the Campbell
Consortium, Vanderbilt University, and a report to the Congress
with 500 indications of the fact that this program resulted in
a 28 percent higher rate of crime and recidivism than those in
the control group.
The Even Start family literacy program was the subject of
three national evaluations, each showing that the children and
the parents did no better, in terms of their literacy outcomes,
than the control group. Congress went on to spend, over the
next eight years, $1 billion on that program. It was finally
eliminated. And, as I mentioned previously, it would be great
if those funds, from the perspective of young people, had been
redirected toward the Reading Recovery program, which
evaluations have shown have significantly boosted literacy
rates.
Mr. HOLDING. You also referenced that you and your
organization have looked at 1,000 other programs to evaluate
what their goals are----
Mr. Bridgeland. Yes.
Mr. HOLDING [continuing]. You know, are there any evidence
to suggest they are achieving those goals. You know, out of
that, the 1,000 that you evaluated, what is the percentage that
were successful and still going on, and what is the percentage
that have been ended after a demonstration that they are
unsuccessful?
Mr. Bridgeland. So the part--the performance assessment
rating tool examined more than 1,000 programs. And 19 percent
were found to be effective. So less than one in five were found
to be effective programs when examining their goals, strategy,
implementation plan, and the evidence behind them. Our former--
--
Mr. HOLDING. Do you have a dollar figure on the 81 percent
that were found to be uneffective----
Mr. Bridgeland. I will tell you----
Mr. HOLDING [continuing]. In terms of the----
Mr. Bridgeland [continuing]. Mr. Holding, I--it is,
literally, billions and billions of dollars. I did co-chair the
White House Task Force on Disadvantaged Youth, and we
discovered 339 federal programs across 12 departments and
agencies spending $224 billion every year. And really, the
President had asked us to surface initiatives to help boost
opportunity for low-income children and their families. And we
were able to identify a number of programs. Home visitation was
one of them, Nurse-Family Partnership. Some of the early Head
Start programs had some evidence of effectiveness with some
fade-out effects.
But, unfortunately, many of these programs, we just
couldn't tell from the evidence. We knew a lot about their
cost, we knew a lot about how many people they served. But too
often, we didn't know enough about what was the impact on
opportunity----
Mr. HOLDING. Is there any good exemplar of a federal
program that has a mechanism within the program itself?
Mr. Bridgeland. Yes.
Mr. HOLDING. Where evidence is going to be continuously and
rigorously reviewed? And, you know, that is the trigger to
recommend continued funding----
Mr. Bridgeland. Yes.
Mr. HOLDING [continuing]. Or the trigger to recommend----
Mr. Bridgeland. So the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act in
the Department of Labor for community colleges is a tiered-
evidence approach, which basically builds in evidence, requires
third-party evaluations, and then gives more funding to those
programs that have better evidence. The Social Innovation Fund
at the Corporation for National Community Service is another
example, and the Workforce Innovation Fund.
And I think both Chairman Boustany and Mr. Doggett
emphasized the importance of creating an environment of
innovation. You talk to social entrepreneurs who are solving
these problems all across the country, they are building in
evidence into the programs that--just as Congressman Davis had
built in a mechanism for home visitation at the outset of the
program. And it builds support for the program over time, and
it also enables us to learn what works.
Mr. HOLDING. And this is for the panel. Are there any
examples in the private sector that you can think of that would
be analogous that have good evidentiary-based review systems
built within their program that you can throw out there?
I believe someone mentioned they Googled, it is 20,000 a
year. But some other----
Mr. Whitehurst. Right. Well, there is a huge industry that
serves industry, running quick, randomized trials to find--A/B
comparisons, they are called--to find out--there are two ways
of doing it--which one works better. And the tech industry does
this all the time. They can do it, because we are sitting
there, clicking, and it is--they have just got to do it two
different ways, and see which works best.
So, if you are--you see a big advertisement for a foot-long
sandwich, or the nine-inch sandwich, or the four-inch sandwich,
you can bet that has been tried, and they know which link
that--the sandwich you are most likely to pay for. So it is
endemic, particularly in the tech industry, that we don't do it
in government or social services means that they learn and we
don't.
So we desperately need to infuse into the government
provision of services the ability to collect that information,
analyze it quickly, do A/B comparisons, and move forward.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Let's go to Mr.
Lewis next.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank each one of you for being here today.
Could you tell me, members of the panel, what does the
evidence show is the result of letting important safety net
programs expire, elapse? Do we have any evidence?
Ms. Entmacher. Well, I think the experience, particularly
during the recession, but--of the increase in child poverty,
and the number of children living in deep poverty, showed that
TANF worked very differently in the late 1990s, when jobs were
available, the Earned Income Tax Credit had been increased, and
the combination of factors of the strong economy, work
incentives, and, yes, some of the changes in TANF, increased
the employment of single mothers, and led to a decline in child
poverty.
But when economic circumstances changed, jobs were harder
to come by, jobs were disappearing, welfare mothers had to
compete with people who had college educations who couldn't
find jobs, either. And the safety net had disappeared.
States--TANF is structured so that states are rewarded for
cutting their welfare rolls. Even the work participation
requirements are based on the number of TANF recipients that
you have working over the number of TANF recipients. Well, in
some places--and South Dakota is a good example--it is hard to
find jobs for people. It is really tough. In a recession it is
really tough. So, how do you keep your work participation rates
up? You cut back the denominator. You don't serve the hardest-
to-serve people.
And I know Mr. Haskins, who has testified many times before
this Committee, has talked about the fact that there is a large
group of what are often referred to as disconnected people,
people who are not getting help from any--certainly not getting
help from TANF, maybe getting a little help from SNAP. During
the recession, the TANF Emergency Contingency Fund created jobs
for people who couldn't find work. It was effective, but then
it was abandoned.
So, I think, you know, we need to see that we have our
incentives right, and programs designed so they can quickly
respond to people in need.
Mr. LEWIS. Let me just ask--I know you all are experts--
this morning. Have any of you ever had the ability, had an
opportunity to walk in the shoes of the people that depend on
these safety net programs? I just want to hear from each one of
you.
Mr. Bridgeland. I will answer that, Mr. Lewis, and thank
you for all you have done for this country for so many for so
long.
One of the areas I work a lot, I am co-chair with Ethel
Kennedy of the Earth Conservation Corps, here in the Anacostia.
We work with young people from Congress Heights and Anacostia
and other areas, literally in view of the Nation's Capitol, who
sometimes wake up to the sound of gunfire.
Mr. LEWIS. It is a great program, thank you.
Mr. Bridgeland. And just give you one example--because I
have walked in her shoes, now, for 10 years--LaShante Moore was
a teenage mother. She had three children, she was homeless, she
was, literally, living on the streets of Washington, D.C., in
view of the Capitol. The Earth Conservation Corps gave her a
service year opportunity to come in and have a transformational
experience that Crystal and I are going to have the opportunity
to talk to you about tomorrow, Chairman Boustany, where she was
able to not only see herself not as a problem to be solved, but
a potential to be fulfilled.
And to help clean up the Anacostia River, this group of
young people from Anacostia literally brought the nation's
symbol, the bald eagle, back to the nation's capital. They fly
over our Capitol today because of these young people. Imagine
the hope that that gives them. I have seen her intersection
with welfare, I have seen her intersection with food stamps,
SNAP, I have seen her intersection with a whole host of
programs. And so we walk in the shoes of these young people
from Anacostia every day.
One issue I want to put on the--a subject of this
distinguished subcommittee is there are 1.2 million homeless
youth in the United States in public schools today. And, under
McKinney-Vento there is an obligation to help them with
homeless liaisons. And that is a huge area that I view as a
silent epidemic within the larger epidemic of high school
dropout, and I think we need to walk in their shoes. Thank you.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you.
Mr. Whitehurst. Mr. Lewis, if it is a personal question, I
don't think any of us have really walked in the shoes of
somebody who is hungry. And I won't go there. I will say that I
grew up relatively poor in a hard scrabble small community in
the South, and everybody around me struggled. And I retain a
strong sense of personal obligation to people who are having a
tough time and need some assistance, and I think we need to do
the best job we can to see that that assistance really helps
them, rather than simply makes us feel good.
Mr. LEWIS. Appreciate it.
Mr. Muhlhausen. Mr. Lewis, I used to--in another lifetime,
I used to work at a juvenile correctional facility in
Baltimore, Maryland. And we would get young kids coming in who
were detained for committing various crimes. And, with a little
bit of structure in their life, many of these kids behaved very
well. And we would just think to ourselves, why, you know, this
kid here, he is--with a little bit of guidance, seems like a
perfectly great kid to be around.
But, as soon as he was released back into the community, he
had no structure in his life, and he would end up getting re-
arrested again for various crimes, usually selling drugs on the
street, and come back. And it was just a rotating door, where,
as much as we tried to help him in the correctional setting,
there was nothing we could do when he went back home and he had
no structure in his life, somebody there, whether it was the
parent, or some other person who could help give him guidance.
And so, while I haven't walked in the shoes of the poor,
as--in the question you say, I feel that, in many ways, and the
case of my personal experience is that, you know, sometimes a
supporting family is the best solution to all these problems.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you.
Ms. Entmacher. Thank you. I mean I have spent a lot of time
listening, talking to poor mothers, trying to understand the
struggles that they are encountering. Personally, I know that I
never have.
I have lived on a very low stipend provided by a non-profit
organization, and I tried to make it, you know, by eating a lot
of peanut butter and day-old bread. Then I got sick. I went to
a free clinic, and I got a prescription for an expensive
antibiotic. When I went to fill it, I realized it was going to
be, you know, a couple of weeks' pay, and I almost walked out,
and then I realized, ``You're crazy. Call your parents,'' you
know? ``You can afford it. You're sick. You need it.'' And the
Bank of Mom and Dad, needless to say, came through. I got
healthy, got--you know, got better, went back to school. I have
never been really poor.
My husband was hospitalized. While he was in the hospital,
being treated for a condition that I later learned had a 50
percent mortality rate, I got a note from the insurance
company, saying, ``Oh,'' you know, ``this doesn't qualify for
coverage.'' And so, I thought we would have to cover that
emergency--you know, and at that point he had been in the
hospital for five days. And that was very upsetting, of course.
And--but I realized, okay, you know, my parents, his parents,
our savings, we will cover whatever it takes and I will--you
know, when I am stronger, I will fight with the insurance
company to get it covered.
But for some people, you know, without health care
coverage, that is--you know, that is homelessness. That is
hunger forever. That is a total disaster in their lives. So,
you know, I have been fortunate. I haven't had to depend
entirely on the safety net, which is why I feel really
committed to try to make sure that those supports are available
to other people.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, I want to thank each one of you for your
response.
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for holding this
hearing, and being so liberal with the time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Let's go to Mr.
Reed next.
Mr. REED. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will follow
up on Mr. Lewis's question about personal experiences. And I
think it is clear that we bring all of our life experiences to
this issue, in particular. And you know, being on the
Republican side, sometimes I am accused of being part of the
groups that are coming from the--the people that are born with
silver spoons in their mouth. And I can assure you, being the
youngest of 12 whose father passed when I was 2, and I had a
single mother raise 6 of us in the household that were left,
that was not the case. But----
Mr. CROWLEY. Tom, I think you had several spoons in your
mouth, just----
[Laughter.]
Mr. REED. I used to. I am down 110 pounds. That is why Mr.
Crowley is picking on me.
Mr. CROWLEY. What a set-up I gave you.
Mr. REED. Thank you very much. And he is a good friend over
there.
So, I am committed to this issue, too, because you are
really talking about a core issue in America. And so, I am
interested in hearing from you, our experts here today, from
the point of view from the social worker on the front line.
And, Mr. Muhlhausen, I believe, with your experience at the
juvenile detention facility, other folks who have done
research, you have talked with numerous people on the front
line.
And what I am very interested from you--and we will start
with Mr. Muhlhausen, possibly--is what do they feel is how they
are judged, whether or not they are effective when they are
dealing with the government bureaucracy out of Washington,
D.C., or in the State of New York, where I am from, Albany, or
our county seats in the relevant 11 counties I represent? How
do they feel they are judged? What is the metric that they have
to adhere to, presently? And is that the right metric we should
be creating, in their mind set, on a front-line basis? Or is
there something better we could do? Do you understand the
question?
Mr. Muhlhausen. Yes. Well, I--my experience is the metric
that was used was getting the day without having--getting
through the day without having a major incident, just making
sure that nobody was hurt, that the facility was secure. And
you are so focused on that, that you are not always able to
take the long-term perspective of, ``How can I actually change
the lives of these troubled youth?''
And one of the things that profoundly impacted me was that
we were told we were implementing a program called Therapeutic
Communities at this correctional facility, and that it was
proven to work in randomized experiments. And we were trained.
We had about two days of training, and that is about it. And
when I left the job and I came to Washington, D.C., I went up
and I started to research the literature on Therapeutic
Communities. And I found that we were in no way implementing
the program that was in the literature. We were barely getting
by with what we were implementing, and it was poorly
implemented. And--but we were able to tell the state
legislators that we were running an effective program, because
it was based--it was evidence-based, it was based on a program
that was proven to work, even though we were poorly trained.
So, I think your answer is, you know, it is tough when you
are on the day-to-day front line. The thing about the long-
term--when you are just trying to get through the day and make
sure that everybody is safe, in the case when I was--when I
worked in juvenile corrections.
Mr. REED. So maybe Mr. Whitehurst will go there.
Mr. Whitehurst. I don't know a lot about front-line social
workers. I do know a fair amount about front-line teachers and
child care workers. And I think one of the problems in that
industry, if you think of it as an industry, or willing to
think of it that way, is there aren't any measures of
effectiveness. Whereas, we know that there are great pre-K
teachers and terrible pre-K teachers, and family child care
providers who do a great job and a terrible job, and they are
all treated the same way.
And, you know, I would love to see a system where, you
know, if somebody is working in the criminal justice system,
there are metrics that indicate whether you are being
successful or not. And if you do a great job, you can make a
living wage, and if you are not doing a great job, you can go
do something else.
Mr. REED. Well, before we go there, Mr. Chairman, that is
something I would like to explore and go on record here.
You know, one of the things I think we forget in
Washington, D.C. is we issue these edicts, or these standards
from afar, from the ivory tower. I think we really need to
reach out to the people on the front line and say, ``Okay, how
would you judge yourself to say if you are effective or not in
impacting lives in a positive way,'' and then hold people
accountable to their own metrics. I think that is the best way
to go about this.
And in my last few minutes, Ms. Entmacher, I read your
testimony with interest. And there is 80 programs that we are
essentially talking about here today that have been summarized
in the material. You talk a lot about what works. Identify to
me one program that doesn't work, from your point of view.
Ms. Entmacher. Well, I think, actually, Mr. Muhlhausen--I
looked at the testimony from an earlier hearing on a similar
subject that this Subcommittee had. Marriage promotion--I think
it was Mr. Meehan who talked about, you know, single-parent
families having----
Mr. REED. Because you talked a lot specifically about
programs in your----
Ms. Entmacher. Yes, yes, okay. Well, marriage----
Mr. REED. So the marriage promotion program?
Ms. Entmacher. Marriage promotion programs.
Mr. REED. I am not familiar with them.
Ms. Entmacher. Yes, there is----
Mr. REED. Oh, just those general programs. Is there an
actual program that you could point to that would help me to
show a program that doesn't work, from your point of view?
Ms. Entmacher. Yes. There is money specifically--well,
allocated in TANF for states to run marriage promotion
programs. There is specific funding for it. It was evaluated.
And Mr. Muhlhausen testified about it in earlier testimony to
this Subcommittee. And the results found that it did not
increase marriage rates in any site, which was the program's
primary goal. Of course, programs can have benefits beyond a
primary goal, one of which could have been the relationship
between couples, so that they could work together more
effectively to parent.
But, as Mr. Muhlhausen found, in only one site, Oklahoma,
were there any positive benefits in the couples' relationships.
And, in several sites, there was actually harm done, and there
was more conflict between the couples. So, you know, again, an
interesting and worthy goal, but the evaluations indicated that
it wasn't working.
Mr. REED. Thank you. And so, from what I heard from that
testimony is that the marriage promotion programs are something
we should not support and go forward with.
Ms. Entmacher. Yes.
Mr. REED. Thank you. All right. With that, I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank the gentleman. Let's go to Mr.
Crowley next.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this
Committee hearing today. And, aside from my teasing of my
colleague from New York, who I have fond affection for, Mr.
Reed, I also would like to note for the record that the lack of
green at the table before us--the only thing green is the light
indicating that I am able to speak right now. And I am--just
want to make that point, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter.]
Mr. CROWLEY. But I do find the focus of today's hearing
very interesting, in that--using evidence-based experience to
formulate policy. I think that is interesting.
And, Mr. Muhlhausen, I am sure you--maybe you will find
this interesting, as well. Do you have any thoughts about
whether there is currently sufficient evidence about human
actions significantly contributing to global warming? I don't
expect you to answer that question.
But it seems to me that, with so much scientific evidence,
overwhelming scientific evidence, like from the United Nations
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, we should be
pursuing government policies that reduce effects of global
warming. Having said that, this hearing today--and I do
appreciate the chairman calling this hearing--refers to funding
that works. And I agree, we should fund programs that work.
So, I--Ms. Entmacher, I appreciate the response you just
gave to my colleague from New York, as well, in terms of what
is or is not working.
The federal safety net programs lifted 39 million Americans
out of poverty, cutting the number in poverty nearly in half.
Programs like Social Security, nutrition assistance, and tax
credits for working families, like the Earned Income Tax Credit
and the Child Tax Credit, actually make a difference in
people's lives. They are keeping people from falling deeper
into a policy, and, to me, a policy that is working [sic].
So, we do need to fund what works, and that is fund the
social safety net programs that help people, particularly low
and middle-income families. EITC, the Child Tax Credit, are
vital resources for millions of American families, many of whom
are military families struggling to simply get by. Together,
these two tax credits improve health, school performance, and
provide a critical boost to a family that sets children on a
path towards a much better way in life. Would you agree with
that, Ms. Entmacher?
Ms. Entmacher. Yes.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you. I think that is why it is so
important to keep supporting programs, and ensuring that they
remain refundable for the low-income families that can benefit
mostly from them.
We will be talking a lot over this week and the weeks to
come about budgets. I suspect, as we speak, there is probably
press conferences about a budget that is being proposed by my
Republican colleagues, and others, as well. A budget is meant
to reflect our policies, as a country. In this case, as a
party, to some degree, as well, and the same in terms of our
budget, what Democrats have proposed. The budgets that have
been performed [sic] by my colleagues on the Republican side of
the aisle, I believe, have disproportionately cut programs that
serve working families. I think that is a mistake.
And if we are focused on what works, we should be
supporting, not weakening, these programs that do work to help
lift Americans in their lives. If these programs keep children
from going to bed hungry at night, I think we should continue
them. If they provide child care and assistance, and enable
parents to work and support the families, I think we should
support that. If they help to keep the lights on, and the heat
on, or over--a roof and--over a family's heads, I think we
should support those types of programs. To me, those are
programs that are working.
The research being done, and the focus on long-term
outcomes, is important. And evidence-based policymaking is
important. I agree. But let's not lose sight of the real goal,
the goal of helping people, regardless of your political
persuasion. And I did appreciate the answer that all of you
gave, in terms of Mr. Lewis, in terms of walking in the shoes.
I have been fortunate, as well, not to have walked in the shoes
of people who are starving or hungry or without work or
employment, nor my family. But I have tremendous empathy for
folks who do--are faced with those crises, and I think we, as a
government, should do what we can to help lift them out of
that, and that includes helping parents work.
One of the toughest things I think my constituents had--
have to make is when there is snow or no snow in New York
State, and schools are closed, and parents are in a quandary as
to what to do with their children, because they have no other
means of child care but the school system. And it is painful
for those individuals.
So, I thank all the panelists today. In particular, I want
to thank the chairman for calling--holding this hearing.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. That concludes
all the questions.
I want to thank our panelists for their, really, tremendous
testimony and answers to questions in this hearing, looking at
expanding opportunity by funding what works. I think this
created a great foundation for us to start with, to really look
at how we are going to approach these programs.
I also want to note that there may be additional questions
that Members have, which is customary. And they will submit
these in writing, and we will provide your answers to be part
of the record, as well. We would hope that you can get those
answers back to us within a two-week period.
And, with that, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the record follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
