- THE COST SHARING REDUCTION PROGRAM INVESTIGATION AND THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH'S CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATIONS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE COST SHARING REDUCTION PROGRAM

INVESTIGATION AND THE EXECUTIVE

BRANCH'S CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 7, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-OS13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-194                  WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DEVIN NUNES, California              CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            XAVIER BECERRA, California
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina

David Stewart, Staff Director

Nick Gwyn, Minority Chief of Staff

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois, Chairman

PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
JASON SMITH, Missouri                CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of July 7, 2016 announcing the hearing..................     2

WITNESSES

Michael Deich, Senior Advisor, Office of Management and Budget...    19
John A. Koskinen, Commissioner, Internal Revenue Service.........     9
Mark J. Mazur, Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, U.S.
Department of the Treasury.....................................    15
Mary Wakefield, Ph.D., R.N., Acting Deputy Secretary, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services........................    13

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Questions from The Honorable Peter Roskam, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Illinois, to the Internal Revenue
Service........................................................   212
Additional Questions from The Honorable Peter Roskam, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Illinois..........   214

THE COST SHARING REDUCTION PROGRAM

INVESTIGATION AND THE EXECUTIVE

BRANCH'S CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATIONS

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 7, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Peter Roskam
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Thursday, June 30, 2016
No. OS-13

Chairman Roskam Announces Hearing on

The Cost Sharing Reduction Program

Investigation and the Executive Branch's

Constitutional Violations

House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Chairman Peter Roskam
(R-IL) announced today that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on
``Defying the Constitution: The Administration's Unlawful Funding of
the Cost Sharing Reduction Program.'' The hearing will focus on the
Committee's year-and-a-half-long investigation into the
Administration's funding of the Affordable Care Act's Cost Sharing
Reduction program. The hearing will take place on Thursday, July 7,
2016, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at
10:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time to hear witnesses, oral testimony at
this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However, any
individual or organization may submit a written statement for
consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the printed record
of the hearing.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to make a submission, and click on the link
entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once
you have followed the online instructions, submit all requested
information. ATTACH your submission as a Word document, in compliance
with the formatting requirements listed below, by the close of business
on Thursday, July 21, 2016. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record,
and any written comments in response to a request for written comments
must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in
compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be
maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.

All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in a
single document via email, provided in Word format and must not exceed
a total of 10 pages. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/or
organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be included in
the body of the email. Please exclude any personal identifiable
information in the attached submission.

Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the
exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available
online at
http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman ROSKAM. The Committee will come to order. The Ways
and Means Oversight Subcommittee hearing on the cost sharing
and reduction investigation is under way. Welcome today. We are
joined by the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee,
Chairman Brady, and I am going to yield to Chairman Brady for
an opening statement and then we will hear from Mr. Lewis.
Chairman Brady.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Chairman Roskam, for holding
this important hearing.
Today we are releasing substantive findings from our 17-
month investigation into the Administration's unlawful funding
of Obamacare's cost-sharing reduction program. The reason why
our investigation took 17 months is because the Administration
obstructed the process and simply refused to give the facts to
the American people.
So we are here today to fulfill our constitutional
responsibility to conduct oversight and reinforce Congress'
constitutional power of the purse. We are not here to litigate
whether the Administration acted unlawfully in funding
Obamacare's cost-sharing reduction program. That was settled in
May when the Federal judge ruled that the Administration had no
constitutional or statutory authority to fund this program.
As our Constitution makes clear in article I, section 9,
clause 7, ``No money shall be drawn from the Treasury but in
consequence of appropriations made by law.'' This means the
executive branch may not spend a single taxpayer dollar without
an explicit appropriation by Congress. Our Founding Fathers
entrusted Congress with the power of the purse, not the White
House.
While current law authorizes the cost-sharing reduction
program, Congress has never provided an appropriation for it.
The Administration knew this and they didn't care. They broke
the law and spent the money anyway. This is stealing from the
American people, plain and simple. To date, the Administration
has unlawfully spent $7 billion of taxpayer funding that was
never appropriated for the CSR program. Let me repeat that: The
Administration unlawfully spent $7 billion, taxpayer dollars
for this program.
So in February of 2015, our Committee and the Energy and
Commerce Committee initiated a joint investigation into how all
this was put into motion. The Administration has met us with
unprecedented resistance at every turn. Numerous times we would
call for agencies to turn over critical documents and numerous
times we were denied.
We also asked Administration personnel to come speak with
us in person about how things transpired. Again, we were
denied. At the beginning of the year, I finally said enough is
enough. I issued subpoenas to compel the testimony of agency
officials and legally require the Administration to turn over
requests to documentation. This was one of my first acts as
Chairman. It was the first time in years our Committee has
subpoenaed the Administration for information needed to fulfill
our oversight responsibilities.
The lengths we have had to go, in this investigation,
clearly underscore the unprecedented level of obstruction by
this Administration. In fact, all of the agencies represented
here today still have not complied with our subpoenas to turn
over relevant documents. But these lengths also demonstrate how
seriously we take our duty to oversee the Administration's
actions. We will not be deterred by stonewalling.
Thanks in large part to the outstanding work of Chairman
Roskam, Chairman Upton at Energy and Commerce, and the
oversight teams, our two committees, we have uncovered critical
information about the Administration's unlawful actions. And it
is because of this hard work that we now have a chance to
deliver real findings to the American people.
This morning, along with the Energy and Commerce Committee,
we released a comprehensive staff report on what we have
uncovered thus far. The report, which can be found on our
Committee's website, details how the Administration decided to
fund the CSR program illegally, and it provides an in-depth
look at their unprecedented obstruction of this investigation.
Our investigation in this matter is far from complete, but
today represents a major step toward providing Americans with
the transparency and accountability they deserve from their
government.
Again, thank you to Chairman Roskam and all the Members of
the Oversight Subcommittee for your hard work and dedication. I
yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just say good morning and welcome to the witnesses.
I begin by thanking each and every one of you for being here.
Thank you for your service.
In particular, I would like to thank the Commissioner for
joining us once again. The Commissioner is an honorable man who
has faithfully served his country. I would like to quote the
former IRS Chief Risk Officer who said he is not only a
phenomenal leader but one of the best managers we ever had in
government.
Mr. Chairman, I must tell you, I am upset. And I am very
disappointed with today's hearing, with the topic. I am afraid
it is nothing more than another attempt to roll back healthcare
reform. Almost 2 years ago, House Republicans filed a lawsuit
against the Obama Administration over the funding of the cost-
sharing reduction program, better known as CSR. This program
simply helps low-income people afford medical costs.
Today, over 6 million Americans have been helped. Today,
over 6 million have better access to care. To be clear, the
lawsuit claims that this program needs annual funding from
Congress. The Administration argues that it does not. Mr.
Chairman, this is a lawsuit between two branches of government.
Both parties agree on the facts.
So I respectfully ask, what is the point of this hearing?
Why are we placing public servants in the middle of an ongoing
legal case? Some of you argue that we are here because the work
of the Committee is being blocked. This is not the case. This
is not true. For the record, there are four government
officials representing four different agencies here today. The
Administration has voluntarily provided 13 current and former
officials for interviews on this matter. Thirteen. Not 5, not
6, not 10, but 13. The lawsuit is still pending in the courts.
It is ongoing. Yet, here we are.
Mr. Chairman, there is real work to be done. There are real
issues that need to be addressed. This is not it. This is not
the one. There may be others. We should not waste the time and
energy debating how to tear apart the good part of healthcare
reform. We should not be trying to roll back what helps people
make ends meet. We can and we must do better, and we can do
better. We are called to be leaders, to be headlights and not
tail lights.
Mr. Chairman, I deeply believe that this Subcommittee can
do good work on behalf of the American people. I am hopeful
that we will return to that work very, very soon.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Lewis. Let me attempt to
answer some of the questions that you have laid out.
And before I do that, I want to thank Chairman Brady and
Chairman Upton for the work that they have done in driving this
investigation and, from my point of view, that work has paid
off.
The Ranking Member just a minute ago said there is real
work to be done, and I agree with that. He gave us an
admonition and the question was, what is the point of the
hearing. Let me describe, I think, what the point of the
hearing is. But there is also a notion that when you are doing
good work--and we all want to do it--there have to be clear
lines, clear lines of authority.
We have all heard that phrase, ``Good fences make good
neighbors.'' And what we have seen going back and forth between
the executive branch and the legislative branch are areas where
the legislative branch, at least the Majority in the House
thinks so, feels encroached upon.
And it is not as if this is just a parochial thing. We are
talking about these constitutional themes that this entire
Subcommittee believes matter. Now, how that manifests itself, I
don't obviously speak for the Minority, but these things do
matter and it is not just esoteric.
So as we all learned, we have this system of checks and
balances. And there are three coequal branches of government,
and they are meant to restrain one another. That was the nature
of the architecture that the founders had, and they looked at
these as essential safeguards to protect the American public
from their own government.
In our hearing today, we are going to be looking at how
this Administration has run roughshod over two key authorities
that the Constitution gave to Congress. The Constitution didn't
give them to the Administration, didn't give them to the
courts; the Constitution in article I gives them to Congress.
And as Chairman Brady discussed a minute ago, the first key
authority is Congress' power of the purse. And as we all know,
the Constitution says this: ``No money shall be drawn from the
Treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law.''
That means that the government may not spend any taxpayer money
unless Congress passes a law that says it can.
The American people elect Members of Congress. And here in
the House, we are up for election every 2 years. And we are all
too familiar with that process, and that is the process by
which the American public adjusts the dials. They make the
choices at the ballot box that is manifested in who is seated
in this Congress, and the Constitution says those people, who
are sent by those representatives, get to choose how the money
gets spent. Other people don't; Congress does.
And it also means that the President cannot take money from
one program and spend it on another just because he wants to or
just because he thinks it is a good idea. Money is specifically
appropriated for individual programs, and it seems to me that
this Administration has ignored those constitutional
restraints.
So if you set aside the ``good intentions'' by which the
Administration is cloaking itself and you begin to project out
and think, well, what would a future Administration be able to
do if we allow this to stand? Can a future Administration say
they are going to do what they perceive to be a good idea
regardless of what the Constitution says? And I would argue
that that isn't a good thing.
The Affordable Care Act established many programs. One of
them was the premium tax credit, which helps people pay for
their insurance premiums. Congress wrote the Affordable Care
Act to allow the Administration to pay for that program from an
account held by the Treasury Department. That account is paid
for with a permanent appropriation so the tax credit account
always has money. In this hearing, we might refer to that as
the section 1324 account, or the premium tax credit
appropriation.
Okay. So far, so good. Permanent appropriations are unusual
though. Congress pays for most programs with annual
appropriations, meaning each year the Administration has to ask
Congress for money to pay for those programs. Well, the ACA set
up one of those programs that requires an annual appropriation.
Let me repeat that: The ACA set up the program that requires an
annual appropriation called the cost-sharing reduction program,
or the CSR program.
The cost-sharing reduction program requires insurance
companies to reduce copayments, deductibles, and other out-of-
pocket costs for qualified people. Under the CSR program, the
government is supposed to help offset the insurance company's
cost. Let's get that clear. Who's the beneficiary here? It is
the insurance companies.
The underlying statute says the insurance companies have an
obligation. This program is a subsidy for insurance companies.
It is not a subsidy that is going directly to poor people. It
is a subsidy that is going to insurance companies to offset
their costs for the CRS payments.
But unlike the premium tax credit program, Congress did not
give any money in the ACA for the CSR program. Instead, each
year the President's supposed to ask for money from Congress
and the Congress can decide whether or not to give the
executive branch that money. That is the architecture of the
ACA. And in 2012, the Treasury Department wrote the President's
Office of Management and Budget a memo saying exactly that.
In 2013, the President initially asked Congress for $3.9
billion to pay the cost-sharing reduction payments to the
insurance companies in his fiscal year 2014 budget request. But
then something strange happened. In July of 2013, the HHS
assistant secretary of financial services called the Senate
Appropriations Committee staff and asked them to take that line
out of the President's budget. How unusual.
Then in the fall of 2013, OMB created a memorandum
explaining why the Administration could use the money Congress
appropriated to pay for the premium tax credit program, that
permanent appropriation I was just talking about, to pay for
the cost-sharing reduction program using a permanent account to
pay for an annual expense.
OMB shared that memo with top officials in the
Administration to get their approval, including--think about
this. The level of granularity of this account is getting the
attention of these people: The general counsels of Treasury and
HHS, as well as the Attorney General, Eric Holder, who all had
to sign off on that plan.
Now, around that same time, the IRS' deputy chief financial
officer was confirming that the Administration was squared away
to make these payments, which were set to start being paid in
January of 2014. At first, he was under the impression that the
payments would be made from an annual appropriation to HHS, but
then he learned HHS had withdrawn its request. HHS explained to
him that the payments would come from the premium tax credit
account.
The deputy CFO had two big concerns: First, how would HHS
make payments from a Treasury account? He wanted to be sure
that an audit trail would be in place to later trace the
accuracy of the payments, but then he became concerned about a
bigger problem. Were the funds in the premium tax credit
account even available for these payments?
Because not only does the Constitution prohibit the
Administration from making payments unless they have an
appropriation, there is a law called the Antideficiency Act,
and of all things, it makes it a criminal violation for a
Federal official to pay for a program if Congress has not
appropriated funds for that program.
Helping the IRS avoid Antideficiency Act violations was one
of the deputy CFO's primary responsibilities, and so he did the
right thing. He raised red flags to the IRS' Chief Risk
Officer, David Fisher, the IRS' chief counsel's office as well.
His warning set off a chain of discussions at the IRS, and by
early January of 2014, IRS Chief Counsel William Wilkins
reached out to the OMB General Counsel, Geovette Washington, to
discuss these issues. She then set up a meeting at OMB for
seven IRS officials to come to OMB and look at the memo they
prepared about the CRS funding.
So on January 13, 2014, IRS lawyers and the chief risk
officer and chief financial officer and several other officials
went to OMB in the Old Executive Office Building. And there,
these top IRS officials were escorted into an OMB conference
room. Ms. Washington was at the meeting, along with several of
her subordinates. The OMB lawyers passed out copies of the
memo.
Ms. Washington told the IRS officials not to take notes on
it or to take a copy with them. Think about that. No notes, no
copies, which several participants, according to our
investigation, found to be very strange indeed. The OMB lawyers
left the room and let the IRS officials read the memo. Then the
OMB lawyers come back in. Ms. Washington talked about how she
was excited to have had a chance to brief Attorney General Eric
Holder about this issue and that he had approved the memo.
Chief Risk Officer David Fisher and others raised concerns
that the payments would violate the Antideficiency Act and the
Constitution at that meeting. According to Mr. Fisher, OMB
offered a weak explanation for why the payments would be okay.
Back at the IRS, the officials briefed Commissioner Koskinen
about the OMB meeting. Mr. Fisher told Commissioner Koskinen
that he was worried about the Antideficiency Act violations.
Our investigation has revealed, however, by the time the
officials met with Commissioner Koskinen the decision already
had been made. At the meeting, the IRS officials saw copies of
an action memorandum directing the IRS to make certain CRS
payments from the premium tax credit memo. Secretary Lew had
already signed off on that memo.
Administration officials who constructed this plan and
moved ahead with it chose to fund the CRS payments from money
that Congress designated for other programs. In other words,
all of those individuals chose to hijack Congress' power of the
purse and make those violations in violation of the
Constitution and in violation of Federal law.
To this day, they have made more than $7 billion in CSR
payments without congressional authorization. That is the first
thing. The second thing is this, that we will talk about here
today, is Congress' power to oversee the executive branch,
which is not mitigated, which is not restrained, which is not
hampered by a pending lawsuit.
Congress' oversight authorities are critical to ensuring
the Administration is transparent to the American people. That
is our job. Congress has run into unprecedented obstruction
during the course of this investigation. It took the Committees
a year and a half to gather the facts surrounding the
Administration's decision to make these illegal payments. And
even now, OMB, Treasury, and HHS are in violation of subpoenas
issued by the Ways and Means Committee.
The Administration has argued that because the House sued
the Administration to stop them from making these payments, the
Ways and Means Committee and Energy and Commerce Committee
shouldn't be investigating the facts surrounding the
decisionmaking. The House's lawsuit only focuses on a narrow
legal issue. The House and the Administration have agreed that
the court didn't need to do any of the factfinding to reach its
decisions. That is why we need to do the factfinding here.
The Committees want to know who, why, and how the
Administration decided to embark on this unconstitutional
course. While our oversight--while the prerogative of the
American people, as manifested through them adjusting the dials
in their periodic elections has been run roughshod over, it is
our responsibility to determine these facts. And the fact that
there is pending litigation has no influence on our inquiry
there. And we will stipulate further that it is going to be the
courts that are going to make the ultimate constitutional
decision but already the lower court has decided as I have
described.
Instead of accountability and transparency, the
Administration threw up roadblock after roadblock. But despite
those, and through persistent efforts, we have learned a great
deal. We look forward to learning more from the Administration,
why they decided to make these payments, why they worked so
hard to prevent Congress from learning these facts. And we are
here to listen. We are here to learn. We are also here to
defend the prerogative of the American public.
We will hear from just one panel. Our panel is the four
witnesses, the Department of Health and Human Services Acting
Deputy Secretary, Mary Wakefield; Treasury Assistant Secretary
for Tax Policy, Mark Mazur; IRS Commissioner, John Koskinen;
and Office of Management and Budget Senior Advisor, Michael
Deich.
Commissioner, welcome. Let's start with you. You have 5
minutes. Thank you for coming.

STATEMENT OF JOHN A. KOSKINEN,
COMMISSIONER, INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE

Mr. KOSKINEN. Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Members of the Subcommittee, as always, I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee. This hearing
marks the 35th time I have testified before the Congress.
During my 2\1/2\ years as IRS Commissioner, I have
developed a deep respect for this Subcommittee and its primary
role in overseeing the work of the IRS. We do not always agree,
but you raise important questions and your requests and
suggestions often lead to improvements in our service to
American taxpayers.
I am scheduled to lead the IRS for another 16 months, but I
serve obviously at the pleasure of the President and a new
President can always ask me to step aside sooner. But as long
as I am Commissioner, I am committed to working with you in
pursuit of our common goals and helping you fulfill your
important oversight role.
The IRS has been charged with implementing the tax-related
provisions of the Affordable Care Act. These efforts include
supporting the integrated system of Federal subsidies that help
millions of American families afford health insurance coverage
purchased through the Federal and State health insurance
marketplaces. This system consists of interrelated subsidies,
the premium tax credit, and cost-sharing reduction payments.
The health insurance marketplaces, which are overseen by
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, are responsible
for determining whether an individual is eligible for APTC
payments as well as the CSR payments. The IRS provides the
marketplaces with data and computational services for use in
their determinations about eligibility for financial
assistance.
CMS certifies the payments using the information it
receives from the marketplaces and notifies the Treasury
Department's Bureau of Fiscal Services, which disperses the
payments to insurers. The IRS role in this process involves
providing administrative support to ensure proper funding of
and accounting for the advance premium tax credit and the
shared CSR payments.
The source of funding for these payments is a permanent and
definite appropriation to the Secretary of the Treasury. The
IRS manages and administers this appropriation on the
Treasury's behalf for various types of payments, including CSR
payments, premium tax credit refunds, and advance payments of
the premium tax credit.
At the beginning of each fiscal year, the IRS ensures that
sufficient funding has been transferred into an allocation
account for CMS to use in obligating and disbursing payments,
including those for CSR payments. The IRS manages unobligated
funds in the account at the end of the fiscal year and performs
financial reporting as the parent of the allocation account.
Because the payments are reflected on the IRS' financial
statements, the IRS coordinates closely with CMS throughout the
year to ensure that CMS has effective controls over the
integrity of the payment process and amounts. The IRS
continually monitors those controls to mitigate any risk to
financial reporting. This includes an independent third-party
assessment performed at CMS for the IRS to share with the
Government Accountability Office for the financial statement
audit.
The IRS has received a clean audit opinion from the GAO on
its accounting and financial reporting with regard to the cost-
sharing reduction payment for the 2 years the program has been
in operation. Before the first CSR payments were made in late
January 2014, the Treasury Department determined that it would,
through the IRS, administer cost-sharing reduction payments
pursuant to the Affordable Care Act under the section 1324(b)
appropriation. Thereafter, we proceeded with our activities to
support implementation and operation of the CSR payments.
Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member Lewis, and Members of the
Subcommittee, as well as Chairman Brady, this concludes my
statement, and I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Koskinen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Commissioner.
Ms. Wakefield.

STATEMENT OF MARY WAKEFIELD, PH.D., R.N., ACTING DEPUTY
SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Ms. WAKEFIELD. Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member Lewis, and--
--
Chairman ROSKAM. Turn on your mike.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity to
testify on the Department of Health and Human Services'
implementation of the Affordable Care Act, including the
provisions of the Affordable Care Act that require the
executive branch to make advance payments of premium tax
credits and cost-sharing reductions that help to defray the
cost of insurance coverage.
The Affordable Care Act is expanding access to care for
millions of Americans who would otherwise be uninsured. It
improves the quality of care for people no matter how they get
their insurance while also slowing the growth in healthcare
costs nationwide. Now, we have an estimated 20 million
Americans that have gained coverage since the Affordable Care
Act's coverage provisions have taken effect, and cost-sharing
reductions are a key part of providing more Americans with
access to quality health care that they can afford.
This financial assistance helps low-income Americans to see
their doctor on a regular basis and also to afford their out-
of-pocket healthcare expenses. The Administration has
faithfully implemented the Affordable Care Act, including
provisions that require the executive branch to make advance
payments of premium tax credits, as I indicated, and cost-
sharing reductions that help to defray the cost of insurance
coverage.
Both the advance payment of premium tax credits and cost-
sharing reductions are fully funded by the Affordable Care Act
through the appropriation provided under section 1324. As you
know, the House has filed the lawsuit against HHS concerning
the payment of cost-sharing reductions. This issue continues to
be litigated, and for additional information, I would refer you
to the briefs that have been filed in the case.
At HHS, we remain committed to cooperating with the
Committee to provide information that it needs to fulfill its
legislative responsibilities while also taking into account the
significant confidentiality interests of the executive branch.
And we look forward to continuing to work with you and with
your staff on important matters related to the implementation
of the Affordable Care Act.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wakefield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Mazur.

STATEMENT OF MARK J. MAZUR, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
FOR TAX POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. MAZUR. Good morning. Chairman Roskam, Chairman Brady,
Ranking Member Lewis, and Members of the Subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to be here today to testify
regarding the cost-sharing reduction program under the
Affordable Care Act.
Since the enactment more than 6 years ago, the ACA has
significantly reduced the number of Americans without
healthcare coverage. Twenty million people have gained health
insurance coverage because of the ACA. The uninsured rate is
the lowest on record.
Moreover, the ACA is making health coverage more affordable
and accessible for Americans across the country. About 85
percent of marketplace consumers benefit from tax credits to
make their coverage more affordable and they pay an average
premium of $106 per month after tax credits. And since
enactment of the ACA, we have seen the slowest growth in
healthcare costs in 50 years. This reduced growth rate and cost
benefits all of us.
For insured individuals and families, the total cost of
health care covered by our plan consists of a combination of
payments to insurers and direct or indirect payments to
healthcare providers. The payments to insurers take the form of
monthly premiums that the insurers charge. The payments to
healthcare providers, collectively known as cost-sharing
payments, reflect the fact that insurance plans typically do
not pay the full cost of covered healthcare services. Rather,
plans require insured individuals to pay a copayment or
coinsurance for visits to healthcare providers.
Further, some plans require individuals to pay a specified
amount out of pocket, known as a deductible. The principle goal
of the ACA is to make health insurance more affordable for low-
and moderate-income Americans. To achieve that goal, the Act
established an integrated system of Federal subsidies that
lower insurance premiums and reduce out-of-pocket costs for
millions of eligible individuals through the premium tax
credits and through the cost-sharing reductions.
Premium tax credits, as you know, subsidize monthly
insurance premiums for eligible individuals. Those credits are
available to eligible individuals with household incomes from
100 percent of the Federal poverty level, to 400 percent of the
Federal poverty level, and that reduces the cost of insurance
purchased through the ACA's marketplaces for low- and moderate-
income households.
For individuals eligible for the premium tax credit and who
have household income up to 250 percent of the Federal poverty
level, the ACA also helps with cost-sharing expenses, such as
copayments and deductibles for plans obtained through the
marketplaces. The permanent appropriation in 31 U.S.C. section
1324 provides funding for all components of ACA's integrated
system of subsidies for the purchase of health insurance,
including both the premium tax credits and the cost-sharing
reduction portions of the advanced payments.
Since January 2014, the executive branch has been making
advance payments of premium tax credits and cost-sharing
reductions to issuers of qualified health plans as provided for
in the Affordable Care Act. I understand that some Members of
this Committee disagree with, and will have questions about,
the Administration's legal conclusions that 31 U.S.C. section
1324 permanently appropriates funding for cost-sharing
reduction payments.
The Administration's conclusion about those payments are
the subject of active litigation brought by the House of
Representatives. So for further information on the legal
justifications, I would refer you to briefs filed in that case.
We welcome the opportunity to continue our work with this
Committee and with all of Congress to achieve the objectives
and goals of the Affordable Care Act. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mazur follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Just to put a finer point on it, Mr.
Mazur, your invitation was for further legal justification. We
are going to stipulate that is not the nature of the inquiry.
We are looking for the process justification. So thank you for
the opportunity to inquire there.
Mr. Deich.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL DEICH,
SENIOR ADVISOR, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

Mr. DEICH. Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today.
Chairman ROSKAM. Turn on your mike. Can you pull it closer?
Mr. DEICH. Is that better?
Chairman ROSKAM. Yes, sir. Thanks.
Mr. DEICH. Great. I am Michael Deich, and I have had the
privilege of working for the Office of Management and Budget
twice over the last 20 years. In my first position from 1996 to
2001, I served as Associate Director for General Government and
Finance.
Since returning to OMB last year, I have served as Senior
Advisor to the Director and have been delegated the duties of
the Deputy Director. In this capacity, I advise the Director on
development of the President's budgets and on appropriations
activity. Every day, I am reminded of the excellent work
performed by OMB staff, and I am honored to be part of this
agency and proud of the mission it performs.
The Office of Management and Budget assists the President
in developing and executing----
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Deich, I am getting some requests. If
you can move a little bit closer to the mike or pull it closer
to you, that would be helpful.
Mr. DEICH. Is that good? Thank you.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. DEICH. A core part of OMB's mission is working with ev-

ery component of the executive branch to develop the
President's budget proposals, submitting the President's budget
to Congress, working toward enactment of the budget, and
overseeing the executive branch's implementation of enacted
appropriations.
OMB ensures agencies develop, express, and implement
policies and practices in accordance with the President's
priorities and with statutory direction. OMB is committed to
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of government
programs. As part of its mission, OMB works with other
executive branch agencies to ensure the successful and ongoing
implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
As my colleagues have noted, the ACA has expanded access to
care for millions of Americans who otherwise would be
uninsured. It has improved the quality of care for people no
matter how they get their insurance, and it has slowed the
growth in healthcare costs nationwide.
Cost-sharing reductions have helped improve the
affordability of coverage options for eligible consumers.
Moving forward, the Administration will work to build on the
progress that has been made to further reduce the number of
uninsured Americans, improve health care, and slow healthcare
cost growth.
OMB respects Congress' oversight role in examining the
Affordable Care Act and will continue to work with the
Committee to respond to its requests for information. OMB has a
long history of working collaboratively to respond to
congressional inquiries and will continue to work with this
Committee to accommodate its request for information.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deich follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you all for your testimony.
Chairman Brady.
Chairman BRADY. Chairman, first, let me ask unanimous
consent that the staff report on this investigation be
submitted for the record.
Chairman ROSKAM. Without objection, so ordered.
[The submission of The Honorable Kevin Brady follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Second, Congress is always about
distraction. So let's knock down a couple of them right away.
The distraction is that we can't be doing oversight because
there is litigation involved. Our Founding Fathers didn't write
in the Constitution the power of the purse for Congress unless
a lawsuit is filed. Our Democratic colleagues did recognize
that when they led this Committee into oversight; and
Republicans who, who lead this Committee today, recognize that
constitutional power of the purse and oversight trumps
litigation every day of the week.
Third, this is not about health care. In my view, the
Affordable Care Act is failing 2 years in advance, but that is
not this issue. This is about whether any White House, not just
this one, any White House can ignore repeatedly the explicit
directions of Congress that no dollars will be spent on a
specified program. That is what is at the heart of this. And
whether you are Republican or Democrat, you ought to be
interested in this report and in this power because at that
point there is no need for a legislative branch. Any White
House--any White House can just pick or choose which programs
to fund and which to ignore.
Finally, there is still this--this investigation will
continue until it gets to the complete truth. We have sent
subpoenas for documents to every agency representative here
today. Every one of your agencies are out of compliance with
those subpoenas. You have not asserted a single legal privilege
that protects these documents, so you have absolutely no reason
not to hand them over.
So Mr. Mazur, beginning with you, Treasury is months
overdue on document subpoenas. Yes or no, you do intend to
comply with subpoenas by the end of next week?
Mr. MAZUR. Mr. Brady, I understand that your staff and the
staff of the Treasury Department have been in contact to
determine how best to respond to those subpoenas. I suspect
those will be ongoing and hopefully they will be a success.
Chairman BRADY. You know, we have been very patient and are
trying to be accommodative to it, but it is time to deliver
those documents.
Ms. Wakefield, HHS is also months overdue on the document
subpoenas. Does HHS intend to comply by the end of next week?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Sir, we have provided information and
documents, and we will continue to work with the Committee to
review the Committee's request.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Deich, OMB is also months overdue on
the document subpoenas. We have only asked for one from you.
One. One. It shouldn't be that hard. So does OMB intend to
comply by the end of the week?
Mr. DEICH. We are committed to providing the information
sought by the Committee, and we look forward to working with
the Committee to find a way to accommodate its interests.
Chairman BRADY. I am going to take all of that as a yes for
each of the agencies.
In my view, the level of obstruction has been astonishing.
This is a fairly direct issue. The Administration should not be
hiding the ball on this. And the sooner we get to this and to
the public scrutiny of this, the better all around. And I would
encourage you to do that.
With that, Chairman Roskam, I yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank each of you for being here. Thank you for your
testimony.
My question is for the panel. Please explain what for us
the cost-sharing reduction program is that was established by
the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Thank you for the question, sir.
The cost-sharing reduction program was established by the
Affordable Care Act to help to defray the costs of healthcare
coverage for individuals and families, particularly--not
particularly, but specifically for those that are low income up
to about 250 percent of the Federal poverty level. And, in
fact, what it does is it allows the defraying of costs that are
out-of-pocket costs, so those costs that an individual would
need to pay as part of a copay or a deductible, different from
the advance premium tax credits that focus explicitly on
helping to offset the costs of premiums.
So this is the place, the cost-sharing reduction component,
that for low-income people can have such a significant impact;
that is, it can be the difference between a mom who feels
comfortable taking their child to an urgent care center because
they know in advance that the copay or the deductible is not
going to be prohibitive in terms of their ability to pay.
So the point is that this provision in this statute is
really designed to help individuals offset or defray their
costs so that they can get access to doctors, nurse
practitioners, when they need access to health care. It is a
really important part of the Affordable Care Act, particularly
for those populations that are lower income.
Mr. LEWIS. Does this program benefit the average person,
the average Joe?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes, as a matter of fact, the program
benefits over 6 million individuals as of about March of this
year. That is the data that we have, that there are millions of
individuals that are able to access physicians and other
healthcare providers without what has historically been a
barrier to getting health care pre the Affordable Care Act.
That is the out-of-pocket cost that people would have to pay.
And so about 6.4 million people, about that number, are
currently benefiting from this provision.
Mr. LEWIS. That is the number that are participating in
this program at this time?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Approximately 6.4 million individuals across
the United States, and States, and congressional districts all
over, are benefiting from this program as of this year. And
prior to the Affordable Care Act, it wouldn't be uncommon to
see individuals having to choose between getting healthcare
coverage or paying rent or being able to pay for food because
of the associated costs of coinsurance or deductibles, as I
mentioned, and copays.
So this removes that barrier for individuals that are often
working families, but families that are low-income. It is a
really important provision to help ensure that people have
access to health care.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Lewis.
Dr. Wakefield, just for the point of clarification, you are
conflating two issues: The premium tax credit directly benefits
individuals; the cost-sharing reduction program benefits
insurance carriers. That is the direct beneficiary.
I will yield to Mr. Meehan.
Mr. MEEHAN. I think that gets right to the issue, and this
is the whole heart of what is disturbing about the way these
representations are being made.
Let me just start with--Mr. Koskinen, could you please get
exhibit 7. You will see it up on the screen right here. And I
don't know if you are able to read from the screen, but you are
able to read from the documents in front of you. Would you
please read the yellow parts of section 1324 that has been
cited by just about everybody today in the testimony?
Mr. KOSKINEN. I cannot quite see that, but which----
Mr. MEEHAN. Let me read it for you then so we don't waste
time. ``Necessary amounts are appropriated to the Secretary of
the Treasury for refunding Internal Revenue collections as
provided by law, including payments of''--and then we go to
34(b), the section that states, ``Disbursements may be made
from the appropriations made by this section only for''--and
then it highlights number one, ``refunds for the limit of
liability,'' and number two, ``refunds from the credit
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.''
So that is the authority for the credit provision
reimbursements. Is that not correct?
Mr. KOSKINEN. That is the authority, yes.
Mr. MEEHAN. So from that, you make those tax credit
reimbursements. Are you able to choose to do anything else? Can
you give any of the people there the ability to have other
kinds of benefits? Let's say they all need cars to get to
appointments. Can you give them cars out of that account?
Mr. KOSKINEN. No. We basically rely on legal advice as to
what is included----
Mr. MEEHAN. Well, no, you rely on the legal language,
correct, of the statute?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, actually, the language, you know, there
is a piece of litigation going on about what the language
means. Our role----
Mr. MEEHAN. Well----
Mr. KOSKINEN. Our role is to administer the Act. And we
made, as you know----
Mr. MEEHAN. Where is there ambiguity here where--because I
am looking at the part that articulates tax credits as being
specifically given. But where is the part in the appropriation
that says that you are entitled to do cost sharing?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, as you know, we have not been involved
directly in that discussion. We are not involved in the
litigation. It is not----
Mr. MEEHAN. Then let me ask Ms. Wakefield, where is the
language that allows you to do the cost sharing?
Mr. KOSKINEN. With all due deference, I am not in a
position to enter into that legal debate about whether----
Mr. MEEHAN. No, I am not asking you, Mr. Koskinen. Thank
you. I am asking Ms. Wakefield now. Thank you. You have told me
the authority for what you are enabled to do. I am asking Ms.
Wakefield where she believes she has the authority to do that
now.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I have not done an analysis of what is
included.
Mr. MEEHAN. Ms. Wakefield, did I address you with a
question, please? Please answer my question.
Thank you, Mr. Koskinen.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. It is our interpretation that the Affordable
Care Act requires the executive branch through this section to
make advance payments for the payment of premium tax credits--
--
Mr. MEEHAN. This is a process question. Can you point to me
where you are entitled to do that?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Sir, I cannot. I am not an attorney or a
lawyer. I can say that for the specific interpretation of that
language, I would refer you to the briefs that have been filed
by the Department of Justice.
Mr. MEEHAN. No. Ms. Wakefield, we are talking about a
process here, not the briefs in a legal filing. You can't refer
me to it because it doesn't exist. Where in that language does
it say you are entitled to make payments for cost sharing? Read
it.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. What I can say is that our interpretation of
that section----
Mr. MEEHAN. Interpretation of what? What are you
interpreting? What is--tell me--Mr. Mazur, what are you
interpreting? Show me the point that says cost sharing is
entitled to be paid for. This is not a complex issue.
Mr. MAZUR. Mr. Meehan, we are not trying to make this hard
for you, but if you look at the Affordable Care Act as a whole,
there are cost-sharing payments that are authorized in the
program. They are an integrated part of the program with the
premium tax credits. And the legal briefs, as has been pointed
out, filed make that point of how the interpretation is done.
Mr. MEEHAN. Where do they point to the authority? This is a
process--no, no, no, Mr. Mazur, you are in front of me.
Mr. MAZUR. Yes, I refer you to the legal briefs to take a
look at them. They are available.
Mr. MEEHAN. Well, why don't you refer to the legal briefs
and tell me where they are.
Mr. MAZUR. Because I don't have the legal briefs in front
of me at the moment, sir.
Mr. MEEHAN. Why did you come not prepared to answer the
very question that relates to the point that each and every one
of you made relying on this specific provision and yet
completely unprepared when I pointed out the specific language
that does not give you that authority?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir----
Mr. MEEHAN. Could you speak to the issue that it does? You
have each used it as the basis upon which you have justified
this decision. It clearly does not exist in statute, and
arguably, Mr. Koskinen, you appreciate people could be
criminally prosecuted for spending money they are not
authorized to spend. I am not suggesting we go there. Where
does this authority emanate from?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir----
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Crowley.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
First of all, I just want to clarify a point that the
Chairman and Mr. Koskinen made, that the CSR program benefits
insurers is misleading. That is what he alluded to, that it
somehow doesn't benefit the insurers. CSR directly benefits the
patients by reducing out-of-pocket costs at the point of care.
To make an analogy, I know my Republican colleagues love
the Medicare Advantage program. The Federal Treasury pays the
insurance company. Is that correct, Ms. Wakefield?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes.
Mr. CROWLEY. Not the patient, correct, in a similar way in
which the CSR is operated as well? Is that correct?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes.
Mr. CROWLEY. But no one would say--I don't think my
Republican colleagues would say that the Medicare Advantage
program doesn't benefit patients. So I think you really have to
be under a rock not to understand that the 6 million people who
are getting a benefit today that they didn't have before the
Affordable Care Act, are getting that benefit because of that
subsidy of the cost-sharing reduction program that helps them
afford that coverage. Is that not correct, Ms. Wakefield?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes, that is correct, and it does so using a
sliding-fee scale. That is correct.
Mr. CROWLEY. I think it is a shame we are here today. And a
shame and sham are very closely related. I think it is a sham
as well. The Majority claims today's hearing is somehow needed
to ``investigate'' the implementation of a program that helps
people with healthcare costs. But their minds were made up well
before they embarked on this fool's errand to find wrongdoing
where none existed. They started out believing that what was
happening was illegal. They made that determination and then
they filled in the blanks.
I have been wondering why this hearing was needed, since
after all, our Republican colleagues are engaged simultaneously
and are in the middle of a lawsuit on this very matter, which I
know Mr. Mazur and others have alluded to. But the Majority
kept insisting that this hearing is needed to hear from all of
you today, taking you away from important work.
And then this morning, hours before the hearing even
started, the Majority issued their own partisan, biased report,
full of, in my opinion, false conclusions. And, in fact, we
were asked not to--my understanding is when the report was
given to the Committee Minority side we were asked not to--the
Ranking Member was asked not to share that report with anyone
in terms of open process. I guess they were so eager to hear
from the witnesses they couldn't even wait for you all to
testify before they came to the conclusion and claimed the
wrongdoing.
So it's clear to me this hearing today is only about
attacking the Affordable Care Act and in many respects
embarrassing the witnesses and the Administration and
interfering with the public servants, you all, who are helping
to implement this Act.
But let's take this opportunity to clear some things up. I
am troubled by the charges the Majority has thrown around that
the Administration has somehow not cooperated with the
investigation. As my colleague, Mr. Lewis, has referred to, the
Administration has made available 13 former and current
employees to talk about the implementation of the health reform
laws cost-share program.
I also understand the Administration has made these
individuals available despite being sued right now by the House
Republicans over the very same subject matter that they are
engaged in, and now are simultaneously holding this so-called
investigation on.
Let me just ask a couple of questions, Ms. Wakefield, if I
could. Are you aware of the fact that not a single Republican
on this Committee supported the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. No, I wasn't aware of that.
Mr. CROWLEY. Would you be surprised if I told you that not
a single Member of the Republican caucus supported the
Affordable Care Act? Would you be surprised if I told you that?
You don't have to answer that.
Would you be surprised if I told you that the Republican
caucus has tried 60 times to overturn the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. No, I wouldn't be surprised of that.
Mr. CROWLEY. Do you know that they actually have attempted
60 times to overturn the Affordable Care Act? You know that. Is
that correct?
So I think I have an understanding where they are coming
from here in terms of this morning. They had a predetermined
outcome. They determined what you did was wrong and then they
just filled in the blanks in this report. I think a first
grader could do that, but they would probably get an F from the
teacher for trying to do something just like that. And I think
the American people understand what this is. It is a sham.
And with that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman ROSKAM. Just for the point of clarification, the
Administration stipulated in the lawsuit that has been
frequently cited here that notwithstanding the cost-sharing
reduction program, it is the insurance carriers that are on the
hook. So my declaration earlier is without repute.
Mr. Holding.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mazur and Commissioner Koskinen, in preparing for this
hearing, discussing the issues, I am going to assume that you
have talked with people at IRS and Treasury who have been
involved in funding the cost-sharing reduction program.
Correct?
Mr. KOSKINEN. No, I have not talked to anybody at the
Treasury Department about it. As noted earlier, David Fisher's
deposition discusses the time we had a discussion about this. I
had been at the IRS about a month, and going to Congressman
Meehan's point, the question was raised in terms of what was
the authority, did we have the authority to administer the
plan.
Mr. HOLDING. Well, let me ask a little bit more
specifically. So, Commissioner, do you know Charles Messing?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Pardon?
Mr. HOLDING. Charles Messing.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Charles?
Mr. HOLDING. Messing.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I do not know.
Mr. HOLDING. He is the former IRS CFO.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I am not aware of him.
Mr. HOLDING. You don't know him? So Mr. Messing, who is the
former IRS CFO, gave this document here. I think it is exhibit
1, if we could put it on the screen. If you all could turn in
your binders to exhibit 1. Each of you has it in front of you,
and each of you will need to look at it. So Mr. Messing, the
former IRS CFO, gave the document, which is exhibit 1, to the
Treasury Inspector General when they asked for information
about the premium tax credit program.
Mr. Mazur, do you know who Michael Briskin is?
Mr. KOSKINEN. I do not.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Mazur.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Oh, sorry.
Mr. MAZUR. It is Mr. Mazur.
Mr. HOLDING. Mazur, excuse me.
Mr. MAZUR. Yes, I do know who Michael Briskin is.
Mr. HOLDING. He is the Treasury Special Counsel to the
Assistant General Counsel for General Law Ethics and
Regulation. And the metadata of the document that we are
looking at show that he was the last person to edit this
document.
Now, the document shows that Mr. Briskin, a Treasury
counsel, was the last person to edit the document. And the
Treasury wrote this memo in July 2012 to OMB. And it talks
about whether HHS could use a Treasury allocation account to
make the advance premium credit payments.
So if you are taking a look at the highlighted passage
there in the document, this passage is contrasting the funding,
the appropriation Congress gave for the premium tax credit
program to the lack of funding for the cost-sharing program.
Mr. Mazur, would you read the highlighted passage, please.
Mr. MAZUR. It is not possible for me to read that
highlighted passage.
Mr. HOLDING. You have it in your document there.
Mr. MAZUR. Is it highlighted in there as well?
Mr. HOLDING. It is the last paragraph, exhibit 1.
Mr. MAZUR. The last paragraph of the memo?
Mr. HOLDING. Yes, exhibit 1.
Mr. MAZUR. Sure. It says--the memo as written says, ``Such
a reading, of course, would not be applicable to the largely
parallel language in section 1324(c)(3); there is currently no
appropriation, to Treasury or anyone else, for purposes of the
cost-sharing payments to be made under that section. However,
this does not suggest that section 1412(c)(2)(A) should be read
to require certification of payments by Treasury; such a
reading would be equally inapplicable to section 1412(c)(3).''
Mr. HOLDING. All right. I will stop you there.
Mr. Mazur, are you aware that in July of 2012 Treasury's
legal department wrote this memorandum stating that the account
the Administration currently is using to make the cost-sharing
reduction payments was not available to make those payments and
that there was no appropriation for the CSR payments? Were you
aware of that in July? Were you aware of that?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, I was not aware of this memorandum until
today, until you brought it up. I have been in my current job
since August 2012, when the Senate confirmed me.
Mr. HOLDING. Okay. Mr. Deich, do you know who received this
memo at OMB that is exhibit 1?
Mr. DEICH. I do not.
Mr. HOLDING. Do you know who would know who received that
memo at OMB?
Mr. DEICH. I do not. I arrived at OMB last year.
Mr. HOLDING. Would you be able to find that out for us and
report back to the Committee?
Mr. DEICH. I will take that back, yes.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you.
So based on this memo, OMB was aware that Treasury believed
that there was no appropriation for CSRs in 2012. Would you
consider that to be accurate, having looked at this memo and
what we have read here, Mr. Mazur?
Mr. DEICH. I don't know. I don't know who at OMB received
or read the memo.
Mr. HOLDING. Mr. Mazur.
Mr. MAZUR. So I look at this as one input into a decision
process not dispositive by itself, and I haven't seen this memo
before today.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I didn't follow that line of questioning, but is there any
question that the four of you believe that you are following
constitutionally the letter of the law as relates to the
Affordable Care Act? Have you any problem with it that you are
trying to follow the law?
And in the course of reaching a conclusion of how the law
should be enforced, from time to time there are disagreements,
I assume, among lawyers; and that is what lawyers are for, to
make certain this agreement so that we can get paid. So the
fact that there is not unanimity in memos does not distract
from the unanimity of your testimony today. Does it in any way?
Mr. MAZUR. Correct.
Mr. RANGEL. Do you have any doubts at all about the
positions you have taken as it relates to the constitutionality
and legality of the Affordable Care Act and how we are funding
it right now?
Mr. MAZUR. I have none.
Mr. RANGEL. And, obviously, the court is a separate branch
of government. And you, I, and Republicans and whoever will be
relying on them to determine who is right and who is wrong.
What I don't understand and I hope some of my political
friends on the other side of this aisle can explain is that--
and I hope I don't get in trouble with Reverend Lewis, but it
just seems like----
Mr. LEWIS. Well, it will be good trouble.
Mr. RANGEL [continuing]. Every moral concept that civilized
countries have is you are supposed to take care of the darn
sick--is you have a commitment to take care of the sick. And
there is no reason for me to believe that Members of Congress
don't have that same compassion.
And I do believe, before the Affordable Care Act, that you
received calls from people saying that my dear relative has
cancer and the insurance company claimed they had a
precondition and they are not going to pay for it. And I always
was successful to say, you don't mean to tell me that the
premiums weren't paid so you are not going to give the service.
And we had all hoped that the Federal Government could take
that responsibility off of us legislatively and have a program
that a sick person can either get care or prevent themselves
from getting sick.
Now, what are we talking about? We are talking about how a
person is eligible for care. And if they say that you need
insurance to do it, you are talking about how they get the
resources to pay for the insurance; but if they don't have it,
they can die. They can absolutely die if they don't have the
money to pay for care.
I can see how you can disagree with Obama and Democratic
majorities, but for God's sake, if you think we are doing it
wrong, you should have an alternative to do it right. But you
just can't say that people are not entitled because you don't
like the method in which it is being funded.
So I just hope that, as we go through these things, that
the voters would recognize that somebody cares for how they are
being treated, in terms of their need for health care. And if
they don't like the way we are doing it, they certainly should
come up with a plan to say, ``We can do it better.'' I don't
think that is asking too much since our offices know how many
people, because of the inability to pay these doctors and
hospitals, die because they can't do it.
So I want to thank all of you for doing your job. We write
the law, you interpret it, and they take us to court. I wish
somebody would say, if you don't do it this way, at least show
us how these people can get health care.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Rangel.
Let me accept your invitation, as I look over to recognize
the next Member, the invitation to explain it from the
viewpoint of one of your political friends--and we are
political friends, and I am on the other side of the aisle. It
goes like this. Here goes the thinking:
Number one, you used a great phrase, ``you don't mean to
tell me.'' And so we have the same thing going on. You don't
mean to tell me that you have to violate the Constitution in
order to get this done. You don't mean to tell me that you are
going to come before Congress and say one thing and go to a
Federal court and say another thing, come to Congress and say
this is about poor people--and that is the representation here.
And that is what has your attention. And I respect that.
But let's be really clear. The Administration, in the
lawsuit, stipulated that the insurance companies are going to
do this regardless. They are going to get the money regardless.
In other words, this is a subsidy for insurance companies. And
so that is the scandal.
And if this is such a great idea, then, to go back to
Chairman Brady's point, come clean and say: Here, here is how
we came to this information, here are these witnesses.
And to characterize this group of people, frankly, as being
helpful and forthcoming? They are coming up with new legal
standards here that don't even exist in the law. Heightened
interest in confidentiality, something like that? That is a
complete fiction. That is made up. That is nonsense.
So that is the part that animates me, and I am inviting you
to be animated by that, as well. Because when it all comes down
to it, your point is, look, people need help. Our argument and
what we are trying to drive today is, ``Yes, and there is a way
to do it.''
And don't tell me that you are telling a Federal judge one
thing and you are coming before the Ways and Means to hear
another thing.
Let me yield to Mr. Smith.
Mr. RANGEL. I just want to join with you. If you are going
to sue somebody, sue the insurance company. I will join in with
that suit and encourage the Democratic leadership. But you
don't take away the right and the ability of a sick person to
get well. That is wrong----
Chairman ROSKAM. Great point.
Mr. RANGEL [continuing]. Morally wrong.
Chairman ROSKAM. And, Mr. Rangel, they have admitted in
court that the insurance company is on the hook.
I yield to Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow after that conversation.
Mr. Deich, when Congress writes an appropriations law, what
does that law have to say in order to legally give money to
that program?
Mr. DEICH. I am not a lawyer. My understanding is that an
appropriation has two components. One is directing that a
payment be made, and the other, designating the source of funds
that are used.
Mr. SMITH. That is exactly what I think most Members of
Congress believe, that when you do appropriations that is what
is necessary.
And, Ms. Wakefield, does HHS ever decide to take money from
one program and give it to another for convenience?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. No, sir. Sir, we follow the expectation----
Mr. SMITH. Wait, was your answer ``no, sir'' at the
beginning? The mike wasn't on.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes.
Mr. SMITH. Okay.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. That was my answer.
We follow the expectations that are laid out in the
statutes that are associated with the programs that HHS has
responsibility for implementing. And so our actions derive from
our interpretation of the statutes, and that is the basis for
our implementation of our programs.
Mr. SMITH. Your actions rely on the statutes.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. That is correct, on our interpretation----
Mr. SMITH. And based on the appropriations, that is how you
distribute money. And if you distributed money any other way,
that would be against the law, correct?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. So our actions are based on our
interpretation of the statute, and that is associated with
authorizing language as well as with appropriations language.
Mr. SMITH. So if appropriations are passed saying money
will be disbursed out of this fund for this purpose, if you
disburse it any other way, that would be a violation of that
appropriation, correct? Yes or no.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. We interpret the statutes----
Mr. SMITH. It is a yes-or-no answer. Is it yes or no?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Well, sir, we interpret the statutes----
Mr. SMITH. So it depends is what you are telling us? Just
yes or no or it depends, one of the three.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Our responsibility is to----
Mr. SMITH. Okay.
Let me read this letter, okay? In a letter, Senators Cruz
and Lee--this was a letter to Senator Cruz and to Senator Lee
from Secretary Burwell.
And it says, ``To improve the efficiency and the
administration of the subsidy payments made pursuant to the ACA
for insurers as well as the Federal Government, the cost-
sharing subsidy payments are being made through the Advance
Payments program and will be paid out of the same account from
which the premium tax credit portion of the advance payments
for that program are paid.''
Secretary Burwell did not give a statutory basis for using
the account. She just said it was for efficiency.
Mr. Deich, have you ever seen any other situation in which
the executive branch used money appropriated for one program to
pay for a different program and justified it solely because of
the convenience or for efficiency?
Mr. DEICH. Congressman, thank you for your question.
In the present instance, the Administration made the
payments based on the existence of an appropriation.
Mr. SMITH. Have you ever seen Congress make an
appropriation determination based on the efficiency or based on
their convenience?
Mr. DEICH. I am sorry, I didn't hear the question. Say it
again.
Mr. SMITH. Let me repeat the question again, because you
didn't answer it.
Mr. Deich, have you ever seen any situation in which the
executive branch used money appropriated for one program to pay
for a different program and justified it solely because of
convenience or efficiency?
Mr. DEICH. I have not. And, as I mentioned earlier, in the
present instance, it is our belief----
Mr. SMITH. Today you have.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to read from a letter to the editor of Newsweek
from the Cook County president, Toni Preckwinkle, as she
responds to Newsweek magazine's March 4, 2014, article, ``How
Obamacare May Lower the Prison Population More Than Any Reform
in a Generation.''
And she says, ``Cook County, home to 130 municipalities,
including the city of Chicago, is the second-largest county in
the United States. As president of Cook County's Board of
Commissioners, I am charged with overseeing an overburdened
criminal justice system, which includes one of the Nation's
largest jails. I commend Newsweek for recognizing the vital
connection between Obamacare and safer communities.''
How Obamacare May Lower the Prison Population More Than Any
Reform in a Generation, March 4, 2014.
``In November 2012, Cook County was granted a Medicaid
waiver that has already allowed us to provide health insurance
to over 86,000 low-income residents, including 2,600 formerly
detained individuals. For the first time, many of these people
are now receiving mental health and substance abuse treatment,
supported by preventive physical health care in their
communities.
``These efforts mean those with criminal records are less
likely to return to our jail, while others will never make the
first trip into detention. When a young person struggling with
depression gets treatment instead of access to street drugs, it
puts him or her on the path to a productive life. We can
realize lower rates of incarceration and recidivism in 2014 by
seizing the opportunity Obamacare has created.''
Deputy Secretary, do these individuals receive the benefit
from shared-cost reductions?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Thank you for the question.
Individuals with an income between 100 and 250 percent of
the Federal poverty level are eligible for the benefits
associated with the cost-sharing reduction provisions of the
statute. And it is a provision that is really important for
low-income individuals and families, because it helps to offset
and defray the costs that are out-of-pocket costs when
individuals access healthcare services.
So, certainly, no doubt, some of the individuals in the
population you have just described, sir, would be probably
eligible for that particular benefit.
Mr. DAVIS. And if we did not provide care for them, would
they have any other recourse, any other place, any other
source, or any other way to do anything except, as
Representative Rangel suggested, die?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. So those out-of-pocket costs can be a
barrier to individuals getting access to health care services.
Individual families will make decisions on occasion about
whether or not the money they have available would be used to
pay for a deductible, for example, or a copay to see a doctor
to have their child taken care of, for example, or that that
money would be stipulated in that family's budget for use for
some other purpose.
So choices would, historically, before the Affordable Care
Act, for families, many families, would have needed to have
been made, especially those families that are--well, the
families that are lower-income families. So those were tough
choices that impacted individuals.
And I can tell you, as a nurse, as a registered nurse, it
is really important, from my vantage point, that people are
able to access care when they need it. And this provision helps
to remove what has been a barrier for many individuals to
access health care when they need it because of their low-
income status and limited funds that they have to pay for
healthcare services versus some other choice.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Deputy Secretary, I want to focus in on some of the
decision-making processes that happen at the Department of
Health with this issue.
Are you aware that in fiscal year 2014 there was an
appropriations request made to the Senate for reimbursement of
the cost-sharing payment?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. It is my understanding that in the fiscal
year 2014 budget there was a request for appropriations to fund
the cost-sharing reduction provisions.
Mr. REED. So that request was made by the Administration to
the appropriations process, to have it funded through the
discretionary appropriations process that we deal with here in
Congress, correct?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I believe that is correct----
Mr. REED. I think you are accurate.
Ms. WAKEFIELD [continuing]. I believe.
Mr. REED. Then, 2015, that appropriations request did not
seek reimbursement for the cost-sharing reduction payment.
Isn't that correct?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I believe that for fiscal year 2015, in the
President's budget, that the conclusion was made that the
executive branch was required to make cost-sharing reduction
payments using permanent appropriations and to fund CSR.
Mr. REED. So isn't it fair to say, then, 2014, the
Administration requested an appropriations request for this
cost-sharing payment; 2015, they did not make that request for
the appropriations payment and they went a different route,
they went down this mandatory spending, this provision that we
are relying upon that is in the lawsuit? That is where we are
at, correct?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. As I said, the conclusion that was drawn for
fiscal year--the conclusion that was made, it is my
understanding, for fiscal year 2015's President's budget was
that the executive branch was required to make appropriations
available to fund the cost-sharing reduction provisions of the
law.
Mr. REED. Because the appropriation was denied in 2014.
The other question I have then for you is, you have in your
testimony asked us to look at the briefs, to get to some of the
details here. And are you aware that in the briefs the court
asked the question of the Administration lawyers, what caused
you to withdraw that appropriations request from 2014 to 2015?
Are you aware of the court asking that in the litigation?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. No, I am not aware of that.
Mr. REED. They did. They did.
And then the Administration's lawyers responded to that
request of the court and said, ``The reference of withdrawal is
to OMB's submission of the fiscal year 2015 budget, which did
not request a similar item. Defendant's counsel did not intend
to suggest that there was a separate formal withdrawal document
and apologizes for being unclear on that point.'' That was the
representation of the Administration to the court.
Now, are you aware of an Ellen Murray?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes. She is the Assistant Secretary for
Financial Resources at the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
Mr. REED. And are you aware she made a phone call to the
Senate Appropriations Committee asking them to withdraw or to
not provide that cost-sharing payment?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I was not in the position that I am
currently in, as the Acting Deputy Secretary, during the fiscal
year 2014-
fiscal year 2015 budget process that you described----
Mr. REED. So you weren't there.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I wasn't there, so I can't speak to
conversations.
Mr. REED. I anticipated you saying that. But the question
is--the record is very clear. Ms. Murray made that phone call.
She made that phone call to the Senate Appropriations Committee
to withdraw that request. I think that is going to be--that is
undisputed, as to what happened there.
The question I am going to ask you is--I am going to give
you an opportunity to come clean. Do you know who directed her
to make that call?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Sir, I wasn't in my current position at that
time. I was the Administrator for the Health Resources and
Services Administration. I have no knowledge of a call that was
made or--I have no knowledge of a call that was made.
Mr. REED. Have you ever had any conversations with anybody
at the Department of Health about Ellen Murray's phone call to
the Appropriations Committee?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I have no knowledge of a call that was made
by Ellen Murray.
Mr. REED. Have you talked to anybody at the Department of
Health about that phone call?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. No. I have no knowledge of that call.
Mr. REED. Okay. So this is the first time you have ever had
a conversation about Ellen Murray's phone call, with me here
today.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I have no knowledge of that call,
Congressman. I have----
Mr. REED. No, no, no, not that you don't have knowledge.
Have you had a conversation? Other than our conversation right
here today, have you had a conversation in the Department of
Health about Ellen Murray's phone call to the Appropriations
Committee to withdraw the request?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. In coming into the Committee today,
Congressman, I was informed that there was the possibility of a
call. Somebody mentioned in passing to me, Congressman, that
there was a conversation that had--I am sorry, I am trying to
catch it exactly correct.
I was, I think, informed that a conversation had been made
by Ellen Murray with an Appropriations staffer. I have no
knowledge of----
Mr. REED. Who did you have that conversation with?
Ms. WAKEFIELD [continuing]. The details of that call.
Mr. REED. Who told you that? Who told you that?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Oof.
Mr. REED. In preparation for your Committee testimony
today----
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes, that is right. So this was in
preparation for the Committee.
Mr. REED. Who told you that?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I am trying to remember.
Mr. REED. You don't even remember who told you that in
preparation for the Committee?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Congressman, we do a lot of prep with
different individuals coming into the----
Mr. REED. So who did you prepare with in preparation for
today's testimony?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Sure. So I prepared----
Mr. REED. Give me names.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Excuse me?
Mr. REED. Give me names.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes. So I prepared with individuals from
different parts of the----
Mr. REED. Names.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Well, the individuals that I prepared with
included Kevin Barstow--bear with me, please, because this is
over the course of the last few days--Hannah Bumsted. Let's
see----
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman, I am going to object. The Member's
time is over. I don't think he should be harassing----
Mr. REED. This isn't harassment, Mr. Lewis.
Chairman ROSKAM. I mean, I was just letting her complete
her statement, and then I was going to interrupt.
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Yes. And sorry, there are just a number of
individuals. So, in preparation for this meeting--Congressman,
I am not trying to obfuscate. I am actually trying to remember
the names of the individuals. There----
Mr. REED. That is the problem.
Ms. WAKEFIELD [continuing]. Are a number of them.
Mr. REED. You obfuscated to the court, and you are not
being truthful here today.
Chairman ROSKAM. The gentleman's time----
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman ROSKAM. I got it. I got it.
The gentleman's time has expired.
Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I always like to come to a session of the theater of the
absurd. It is an old period in the theater in which things are
very strange on the stage.
What I find interesting in the theater of the absurd today
is that we have Mr. Koskinen here as a witness. Now, he is the
guy that this Committee and this Congress, on the Republican
side, is trying to get rid of or dismiss as the IRS head, but
he is good enough to come here and testify.
So I am glad to see you here, Mr. Koskinen. I appreciate
your public service.
Now, what is the theater of the absurd here is that he sits
as an administrator in which people argue in front of about
what decision he should make, about how money should be spent,
or how money should be spent in a particular program that is in
law, and there are disputes.
I sat in a deposition and listened to some employee of the
department say that there was a big dispute. And then he went
on to say that Mr. Koskinen made the decision that 99 percent
of the people would make--that is, to pay out these payments.
The witch hunt that is going on here is really about
discrediting the IRS. Because the Speaker himself has said we
care about poverty, we really care, we Republicans are really
worried about poverty. This was a program to help poor people
get health care. It was to give them the ability to buy and
deal with some of the problems that come up for folks that
don't make $170,000 a year like we do. Everybody on this dais
does not have problems with healthcare payments, but there are
a lot of people out there in the world who do.
And we put a program together, and instead of coming in
here to fix it--if it was an appropriation, then fix it. That
would be a simple bill, almost a consent calendar bill, if
people were serious about fixing it. But this is not about
fixing it. This is about a witch hunt for somebody in the IRS
who sent a letter or made a phone call or did something.
Now, I find it very hard to see how a public
administrator--have you ever had any decision, Mr. Koskinen,
before you that did not have people on both sides of it?
Mr. KOSKINEN. As a general matter, the only decisions that
come to me are where there are close questions or arguments on
both sides of the question.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And what is the process you go through in
dealing with those kinds of things?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, as Mr. Fisher noted in his deposition,
from the day I started--and the meetings involved here were in
my first month--I have always said that at any meeting everyone
in the meeting should feel comfortable and, in fact, obligated
to raise any questions or concerns they have.
And, in fact, Mr. Fisher and I were setting up an
enterprise risk management program, where my goal was to have
every IRS employee view themselves as a risk manager who not
only should feel comfortable raising concerns or issues but
really has an obligation to let us know.
So my way of running meetings is everybody in the meeting
should feel comfortable--if they have a question or an issue to
be raised, they should be comfortable raising it, and, in fact,
it is their obligation to raise it.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And then, when that process is done, you
have listened to all of them, you make a decision.
Mr. KOSKINEN. That is correct.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And the buck stops at your desk, more or
less, is how it would be put in Harry Truman's terms, correct?
Mr. KOSKINEN. That is correct.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Now, has there ever been a decision you made
where you think, well, I could have gone the other way, but--
maybe I should have gone the other way? Have you ever
questioned yourself afterward?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, if you run meetings the way I have been
running them for my 45-year career and you see all of the
issues before you, as a general matter, I have not then felt
that I had to make second choices or a concern about that,
because I have heard from very smart and able people on both
sides of the issue. There is usually a consensus that develops.
And that is what happened in this meeting, as Mr. Fisher
noted. By the time we got through analyzing it and looking at
the legal advice we had, the consensus was the IRS was
authorized to go forward with its administrative
responsibilities, which we did.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you for your service as the Director
of the IRS.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Thank you.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Part of the challenge in coming into act three of the
theater is that you missed the two previous acts. The point I
made in my opening statement was that this decision was largely
made at the time the Commissioner showed up at the IRS. So this
was basically a done deal.
Let me also point out that the Commissioner is the only
person who accepted our invitation to be here. He was invited,
he accepted the invitation, and here he is as a witness. The
other three witnesses are here basically by threat of subpoena,
and it was like passing a kidney stone to get these people to
come here. So the Commissioner is in very much a different
posture, and that was very clear in my opening statement.
Let me yield to Mr. Rice.
Mr. RICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am going to follow up on Mr. Reed's questions to Mrs.
Wakefield.
Did you know that the Administration's lawyers in the
ongoing litigation regarding this matter wrote that the
Administration did not withdraw its request for the
appropriation, but later on, in the process of preparing for
this, in our investigation, Ellen Murray in fact said that she
was directed by somebody--that is unclear, who that was--to
call Senate Appropriations and say that we no longer needed the
money, the Administration no longer needed the money? Were you
aware of that?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. No, sir. I have no knowledge of the
circumstances that you just described. I do not.
Mr. RICE. Okay. Well, so if the Administration's lawyers in
the course of this litigation said that there was no withdrawal
but, in fact, Mrs. Murray did actually call Senate
Appropriations and withdraw, that would be somewhat of a
misrepresentation to the court, wouldn't it?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. I am unaware of the context or the specific
circumstances that you have just described. Sorry. I was not in
my position at the time of----
Mr. RICE. Thank you, Mrs. Wakefield.
I want to talk to you, Mr. Mazur. You know, we work for the
same people, the American people. And President Obama promised
the American people the most transparent Administration in
modern history. But experience has proved exactly the opposite.
With a string of lies and scandals and coverups in the IRS
and in other areas of government, from Lois Lerner and Jonathan
Gruber, to things that you said to this Congress, Commissioner
Koskinen, to Susan Rice, to Hillary Clinton, Eric Holder, James
Clapper--it goes on and on--it is just not surprising that the
American people have lost faith in our government.
Mr. Mazur, I am trying to understand--I am looking at your
memo of January 15, 2014, which I assume you have in front of
you, and I am trying to understand your justification for using
1324(b). What I don't understand is why you can't clearly
answer that question, why it has to be confused, duck and
cover. I want to know--this memo, you prepared it, right? Your
name is on it.
Mr. MAZUR. Correct.
Mr. RICE. How many memos do you do, action memorandums, for
Secretary Lew? How often do you do that?
Mr. MAZUR. I have probably written hundreds of memorandums
to Secretary Lew over the time that I have been there.
Mr. RICE. Whose initials is that where it says ``approved''
there?
Mr. MAZUR. Excuse me?
Mr. RICE. The initials where it says ``approved'' on the
memo, is that Secretary Lew's?
Mr. MAZUR. Those would be Secretary Lew's initials, yes.
Mr. RICE. That is Secretary Lew's? All right.
When it gets down to the part of justifying why you believe
that the payments are appropriate under section 1324(b), that
entire paragraph is redacted. Why would that be redacted?
Mr. MAZUR. Really, that is----
Mr. RICE. Is there some privilege that you want to assert?
Is this a top-secret matter of national security? Why would
that be redacted? Why wouldn't you share that with the Congress
and the American people?
We both work for the same people. All we are asking for is
what President Obama promised, and that is transparency. Why
would that be redacted?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, I agree we all work for the same American
people. I also think that the Treasury Department has been
working with your Committee to give you the information you
need----
Mr. RICE. Oh, really? So here we sit, a year and a half
later, and we still don't know the justification in this
memorandum for why you believe these cash payments should be
taken out of 1324(b).
You say you have been working with us, but yet you redact
the very crux of it in this memorandum. The most important
paragraph is taken out of this memo. Why would you hide that
from us? Why is it a constant, constant stream of scandals and
cover-ups and obfuscation? Why is that?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, first, I am going to respectfully disagree
with you on the scandals part. I don't think there has been a
set of scandals in this Administration.
Mr. RICE. Well, I mean, the Congress had to take the
unprecedented action of suing the Administration to get to the
bottom of this because of continued ducking, covering, hiding,
obfuscation. Why do we have to go to the courts to get these
answers?
Why are we sitting here today, a year and a half into this
investigation, and you still won't lay out the specifics of
your memorandum of January 15, 2014, which--the public has the
right to know this information. Why is it that we continuously
are faced with these lies and coverups?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, the House of Representatives has taken the
unprecedented action of suing the Administration over this
political disagreement. And that is where it stands right now.
It----
Mr. RICE. Political disagreement? We don't even know what
we are disagreeing about because you won't even tell us your
position.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask the panel today if any of you consider
the tax refund account a slush fund.
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, no. It is used for appropriate purposes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Okay. So is there any precedent, is there any
other time in history where the tax refund account--and, Mr.
Koskinen, Mr. Commissioner, you certainly don't view that tax
refund account as a slush fund that can be tapped for political
reasons.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Absolutely not. We would only----
Mr. MARCHANT. I think----
Mr. KOSKINEN. We only run a program with----
Mr. MARCHANT. I think that every member of the panel can
agree that that is not the intent of that fund. And all of you
should be concerned that that is the way it was actually, in
effect, used.
The Administration had a real clear choice to come to the
Congress and ask for that money. It is in the legislation. It
allows the Administration, or Health and Human Services, to
come to the Congress, get that appropriation so that they can
make those payments to the insurance company. Is that correct?
Yet they chose not to do it this year. Why?
Well, I can tell you. Back in my district, Obamacare is one
of
the most unpopular programs the Federal Government has ever
printed. And it is my opinion that the Administration knew that
if it came to Congress for that appropriation it was going to
have trouble getting it.
So, Ms. Wakefield, if those insurance companies don't get
that amount of money, what do they do to recoup the money?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Congressman, it is our intent that, through
the litigation, that the----
Mr. MARCHANT. No, not the litigation. Just from a practical
aspect, don't the insurance companies have to raise their
premiums if they do not get that reimbursement?
Ms. WAKEFIELD. Sir, it is our view that the Administration
will prevail in the position that we have taken in litigation--
--
Mr. MARCHANT. No. I am talking about, just from a practical
standpoint, if those insurance companies don't get that amount
of money, they are going to have to raise their premiums to
recoup their costs so they don't go broke.
So my opinion is that there was no appropriation sought.
The money was available in this fund. It was readily available
through a--looks like a very complicated process. They got
everybody on the same page and got this money, tapped this
money, and sent it to the insurance companies, primarily so
that the insurance companies would not have to go up on their
premiums so that the program would not be--it would not be
disclosed earlier than it is being disclosed this year and next
year, where in Texas I think Blue Cross-Blue Shield has said
that in some areas they are going to have to go up as much as
60 percent on the premiums just so they don't go broke.
So this was all political. This was all done for political
expediency, to keep the insurance companies from going up on
the premiums so that the Obamacare program would not appear to
be insolvent and not working and going broke.
So is there any precedent in government for these kinds of
funds, this fund particularly, being used this way? Do any of
you know of another instance in your career where the tax
refund account was used for this purpose?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, the Administration's position is that it is
an integrated system of the premium tax credits and the cost-
sharing payments, and it is appropriate to make them out of the
permanent appropriation. That is what the law--the law is very
clear that these payments shall be made. And so, interpreting
that statute, that is the conclusion that we came to.
Mr. MARCHANT. And of all the thousands of Federal programs
out there, has the Administration--has any Administration ever
reached the conclusion that the tax refund account was the
place to go to fund a program that it did not want to go to
Congress and get its appropriation for?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, again, this is an integrated system of
payments that are made to the insurance companies on behalf of
individuals, and the Administration believes it is appropriate
they come out of the same account.
Mr. MARCHANT. So, as a public policy moving forward, I
would just challenge the witnesses from your standpoint and the
positions that you hold. We consider, Congress considers this a
breach of faith, not just an illegal, unconstitutional act, but
a breach of faith of what your duties are.
And I would urge you, if you are ever presented with this
situation again, whether the courts rule one way or the other,
to take this kind of action very seriously.
Thank you.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mrs. Black.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mazur, so let's just establish, first of all, you are
the Treasury Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, correct?
Mr. MAZUR. That is correct.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. And is it fair to say that you are
familiar with how tax credits and refunds work?
Mr. MAZUR. I am familiar with a lot of parts of the tax
law, yes.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. So the ACA premium tax credit is paid out
of a permanent appropriation given to the Treasury at 31 U.S.C.
1324, right?
Mr. MAZUR. I believe that is correct.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. And that appropriation is set up to pay
for other tax refunds and credits, as well. Is that correct?
Mr. MAZUR. I believe it is a permanent appropriation to do
so, yes.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay.
Are cost-sharing reductions a tax credit?
Mr. MAZUR. Ma'am, again, you need to go back to the
Affordable Care Act as a whole and look at the cost-sharing
payments and the premium tax credits as an integrated set of
payments that are made.
Mrs. BLACK. Can you show me in the bill, in section 1402,
where the cost-sharing reductions or tax credits are--excuse
me? In CSR, in 1402, is where the cost-sharing is actually
talked about. Can you show me in there--because you keep using
this word ``integrated,'' and that is an assumption, because I
have read that section over? And I would like to know--maybe I
am not reading it correctly--can you show me in there where it
actually says that that is a cost-sharing reduction that goes
back to a tax credit?
Mr. MAZUR. Ms. Black, I don't have that in front of me
right now, so I really can't point to the language.
Mrs. BLACK. But if you keep on saying it is integrated,
then you have to be able to report--you have to somewhere show
me that there is not an assumption made here. Because you keep
using this word, ``integrated.'' I can't find the word
``integrated'' anywhere in this section. So you keep using that
word, ``integrated,'' when it is not in the law. Do you not
have to abide by the law?
Mr. MAZUR. Ma'am, we are looking at the Affordable Care
Act, and the intent of the law is that these payments are made
to insurance companies, much like the premium tax credits are
made.
Mrs. BLACK. Yes. The intent is that the insurance companies
would reduce the cost. That is the cost-sharing reduction piece
of this. It does not say in here--and, again, I want you to
point somewhere in this section that actually says that.
Because if that doesn't say that and it is not clear, then what
it does say is that it should be an annual appropriation and
not an appropriation that is a mandatory appropriation. Is that
not----
Mr. MAZUR. Congresswoman Black, I mean, I think you can
look at this in a somewhat different way. If Congress doesn't
want the moneys appropriated, they could pass a law that
specifically said, do not appropriate the moneys from that
account.
Mrs. BLACK. That is not my understanding, sir. And you are
an expert in this area. So what you are saying is, if it is
left without direction, that it can just be made a mandatory?
Is that what you are telling me?
Mr. MAZUR. I am saying that the Affordable Care Act--and I
think the legal piece we referred to goes to this. The
Affordable Care Act directs the executive branch to make these
cost-sharing reduction payments. And these payments are of a
piece with the same payments that are made to the insurance
companies under the premium tax credit. And that is the
justification for using the same account.
Mrs. BLACK. So the justification comes because the
Administration then decides that that is the way they want to
do it, even though it is not stipulated in the law.
Mr. MAZUR. And, frankly, if you would like to make the law
clearer, you could pass an appropriation law that said, do not
make them.
Mr. MEEHAN. Would the gentlewoman yield for one second?
Mrs. BLACK. I would yield.
Mr. MEEHAN. Mr. Mazur, we discussed this point. It clearly
articulates, ``Disbursements may be made from the
appropriations made by this section only for refunds due from
credit provisions in the Internal Revenue Code.'' That is
section 1324. What is ambiguous about that?
Mr. MAZUR. Again, sir, as we were talking about earlier,
the legal interpretation of the Administration is that section
1324 of 31 U.S. Code allows for these cost-sharing payments to
be made.
Mr. MEEHAN. ``Only for.'' And it points out, you asked
Congress to give you direction. Congress gave you direction.
And it said ``only for'' and then told you what you could spend
it on.
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, Congress gave----
Mr. MEEHAN. And then you went beyond and spent it, because
you determined that you could spend it in an area that was not
authorized by Congress.
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, Congress gave direction to the executive
branch in the Affordable Care Act to make these cost-sharing
reduction payments----
Mrs. BLACK. I am reclaiming my time.
Mr. MAZUR [continuing]. To help low-income individuals pay
for their healthcare insurance.
Mrs. BLACK. And reclaiming my time, can you--and I know we
are going to be out of time, but can you specifically show me
where that authority is? Because I don't see that authority in
this bill.
Mr. MAZUR. Congresswoman Black, I don't have that in front
of me, but I can take that back and get back to you.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Renacci.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for holding this hearing and allowing me to attend and
participate. I do believe one of Congress' most important roles
is oversight and that it is important we have this hearing.
I am trying to get a timetable here, and I am noticing
that, in going back to some of the testimony, that HHS had
actually requested almost $4 billion in funds at some point in
time, early 2013, as part of the budget process. So it looks
like they were looking to fund these dollars through the
appropriations process.
But, at some point in time, OMB released a report--
actually, it was the 2014 sequestration report--that said that
these funds would be subject to sequestration.
And then I noticed that HHS Assistant Secretary for
Financial Resources Ellen Murray testified that she withdrew
the request before the Senate Appropriations Committee released
its appropriations bill in July of 2013.
So, at some point in time, the Administration was looking
for money. At some point in time, the Administration realized
it couldn't get the money they needed through the
appropriations process so it would be through sequestration. So
then, all of a sudden, at some point in time, the
Administration decided to look elsewhere. And it also appears,
then, late in 2013 is when they started looking toward the
premium credit account.
The Committee also heard testimony that the IRS Deputy CFO
raised red flags about the Administration's plan to make the
cost-sharing reduction payments from the premium tax credit
account in late fall. So there were red flags going up in late
2014.
Mr. Mazur, did you personally know that the people at the
IRS were concerned about this plan in the fall of 2013?
Mr. MAZUR. Not at that time, no.
Mr. RENACCI. You found out later?
Mr. MAZUR. I am aware--you have gone through the timeline
right now.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. Was anybody else in the Treasury aware
of it at that time? Because, again, the IRS was throwing up red
flags.
Mr. MAZUR. I can't speak for other people at the Treasury
Department, sir.
Mr. RENACCI. We also understand that the former Chief Risk
Officer was also concerned. He was worried the payments would
violate the Constitution--wow, violate the Constitution--and
the Antideficiency Act. You all know the Antideficiency Act is
a criminal law that prohibits government officials from making
payments without an appropriation. So people were getting
concerned.
So the IRS General Counsel and OMB General Counsel arranged
for seven IRS officials to come to OMB and view the memo. The
OMB General Counsel told them that they were not allowed to
take notes or take the memo with them.
Mr. Deich, is this common, to have meetings like this
where, you know, you can't take notes and you can't take the
memo? It just seems unusual. Red flags were flying, we are
going to have this meeting, can't take any notes, don't take
the memo. Is this normal?
Mr. DEICH. I wasn't here at the time, and I can't speak to
the specifics of the circumstance. But, as a general matter, I
don't think it would be highly unusual for issues that are
still under discussion to be considered by sharing the
information in a memo but not allowing materials to be
brought----
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Deich, just--I didn't hear. Did you
say ``highly usual'' or ``highly unusual''?
Mr. DEICH. It would not be highly unusual to share
information in this way.
Mr. RENACCI. You are right, it wouldn't be highly unusual,
because it was an issue that was concerning people. You had red
flags all over the place. The IRS was concerned.
We have testimony the IRS officials got back to the IRS;
the Chief Risk Officer and others still worried about the
payments violating the Constitution. Keep going back to
``violating the Constitution,'' which is really important about
this hearing. So they asked to speak with Commissioner
Koskinen.
Commissioner, do you remember that meeting?
Mr. KOSKINEN. I do.
Mr. RENACCI. Do you remember the IRS officials at that
meeting told you that they thought the payments may violate the
Constitution and the Antideficiency Act?
Mr. KOSKINEN. We had a full discussion of concerns about
the appropriation, the appropriate Appropriations Act, as well
as our ability to monitor the payments and ensure there was an
appropriate audit trail. The CFO's concern was as much about,
if we had the authority, how would we make sure that there
would be a sufficient audit trail.
And all those issues were vetted. Chief Counsel reported on
the meeting at OMB--I did not realize that David Fisher had
gone to that meeting--and that we had legal advice from OMB and
we had just received authorization and, in effect, a directive
from Treasury to go forward.
Our job is to administer the Tax Code, and we felt that, on
balance, when we got through with the discussion, that we had
the appropriate authority to proceed.
Mr. RENACCI. So, at that meeting, there was also this
action memorandum put in that I know one of my colleagues
talked about, the memorandum between Mr. Mazur and Mr. Lew.
And I am not sure I got the answer from you----
Mr. KOSKINEN. I would just note that that memorandum was
not at the meeting. It had just been issued. The Chief Counsel
reflected that he had received the memo. But I have never seen
the memo until today.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay.
So, getting back to what my--so, Mr. Mazur, you authored
this, and then you approved using these funds--based on this
memo, you approved using these funds then, correct?
Mr. MAZUR. If you read the text of the memorandum, I
recommended that that account be used for those funds. Yes,
that is true.
Mr. RENACCI. So who made the final decision? Who approved--
--
Mr. MAZUR. Again, if you look at the memorandum, which you
are holding in your hand, you can see that Secretary Lew
approved the course of action.
Mr. RENACCI. So, Mr. Deich, you said earlier you are
familiar with the Antideficiency Act. If someone approves an
authorized expenditure of funds without appropriation, is that
person in violation of the Antideficiency Act?
A pretty simple question. Yes or no?
If somebody--I am going to ask----
Mr. DEICH. The Administration believes that there----
Mr. RENACCI [continuing]. It one more time.
Mr. DEICH [continuing]. Is an appropriation for this----
Mr. RENACCI. If someone approves and authorizes the
expenditures of funds without the appropriation, is that person
in violation of the Antideficiency Act, yes or no?
Mr. DEICH. I am not a lawyer, but it is my understanding
that an appropriation is needed in order to make payments, and,
in the absence of the appropriation, it would be a violation of
the Act.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you all.
Let's do a little bit of cleanup. I would like to talk a
little bit about the legal justification--that is, the 2013
memo.
And you have sort of put us in a trick bag, in a way, in
that you have talked about the totality of a system, an
integrated system--I think that was your word, Mr. Mazur, I am
not sure, but a holistic theme, basically. And yet you have
said we have all this, it is all written down, and it is all in
a memo; we are just not going to share this integration, this
revelation, this legal theory that came to us.
Do you understand, sort of, the nature of the trick bag
that you are putting the Congress and the American people in
because you have not disclosed that information?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, which 2013 memo are you talking about?
Chairman ROSKAM. I am talking about the OMB memo.
Mr. MAZUR. I am not aware of that memo.
Chairman ROSKAM. All right. How about your memo? Let's go
to the one that you were just talking about, the January 2015
memo. What is in the redacted part?
Mr. MAZUR. I don't recall what is under the redacted part,
sir.
Chairman ROSKAM. Come on. You don't recall that?
Mr. MAZUR. Come on. I write hundreds of memos.
Chairman ROSKAM. Okay.
Well, yesterday, you were on full display before the Senate
Finance Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee, Mr.
Mazur. And, in that Committee, I was very impressed by your
independent recollection of section 385, your ability to wax
eloquent on chapter and verse and this and that. ``We have done
this, Congressman. We have done that, Mr. Chairman. We have
taken on this responsibility.'' You had details of process that
were very, very impressive.
And now, on an issue that is absolutely pivotal, that is a
fulcrum between the executive and the legislative branch, you
say in this memo ``I don't remember''? Is that your testimony
today?
Mr. MAZUR. That is correct, sir.
Chairman ROSKAM. Is there anything that would refresh your
recollection?
Mr. MAZUR. Not that I could think of, sir.
Chairman ROSKAM. Did you prepare in any way for this
hearing?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, as you know----
Chairman ROSKAM. Did you prepare in any way for this
hearing?
Mr. MAZUR. Yes, I had some brief preparation.
Chairman ROSKAM. What was the nature of your preparation,
brief as it was?
Mr. MAZUR. I reviewed this memorandum.
Chairman ROSKAM. You reviewed the memorandum?
Mr. MAZUR. With the redacted portion, the one----
Chairman ROSKAM. Oh, so that is all you did? Tell me what
else you did.
Mr. MAZUR [continuing]. The one that was provided to your
Committee. I also reviewed the 10-page----
Chairman ROSKAM. When is the last time you saw the
memorandum as you wrote it?
Mr. MAZUR. I really can't remember, but it probably would
have been 2014.
Chairman ROSKAM. So there has been nothing in 2 years that
has prompted your recollection about your reasoning about the
ability to move forward on a program that brought a great deal
of consternation and anxiety all throughout the Administration.
Based on your own testimony, based on the red flags, based on
one thing after another, there is nothing that you have done to
refresh your recollection about that in the past 2 years. Is
that right?
Mr. MAZUR. That is correct, sir.
Chairman ROSKAM. Wow. That is remarkable. And that is in
stark contrast to the hard work you have been doing on section
385, where you had independent recollections. Is that right?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, section 385 regulations are proposed
regulations. That is something that is ongoing. This is
something that was done 2-plus years ago.
Chairman ROSKAM. How delightful to be able to move from one
work product to another so quickly and so effortlessly.
Let me turn everyone's attention, just so we are clear, on
section 1402, following up on what Mrs. Black was focusing in
on. This is the exact language. So let's knock down this straw-
man argument that this is about poor people. This is not about
poor people. This is about an insurance subsidy. And this is an
insurance subsidy that the Administration argued before the
Federal court.
Here is the plain language, section 1402. In this section,
the Secretary shall notify the insurer of the plan of such
eligibility. And the issuer--that is, the insurance carrier--
shall reduce the cost-sharing under the plan at the level of
the amount specified in subsection C, period, paragraph, end of
letter.
What that tells us is this is not about poor people; this
is about making sure an insurance carrier gets a subsidy. So
let's debunk the straw-man argument. You can make a poor-person
argument as it relates to premium tax credit. You cannot with
any credibility couch this, cloak this, masquerade this in some
way as it relates to poor people on cost-sharing reduction. It
is an absurdity.
Mr. Deich, let me ask you a couple of questions. OMB wrote
a memo to try to justify making the cost-sharing reduction
payments from the premium tax credit appropriation. That is
right, isn't it?
Mr. DEICH. That is my understanding, yes.
Chairman ROSKAM. And you are aware that the Committee has
subpoenaed that memo. Isn't that right?
Mr. DEICH. I am.
Chairman ROSKAM. And you are aware that OMB has not
produced that. Isn't that right?
Mr. DEICH. I am.
Chairman ROSKAM. And you are also aware--tell me you are
aware of this, restore my hope that you are aware of this--that
OMB has not given any legal justification for withholding the
memo. You are aware of that, aren't you?
Mr. DEICH. My understanding is that OMB continues to look
for ways to provide the Committee----
Chairman ROSKAM. No, no. That is not my question. And let's
just--listen, I will be here all day. So let's just get right
to the point.
There has not been a legal justification that has been
articulated by the Office of Management and Budget based on a
legitimate subpoena from the United States Congress. There has
been no privilege asserted. Is that right?
Mr. DEICH. There has been no executive privilege asserted,
that is correct.
Chairman ROSKAM. So there is no legal justification, based
on your own admission, for withholding that information. Isn't
that right?
Mr. DEICH. I am not a lawyer, and I can't address----
Chairman ROSKAM. I am not asking you to be a lawyer.
And, by the way, you are here, you are representing--so
this ``I am not a lawyer'' laminated hall pass that people want
to use today? It is completely ridiculous. Then send a lawyer.
Then send somebody who is equipped to answer these questions.
These are not questions that are unanticipated, Mr. Deich. It
is the nature of the conflict that is between us.
So do you have any other information today about the nature
of the assertion that you are making? In other words, is there
something that you know that is a legitimate reason as to why
this information should be denied to the American people
through their elected representatives in Congress? Do you have
anything new?
Mr. DEICH. OMB is committed to providing the information
that the Committee----
Chairman ROSKAM. Your commitment is waning and
underperforming. Good grief.
Mr. DEICH. There are many instances in which the Congress
and the executive branch----
Chairman ROSKAM. There is one memo. There is one memo, Mr.
Deich. There is one memo. It can't be that hard to find. And it
seems to me you have either of two choices. Either you say,
``Here is the memo,'' or you say, ``We are not going to give it
to you, and here is why we are not going to give it to you.
Because you don't have the legal justification to do it.''
You are being passive-aggressive. You are being an
obstructionist agency. And it is outrageous.
Do you know who wrote the memo?
Mr. DEICH. I do not.
Chairman ROSKAM. You didn't prepare to even understand who
authored a memo? And you are here today representing OMB?
Mr. DEICH. That is correct.
Chairman ROSKAM. Are you aware that the Attorney General
signed off on the memo?
Mr. DEICH. I am not.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Mazur, what happens at Treasury when
you receive a document request from Congress?
Mr. MAZUR. I believe it goes to our Office of Legislative
Affairs and then to our General Counsel's Office to respond.
Chairman ROSKAM. Is that the same thing that happens when
you receive a subpoena, or is a subpoena treated differently?
Mr. MAZUR. I am not aware. I think it is the same
treatment, but I am not aware of the exact----
Chairman ROSKAM. Do you recognize the distinction between a
letter, let's say, that Mr. Lewis and I would write together to
the Department making an information request and a subpoena
that is formally issued? Do you understand a legal distinction
or appreciate the distinction between those two?
Mr. MAZUR. I believe there is a distinction, yes.
Chairman ROSKAM. What is the distinction?
Mr. MAZUR. I believe the subpoena is more of a compelling
document.
Chairman ROSKAM. What is your understanding of what the
Department's obligation is upon the receipt of a subpoena?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, I understand that our staff has been
working with your staff on these issues to try to give you
information you need.
Chairman ROSKAM. If what you are hearing from your staff is
that your staff is doing a good job, your staff is
misrepresenting what is happening. Because what we are hearing
from our staff is that your staff is not doing a good job,
because you have not met a single deadline that the subpoena
has put forward.
And these are not unreasonable deadlines. I mean, let's be
real. These are requests for documents, they are requests that
the Congress is entitled to, and they are requests that you are
denying. Isn't that right?
Mr. MAZUR. Sir, we have provided you with numerous pages of
documents and----
Chairman ROSKAM. Numerous pages is not zip.
Mr. MAZUR [continuing]. Made many people available for
transcribed----
Chairman ROSKAM. Numerous pages is meaningless. You know
that, and I know that.
What is your commitment today to comply with--in other
words, you have an opportunity to give a resounding ``yes'' to
Chairman Brady on his request. Are you prepared to do that?
Mr. MAZUR. No.
Chairman ROSKAM. And you are not willing to do that.
Mr. MAZUR. No. I will take back the request to the
Department.
Chairman ROSKAM. You will take it back. To the same staff,
presumably, that has been representing what a great job they
are doing. Is that who you are going to take it back to?
Mr. MAZUR. I will take it back to the relevant staff who
are responsible, sir.
Chairman ROSKAM. Let me just make one final point.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman ROSKAM. Yes, I will come to you. I will make one
final point.
Mr. LEWIS. We have been here for a while----
Chairman ROSKAM. Listen----
Mr. LEWIS [continuing]. And you are going over.
Chairman ROSKAM. We are going to be here for a while. So--
--
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman, I don't plan to stay here, and I
don't----
Chairman ROSKAM. Listen, you don't have to stay here.
Mr. LEWIS [continuing]. And I don't think it is fair for
the witness to stay here.
Do you want to subpoena all of them? Do you want to hold
them in contempt?
Chairman ROSKAM. Listen, I want to get answers; you want to
get answers; everybody wants to get answers. So let me just
make one final point.
There has been a lot of discussion at a high level today
about the nature of the Constitution and what it means. And,
look, there are complicated issues that we are all dealing with
and we are all walking through.
But there is a real danger that I perceive as being on full
display here. And the danger is a level of presumption that
says, we will not be limited by the plain language of a
statute, as Mr. Meehan was pointing out and as Mrs. Black was
pointing out.
The limitation, when we were invited by Mr. Mazur to
correct the statute, Mr. Meehan pointed out, look, it says
``only.'' ``Only'' means ``only.'' There is not more than one
way to interpret ``only.''
And there is this feeling, and I think it is in full bloom
and on full display today, and the feeling is this: That it is
okay to cut down laws, it is okay to cut through things in
cloaking ourselves in good intentions.
It is a dangerous game. Because if we accept this, then
mark my words, there will come a day when there is going to be
a different Administration or a different disposition or a
different attitude and we are going to say, ``Where were the
people who should have stood up for these things at the time?''
My friends on the other side of the aisle, God bless them,
the ACA is now orthodoxy, and it is jarring to them when it is
challenged. This is not about the ACA. This is about a
constitutional responsibility.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
