- THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS) FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DEPARTMENT OF

HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)

FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 10, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-FC09

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-185                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DEVIN NUNES, California              CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            XAVIER BECERRA, California
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina

David Stewart, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of February 10, 2016 announcing the hearing.............     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Sylvia Burwell, Secretary, United States Department
of Health and Human Services...................................     8

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

National Association of Chain Drug Stores, statement.............   142

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Sylvia Burwell.....................................    81

THE DEPARTMENT OF

HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)

FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Kevin
Brady, [chairman of the committee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you for joining us today, Secretary
Burwell. We appreciate your time and welcome to the Ways and
Means Committee to speak about the President's fiscal year 2017
budget request for the Department of Health and Human Services.
I would like to begin the day by speaking generally about
this year's budget. Even though the President knows that he
does not have much time left in office to solve real problems,
he has decided to put forward in my view a budget that really
is not rooted in reality for yet another year's budget proposed
trillions of dollars of new tax increases and more wasteful
Washington spending.
The President's efforts to secure his liberal legacy does
not come cheap. While the United States likes to break records,
the American people are not cheering for the most expensive
budget in our Nation's history.
The President has chosen to completely ignore the very real
fiscal challenges our country faces in the immediate future.
This budget is a missed opportunity, especially for the
programs at your department that impact the lives of millions
of Americans.
For example, last year when you testified at the Energy and
Commerce Committee you said the Affordable Care Act was leading
to substantial savings for households, businesses, and the
Federal Government, but we know that is not the case today.
In fact, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office
recently found the government spending on health care programs
would grow from $1.1 trillion this year to $2 trillion in 2026.
We also know that many Affordable Care Act recipients are
watching their premiums increase by double digits every year.
And the Medicare Hospital Insurance Trust Fund that our seniors
rely on will be exhausted in 2026, four years earlier than
projected.
These are serious problems that need real solutions, but
these solutions are nowhere to be found in this irresponsible
and very expensive budget.
To add insult to injury, the budget also duplicates
programs that already exist at your own agency. One proposal
calls for a new program to provide short-term financial help to
those in need, even though that is already the central purpose
of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.
Another calls for a new Home Visiting Program run by the
Ag. Department, despite the current Home Visiting Program run
by HHS.
Instead of duplicating programs we already have, Washington
needs to effectively reform our welfare program and finally
help more Americans climb the economic ladder through work, and
while we will disagree more than we agree today, I do believe
there are some important areas of cooperation.
I am glad the White House has finally faced reality in one
area and agreed that the so-called Cadillac tax simply is not
workable.
We must also work to put Medicare on a sustainable path,
and while we do not agree with the specifics in the proposal
presented today, we do agree we need to address spending on
post-acute care and medical education.
I believe we can also find some common ground in the TANF
reauthorization proposal that includes many of the items that
were released by this Committee last July in its TANF
discussion draft.
And when it comes to child welfare, there is broad
agreement about the need to keep kids from entering foster care
in the first place. We share the belief that all programs
should be evaluated and held accountable for making a positive
difference in the lives of children across our country.
So, Secretary, thank you again for joining us today. I now
yield to the distinguished ranking member from Michigan, Mr.
Levin, for the purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Madam Secretary, a warm welcome.
I think this will be your last appearance at least as you
plan before us unless there is a special call, and I hope you
will not brag about it, but you come with a sense of
accomplishment and pride in those accomplishments.
If you just look back a few years, there has been so much
positive change. Eighteen million previously uninsured
Americans now have health insurance, 18 million. The growth of
health care cost has been substantially reduced. One hundred
and twenty-nine million Americans now do not have to worry
about having their health care coverage denied or their
premiums increased because of preexisting conditions.
The tens of millions who now have free preventive care and
we do not see the consequences perhaps in this Committee, but
they are real.
The re-admissions have gone down also because of ACA, and
the last enrollment period, and we hope you will cover on this,
13 million, 13 million signed up.
About ten days ago I met a woman who told us this story.
She had breast cancer. She lost her job. She lost her health
insurance. Because of ACA, she was able now to be covered, and
then her breast cancer reoccurred, and she looked at all of us
and essentially said, ``I would not be here today if it were
not for health care reform and ACA.''
There are millions of people like this, some with breast
cancer, some with diabetes, some with other chronic ailments
who have coverage, and without that coverage would be sicker,
without that coverage they may not have survived.
So you will hear a lot of ideology today. We have been
through that so many times on the floor of the House, efforts
to repeal, but I think the realities are so different than that
ideology.
The President's budget also proposes important reforms to
Medicare. I hope you will cover on those.
And for Mr. Blumenauer and myself and others, there has
been finalized advanced care planning codes, which is
important. The Administration is also suggesting that we head
on tackle the opioid abuse epidemic, as well as providing some
additional money for mental health.
I want to close by touching on a real health crisis. I was
in Flint two days this weekend. What has happened there is not
only intolerable, inexcusable, but with consequences that we
cannot foretell. Dan Kildee has proposed a bill with the
support of a lot of us to address the needs there.
This is a national crisis. The Senate is now debating a
bill, and there is an effort by two Senators from Michigan to
add some funds to help address this crisis, this human crisis,
in Flint for families and especially for children.
And so I will be asking you questions about the possible
role of HHS. I think you have already begun.
I think it highlights what is really in the end the test
for all of us. Behind these statistics, behind all of the data
are the lives of individuals in this country, and all of us who
supported ACA are proud to have done that, and as we go forth
in our district and beyond, we see what it has meant in the
lives of the people in our district and this country.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection, all the members' opening
statements will be made part of the record.
Our sole witness today is the Honorable Sylvia Matthew
Burwell, Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Sworn in on June 9th, 2014, Secretary Burwell is the
22nd Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Prior to serving at HHS, Secretary Burwell was the Director
of the Office of Management and Budget.
Welcome, Secretary Burwell. The committee has received your
written statement. It will be made part of the formal hearing
record, and you have five minutes to deliver your remarks, and
you may begin when you are ready.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SYLVIA BURWELL, SECRETARY, UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Secretary BURWELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Levin, as well as Members of the Committee. I want to
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the President's budget
for the Department of Health and Human Services.
As many of you know, I believe that all of us share common
interests and that we can find common ground. The last
legislative session, this Committee embraced the spirit of
bipartisan leadership when it took historic steps to pass the
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, and I
want to thank you for your leadership on that issue.
The budget before you today is the final budget for this
Administration and my final budget. The budget makes critical
investments to protect the health and wellbeing of the American
people. It helps ensure that we can do our job to keep people
safe and healthy. It accelerates our progress in scientific
research and medical innovation and expands and strengthens our
health care system, and it helps us to be responsible stewards
of the taxpayers' dollars.
For HHS, the budget proposes $82.8 billion in discretionary
budget authority. Our request recognizes the constraints in our
budget environment and includes targeted reforms to Medicare,
Medicaid, and other programs.
Over the next ten years, these reforms to Medicare would
result in net savings of $419 billion.
This budget invests in the safety and health of all
Americans. An issue that we have been working on at home and
abroad I want to start with and that is as we work to stop the
spread of the Zika virus, the Administration is also requesting
more than $1.8 billion in emergency funding, with $1.48 billion
for HHS.
We appreciate the Congress' consideration of this important
and timely request so that we can implement the essential
strategies to combat this virus.
I know the rise in opioid misuse and abuse and overdose has
affected many of your constituents. Affected every day in
America, 78 people die of opioid related deaths, and that is
why this budget proposes significant funding in this space,
over $1 billion to combat the opioid epidemic.
Today too many of our Nation's adults and children with
diagnosable mental health disorders do not receive the
treatment that they need. So this budget proposes $780 million
to close that gap.
Research shows that early interventions can set the course
of a child's success, and that is why we propose extending and
expanding the Home Visiting Program to help even more families
in need support their children's growth.
While we invest in the safety and health of Americans
today, we must also relentlessly push forward on the frontiers
of science and medicine. This budget invests in the Vice
President's Cancer Initiative. This is a vital investment for
our future. Each one percent drop in cancer death rates saves
our economy approximately $500 billion, not to mention the
comfort and security that it brings families across the
country.
Today we are entering a new era in medical science. With a
proposed increase of $107 million for the Precision Medicine
Initiative and $45 million for the Administration's Brain
Initiative, we can continue that progress.
But for Americans to benefit from these breakthroughs in
medical science, we need to ensure that all Americans have
quality, affordable and accessible health care. The Affordable
Care Act has helped make historic progress. Today more than 90
percent of Americans have health coverage. This is the first
time in our Nation's history that this has been true.
This budget seeks to build on that progress by improving
the quality of care that patients receive, spending our health
dollars more wisely and putting an engaged, empowered, and
educated consumer at the center of their care. By advancing and
improving the way we pay doctors, coordinate care, and use
health data and information, we are building a better, smarter,
healthier system.
Finally, I want to thank the employees of HHS. In the past
year they have helped to end the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
They have advanced the frontiers of medical science. They have
helped millions of Americans enroll in health coverage, and
they have done the quiet day-to-day work that makes our Nation
healthier and stronger, and I am honored to be a part of this
team.
As members of this Committee, I think, know, I am
personally committed to working closely with you and your staff
to find common ground and deliver impact for the American
people.
With that, thank you and I am happy to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Burwell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you for your testimony.
We will now proceed to the question and answer session.
Secretary, exchange enrollment for 2016 will be
significantly lower than the nonpartisan Congressional Budget
Office projected when the law passed, in fact, about half that
level, and it has been lower for every year since the law
passed, and despite spending over $1.7 trillion on coverage,
poor enrollment results show Americans just are not buying what
the President is selling on this law. In fact, millions would
rather pay the punitive individual mandate tax penalty than buy
Washington designed insurance they do not want and often cannot
see their preferred doctors or hospitals.
So it is not surprise the law is not working as advertised,
and that is because the theories behind this, the Washington
designed products, punitive mandates are just fundamentally
flawed.
So do you believe the exchange enrollment projections--I am
not talking Medicaid--exchange enrollment projections made by
CBO at the time of the law's passage and not met each year
since are fundamentally flawed?
Secretary BURWELL. So with the----
Chairman BRADY. Is the CBO wrong or is it the enrollment
just continues to fail to even come close?
Secretary BURWELL. I think with regard to the most recent
CBO numbers, as we look at those numbers, the most important
thing to focus on is the number of uninsured, and when we look
at CBO's original projection there, in terms of that drop, and
what we have achieved as a Nation, we are actually slightly
higher in terms of the number of reduction of uninsured.
And I think we all would accept that in terms of how we get
to that reduction, it is good when we have a lower unemployment
rate, and that often leads to fewer people being uninsured. It
is good when it comes through the marketplace, and it also
happens through Medicaid.
With regard to the comparison of the numbers, I think you
know that at the end of this open enrollment, CBO's adjusted
number is around 13 million. Our number is about 12.7 in terms
of the enrollment in the marketplace, and one of the big
changes from CBO's original estimates, CBO estimated a couple
of things.
One is that there would be great movement from the
employer-based market to the marketplace, and that we have not
seen, and as part of CBO's changes, I think that is an
important part of what they are considering.
We now have the numbers before us, and one of the numbers
that CBO expressed, whether it is a concern or not, is that
people would move from their employer-based care to the
marketplace care, and when we have not seen that, but you see
an uninsured number going down, but you do not see as many
people in the marketplace as they originally projected.
Chairman BRADY. Two thoughts. One, you focused on what
happens in the insured, including Medicaid, when the question
is really related to the exchange enrollment area, and the
numbers you cite are enrolled, not paying customers within
that, which we know it will lower again taking us below the
projections.
We just see structural problems, disagree with the approach
of this law. This Congress, this Committee will continue to
work toward repealing it and replacing it with more patient-
centered care.
Final question while you are here. I want to talk to you
about my requests for information regarding the Obamacare Cost
Sharing Reduction Program. For more than a year, both Energy
and Commerce and this Committee have been asking HHS for
documents and interviews about how the Administration decided
to funds cost sharing reduction payments from an account
dedicated to something else, premium tax credits.
The law is very clear. It states payments from the premium
tax credit account only may be made for tax refunds and
refundable tax credits. Cost sharing reduction payments are
neither of these. They are payments made to insurers to
reimburse for additional benefits provided to eligible
beneficiaries.
Nevertheless, this Administration has paid out more than $5
billion in these payments in clear disregard of the law. This
Committee has the constitutional obligation to oversee how the
Administration implements the programs paid for by American
taxpayers and has waited patiently for the necessary
information.
In response to our inquiry on January 19th of this year
your assistant secretary wrote that Congress did not have a
legitimate oversight need for the information requested. This
does not represent a good faith attempt to respond to
congressional oversight. This Committee determines what
constitutes legitimate oversight, not a HHS assistant
secretary.
So let me be clear. It should not be necessary to subpoena
the information this Committee needs to conduct oversight, but
if HHS does not respond to this Committee's information
request, I will not hesitate to issue subpoenas for these
documents.
So my question to you, and you can resolve this today: will
you provide this Committee the documents requested and allow
requested employees to speak with staff, or will I have to
compel your cooperation?
Secretary BURWELL. Mr. Chairman, my understanding of where
we are, and we have had letters back and forth, I have had an
opportunity to speak with Chairman Upton where this is also in
terms of your committee and Chairman Upton's committee that we
are having both of these conversations; have spoken directly
with him, and my understanding is with regard to that issue
that we are at a place in terms of an agreement of what our
next steps forward are in that space.
I think with regard to the substance of the issue at hand,
which was the question of the authorities, that we believe and
have cited we believe that the authority exists in U.S. Code
13-3124, which I think is the exact provision. We have filed
our brief as recently as last week.
I think you know this is a matter where the House of
Representatives is suing the department and myself with regard
to this issue, and so we have filed that brief. I think we are
in conversations with your staff to provide in terms of the
issues in the conversation that you have asked for.
And so I think that we are taking that next step right now,
is my understanding of where we are.
Chairman BRADY. I do not think that is the case, but here
is my point. This Committee has oversight interests separate
from the House's litigation. We have responsibilities and
oversight that extend well beyond this particular program that
the Administration's actions have affected.
The law is clear. The dollars will be spent. The
Administration spent it in complete disregard to that law. That
is why we are investigating this action, and so we are going to
continue to seek those documents, and I am hopeful that the
agency will be forthcoming both on the documents and making
those staff available for interviews because we will not give
up in this regard.
So with that I would like to recognize the distinguished
Ranking Member from Michigan, but I have been instructed that
the House will adhere to the 15 minute rule very tightly. So we
are going to recess until after these three votes, Madam
Secretary, and then we will be back at that point.
The committee is recessed.
[Recess.]
Chairman BRADY. Secretary, thank you for being patient. We
just took a short hearing and made it shorter. So after Mr.
Levin questions, we will be going to three-minute questioning,
and it will be strictly enforced. We want as many members to be
able to visit with you today as possible.
I will now recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr.
Levin.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
In order to expedite, Mr. Chairman, everybody's
opportunity, I will limit myself to three minutes.
Thank you.
There was discussion here about the cost sharing issue. I
just want to mention, Mr. Chairman, the Republicans decided to
file a lawsuit, and now they want to take depositions outside
of that lawsuit. I am not sure what the motivation might be.
You mentioned in your opening statement about TANF. I think
you and I agreed that we would have an effort on a bipartisan
basis with the subcommittee leadership on both sides to work
out possible changes, and I hope we will proceed on that basis.
Let me just ask you about Flint. There is a panel
discussion going on now. The person who first came across, I
think, the deep problems there is testifying. I think also the
Mayor of Flint is there.
So if you would discuss the HHS role because there are so
many health aspects to this in terms of the CDC role, in terms
of health care for these kids in their schools, et cetera.
So could you briefly describe what you are undertaking? The
State failed in its responsibility. The Federal Government is
stepping up to the plate here. Tell us what you contemplate.
Secretary BURWELL. So the President asked HHS to take the
lead in terms of the interagency effort, working with EPA, HUD,
USDA and FEMA, and we have done that. The Assistant Secretary
for Preparedness and Response, Dr. Nicki Lurie, is leading that
effort from an HHS perspective with Dr. Karen DeSalvo, the
nominee for the office of the Assistant Secretary for Health.
So that is our lead team.
Our efforts are focused on two fundamental things in terms
of where we are and the go forward, supporting the State, the
county and the community in two fundamental things.
The first is clean water and water that is potable,
drinkable, and usable for the community. That has some short-
term issues, and that has to do with things like FEMA helping
get bottled water out, the installation of filters, which HUD
is helping with, in terms of making sure people are putting in
those filters right.
So there is the short-term solution, and then there is the
longer term solution in terms of piped water being clean and
usable. Focusing on that part, EPA obviously is leading much of
the Federal Government's work in that space.
The second part of our effort in terms of what we are
focused on in our plan is to support the local community as
well as the State in determining the extent of the problem
cost. In other words, how many children are suffering from
elevated levels of lead, and then the attendant circumstances
from a public health's perspective that come with that?
As we determine that, then determine how we go forward and
assist in mitigating those circumstances.
Mr. LEVIN. And in terms of health services, in particular,
if you would just describe that because in mental health I was
deeply troubled to learn there is one social worker, I think,
for the entire elementary school system, and you have here a
major health crisis for thousands of children who are now
threatened through no fault of their families at all. Tell us a
bit about that.
Secretary BURWELL. So the mental health and the behavioral
health we think is an extremely important thing, and when we
activated our efforts and the President asked us to go in, we
activated SAMHSA, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health part of
HHS so that they are supporting and providing behavioral health
for the children, for the parents, for everyone.
We do that in crisis whether that is where other kind of
crises occur, natural disasters, shootings or other things. And
so SAMHSA is also a part of our extended effort on behavioral
health.
With regard to other parts of the health issue, we have
worked with USDA, and USDA is making sure that WIC will pay for
a formula that does not need to be water mixed.
Mr. LEVIN. If it is mixed with water, it makes it worse.
Secretary BURWELL. Right. So USDA is taking those steps. So
we are working on the health issues both in a preventative
form, in terms of pregnant mothers, as well as making sure that
these children are getting tested.
And we are using our HHS facilities and sites to help with
that, and whether that is using our health centers that are
funded through HHS or using our Head Start facilities to get
the information correctly to parents so they know that they
need to get tested, and so we are supporting the State and the
local community in that effort to get the children tested and
then to do the follow-up services needed.
Testing is also something paid for in Medicaid.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized for three minutes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Madam Secretary, I would like to start by asking you about
the President's budget for refugee resettlement. Is it not
correct that he proposes increasing the number of refugees to
at least 100,000?
Secretary BURWELL. That is correct, by 2017. By 2016, 85.
Mr. JOHNSON. Now, that is an increase of over 30,000 from
2015, with many of those refugees coming from Syria. It is no
secret I oppose the President's plan. We just cannot take the
chance of a terrorist slipping through because we cannot vet
these folks.
Since Texas receives about ten percent of all refugees, my
constituents are very troubled, but you know what else is
troubling? These refugees end up on social welfare programs
like food stamps and Medicaid, and for more than just a few of
them. In fact, in 2013, over 91 percent of Middle East refugees
received food stamps while fewer than half worked any point in
the last five years.
Madam Secretary, with all of these Syrian refugees coming
in, how much is this going to cost the American taxpayer, given
their long-term use of social welfare programs?
And what are we looking at? After all, we are over $19
trillion in debt right now.
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to the issue and our role
in the refugees, I think you know our role is at the point at
which the refugees have been placed that we do limited support
to the local communities and to the refugees for a limited
space of time.
I would be interested in making sure we get the numbers
that you have with regard to the work numbers because the
numbers that I have seen are generally higher than that in
terms of the percentage of people that actually through our
refugee programs that end up working. So I would love to make
sure we can follow up with your staff to understand if there is
a difference in the numbers that we are seeing because that is
related to this issue of the estimates of the total cost to
communities and other services.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes, we would be glad to get those to you.
Where are you on issuing new Medicare cards without Social
Security numbers? Are you still on track to reissue all
Medicare cards by 2019?
Secretary BURWELL. Congressman, this is one that you and I
had both similar interests and similar questions, and in terms
of 2019 and that time frame, yes, we are very much on track to
meet those deadlines that have been legislated. I have actually
pushed the team to see if there is any way that we can beat
those deadlines, but we are certainly on track at this point.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Rangel, you are recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome. Puerto Rico, I understand that you have had some
changes with the DSH formula as well as removing the cap from
Medicaid, but since I have been in the Congress, Puerto Rico's
health care system has been far below the national in terms of
the access to quality health care, and as a result of the
recent fiscal crisis, it is my understanding a lot of doctors
and health providers have left the island.
This changing in the formula, what does this mean in
dollars and cents as relates to $82 billion discretionary funds
that you have?
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to the proposal that we
currently have, I think as you said, what we want to do is try
and get the Medicaid efforts to a place where they are more
similar to those for the rest of Americans in the country.
Mr. RANGEL. They are crippled now, and all I want to know
is in terms of fiscal relief, I mean, what you talk about is
equity and fairness that we should have had. Now they are
crippled for a variety of reasons, and health care is a major
reason.
In the three minutes I have, could you tell me out of your
budget how much is set aside to try to give assistance to our
citizens, most of whom are not Muslim, but to make it easier;
how much money is set aside to help them in this fiscal crisis?
Secretary BURWELL. So there are a number of places in the
President's budget that----
Mr. RANGEL. Total, if you brought them all together, what
would it amount to?
Secretary BURWELL. That I will have to go because I need to
work with my colleagues at Treasury and we will get back to
you.
Mr. RANGEL. Why do you not give an estimate so I will have
some idea of the degree of urgency that HHS has placed on this?
Because a large part of their problem is within the power
of HHS.
Secretary BURWELL. I think at this point I will have to get
back in terms of the number. The number is a large one.
Mr. RANGEL. Well, whatever formulas you have changed, when
we do anything on the committee, we have to put a dollar
estimate on what is it going to cost.
Secretary BURWELL. And we do have a dollar estimate in the
budget, and I will get back on the number. I am----
Mr. RANGEL. You could not even guess how much of the 82
billion we are changing the formula, bringing equity and
fairness, bringing it up to Stateside, providing more money for
a disproportionate share, Medicaid caps removed.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard, there are a series of
proposals throughout the budget----
Mr. RANGEL. How soon can I brag about how your office has
comes to the assistance of our citizens in Puerto Rico?
Secretary BURWELL. You will be able to do it by the end of
the day.
Mr. RANGEL. That is fair enough. I pass.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Tiberi, you are recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Burwell, thank you for being here.
As you know, I think you would agree--maybe not--
Obamacare's co-ops have been a disaster, and after using
American taxpayers' piggybank, more than half have failed. This
morning, the Columbus Dispatch, my hometown newspaper, I was
greeted with this headline: ``Customers mad about late notice.
Ohio Health dropped.''
So Ohio Health is the largest hospital system in central
Ohio, the largest, and these articles, and there is a second
one that I am going to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman,
both of them, and we will get you a copy of both of these
articles.
They indicate that a company called InHealth, which is a
co-op, headquartered in Westerville, Ohio, is under enhanced
oversight, which means CMS is concerned about its financial
stability and it is closely monitoring its operations.
The article that I read this morning says about 9,000
Ohioans are enrolled in InHealth, and they recently got some
bad and surprising news. At the last minute, InHealth decided
to drop most Ohio Health hospitals and doctors from their
network, leaving them with few options now that the enrollment
period has passed.
So this article from this morning's paper talks about a
couple in Marion, Ohio. Marion County has one hospital. It is
an Ohio Health hospital. So this couple now has to drive over
20 miles to go to a hospital outside of the county to get an
in-network hospital rather than go to the one just down the
road that they have been using for years.
Another article from last week quotes a man from
Westerville where InHealth is headquartered in my district,
also had a preferred hospital, Ohio Health, that he went to
that is now out of network for him.
So these folks in this article have been going to doctors
and hospitals that they wanted to until they got onto this co-
op that was created under Obamacare. So the article goes on to
talk about how this co-op is struggling, and the article now
also says that these folks are now going to have a narrower
provider network because of the mandates and regulations under
Obamacare.
So what I do not understand is how the Administration that
has been crowing about consumer and patient protections in the
President's health care law allow a co-op that was created
under the health care law, can allow this co-op that is
supposed to be closely monitored, pull the wool out.
And you will see the article here. Some of these people are
just devastated from losing their doctors and hospitals, to
allow a provider to pull out of a provider network, provide a
major announcement, major changes, after the enrollment period
has passed.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Secretary BURWELL. With regard----
Chairman BRADY. Madam Secretary, I apologize. Time has
expired in the three minutes, and hopefully you will get a
chance to respond to that a little later.
Dr. McDermott, you are recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will respond. The Republicans gutted the risk corridor
money, and so these co-ops are going down. That is what
happened in Ohio. So there is no mystery to what happened.
The newspaper just did not go to the fact that the
Republicans in the Congress had taken away the risk corridor
money.
Mr. TIBERI. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. No. I have got only three minutes.
I want to ask you a question about drug costs because drug
costs are scaring the living daylights out of people, and when
we put Part D in the law, the Republicans put it in by caving
to the pharmaceutical industry and tied the hands of the
Secretary and taped his or her mouth shut so you cannot
negotiate any kind of reductions in drug prices; is that
correct?
Secretary BURWELL. At this point I do not have negotiating
authority. That is one of the things we had asked for in our
budget, for specialty and high cost drugs. That is one of the
proposals that is in the President's budget right now.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Does the Veterans Administration have the
ability to negotiate reductions?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, they do.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Do you know the percentage reductions that
they have negotiated there?
Secretary BURWELL. We know that they have been able to
achieve cost savings.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Twenty percent, 30 percent?
Secretary BURWELL. I would have to ask the Secretary of the
VA.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You do not know them?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. How much money do you spend in Medicare on
pharmaceuticals?
Secretary BURWELL. The number, the percentage continues to
risk, and that is why this is one of the areas of focus for us
in terms of we know that in the most recent year for
statistics, 2014, we saw a 12 percent increase in just the
pharmaceutical costs.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. What is the dollar amount that you spend?
Secretary BURWELL. We can get back on the dollar amount. In
percentage terms it is a growing percentage of the overall
Medicare budget, which is 52 percent of all of the entitlements
at HHS.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Let's say you spent $100 billion on
pharmaceuticals, right? Just for a hypothetical.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. If you reduced that, if you could negotiate
a 20 percent reduction, that would be $20 billion saved; is
that correct?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, it is.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. If you could negotiate a 40 percent
reduction, it would be 40 billion, right?
That is what the Veterans Administration says, somewhere
between 40 and 60 percent reduction, and it seems to me that
you have asked for that in this budget. Tell us about what is
in the budget as far as negotiating ability.
Secretary BURWELL. So there are number of things that are
in the budget with regard to the high cost drug issue. This is
one of them in terms of negotiating authority. We have also
asked for the authority for us to pool with States and Medicaid
to create Medicaid pools so that the States can negotiate in a
more effective way in terms of drug costs for the States.
The third thing that I would mention in the area of high
cost drugs that is in this budget that I think is important is
speeding up the closure of the doughnut hole for our seniors.
Right now through the ACA, the closure that originally occurred
has saved $20 billion for ten million seniors in the country,
and so working through our ability to do that are three of the
priorities we have.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. All time has expired.
Mr. Reichert.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
I just want to cover quickly some of my major concerns with
the President's budget. Reduces biologics market exclusivity
from 12 to seven years, a serious impact on TPP and the
biologics industry.
It cuts medical education payments to hospital by ten
percent; cuts reimbursement to critical access hospitals, which
are the small rural hospitals like Sequim Valley Hospital that
you are familiar with coming from Washington State for those
many years; cuts payments to long-term care hospitals, skilled
nursing facilities, home health agencies; cuts Medicare Hospice
payments. Those are some of my major concerns.
But I want to also in my short time thank you for your work
with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, for promoting
women's health, children's health, and fighting global poverty,
and all those things that you have done. You know, I know your
heart. It is a caring heart, and so I am going to move away
from partisanship messages for a moment and ask for your help,
and I'm going to ask for the President's help and the Vice
President's help, the Administration's help on this.
I am on a mission, and I want you to be a part of the
mission, and the mission is this. The President has said we are
taking a moon shot on cancer, $755 million in this effort. But
here is a group of people I am going to share with you who are
left out.
One of the most common side effects from cancer treatments
is lymphedema. It afflicts an estimated 15 percent of all
survivors and 40 percent of all breast cancer patients. As
beneficiaries live longer, an even greater emphasis must be
placed on self-care. These lymphedema patients need these
compression garments. I am asking today, Madam Secretary, for
your help, the Administration's help in providing the care for
40 percent of breast cancer survivors who need these garments.
The money we save, the health issues that we can avoid,
providing these garments, well, they are not measurable. Can
you help us with that?
Secretary BURWELL. Congressman, I will look at it and
follow up and follow up directly with you.
Mr. REICHERT. Can you help us with that?
Secretary BURWELL. I assume it is a payment issue in terms
of what we do and do not pay for? Is that what it is?
Mr. REICHERT. We just need your help. Yes. Would you help
us with that?
Secretary BURWELL. I will look into it and work to see what
we can do within our authorities. You know, when it is a
payment issue----
Mr. REICHERT. It has been years, and the $755 million we
are asking for, the President asked for, at least some
consideration for the help of these people suffering from this
disease should be considered.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis, you are recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, welcome.
Secretary BURWELL. Thank you.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you for your service and for all your
great and good work.
Madam Secretary, as you well know, the CDC is headquartered
in my congressional district. Can you talk about public health
preparedness generally? Are we ready? Are we prepared?
My understanding is that the Zika cases have already been
reported in the United States. Do we have an estimate or the
potential cost of this virus?
Secretary BURWELL. So the Zika virus, I think, is part of
the broader preparedness, and fortunately, the work that we did
in Ebola has put us in a place where there are a number of
things that help us.
But with regard to the Zika virus specifically, I think it
is important to note a number of things that are very
important. First of all, the most important concern we have
right now is pregnant women, and I think you know we have put
out the guidance that indicates that any woman that is
pregnant, the CDC recommends you do not travel to any of the
regions because microcephaly, the birth defect, that while we
have not been able to scientifically put the causal link, we
have enough concern that we have made that recommendation.
So focus on pregnant women. Next is we need to make sure
that we are focusing on controlling the mosquitos that cause
it. This is different, and I think many people will harken back
to Ebola, but this is fundamentally different because it is
passed by a mosquito biting someone who has the disease and
then biting another person.
Eighty percent of the people that have it do not know, and
so this is a part of what is a very large problem, and for
those that do have it, it is about a week's worth of fever, and
sometimes they think that it is the flu or something else.
With regard to our domestic preparedness, we have a plan
together with the CDC, the NIH, the Assistant Secretary for
Preparedness Response in terms of our homeland preparedness.
What we need to do though, and we have the supplemental
that we have proposed, is make sure that we are able as Nation
to be prepared as we go into the summer months, especially in
the South.
So there are two mosquitos that transmit this. One is a
very efficient transmitter, meaning it will bite four
individuals in a meal, and so you can imagine how that gets
passed. The other mosquito, that mosquito is limited into the
Deep South in our country. The other mosquito can cover almost
up to 20 or so States. That one bites other things, but I still
may be a transmitter.
So we need to get in place the right communications, the
right public health, and the right mosquito control before we
hit the South.
Right now in the United States no continental cases have
been passed by a mosquito to a person. It is travelers coming
back, and one sexual transmission in Dallas. In Puerto Rico, we
have a situation where already we are seeing mosquito pest
cases.
And so those are the elements we need to do. We have a
plan. That is why we have asked for the funding.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Boustany, you are recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Burwell, I want to get the Administration's
clarification on health reimbursement arrangement or health
reimbursement accounts. In 2013, harsh penalties were applied
to small business owners who use these health reimbursement
accounts for their employees to the tune of $100 per day per
employee.
I questioned Secretary Lew about this last year during the
budget talks, and subsequently the Administration put this on
hold for less than a year.
I heard from Randy Noel in Louisiana, who is a small
business owner, he has been advised to pay these penalties
because the time in which this was put on hold was less than a
year.
There has been so much uncertainty, but this is a very
draconian penalty. Is the Administration going to eliminate
this penalty or would you work with us? Because Mike Thompson
and I have bipartisan legislation; it is bicameral and it is
also bipartisan in the Senate, to eliminate these harsh
penalties.
Secretary BURWELL. Is this the rulemaking that you spoke
with Marilyn Tavenner about? Is it that particular rulemaking?
Mr. BOUSTANY. I actually had a conversation with Secretary
Lew about this. I think I did raise this with Marilyn Tavenner
as well.
Secretary BURWELL. I want to follow up because there are
two different provision, and I am not sure which one we are
talking about here.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Well, this is specifically about the health
reimbursement arrangements which allow for employers to provide
dollars' assistance to their employees. It is fine under ACA,
but for some reason the Administration going back to 2013
imposed a $100 per day per employee penalty.
It is very draconian on these small businesses, and
Secretary Lew admitted it was a problem last year. It was put
on hold, but for really less than a year. I think it was like
six or seven months, and now we have this penalty re-imposed.
These small business owners do not know what to do. We
think it ought to be eliminated. These employers are trying to
help their employees and provide for insurance.
Secretary BURWELL. Let me check and follow up. It is on the
tax side though. Is that why you went to Secretary Lew?
Mr. BOUSTANY. Well, I did raise it because it is a tax
issue, but it also is a health issue.
Secretary BURWELL. Okay. I will follow up on our end.
Mr. BOUSTANY. I intend to ask Secretary Lew about it when
we have him in front of the committee as well.
Secretary BURWELL. Okay. I will follow up with the
Secretary. This one probably sits with them, but as you
reflect, it is an important part of the----
Mr. BOUSTANY. It is a health issue.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes. So I will follow up.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Neal, you are recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Madam Secretary, the Massachusetts delegation lunched today
with Michael Botticelli and the Sheriffs' Association of
Massachusetts to talk about the opiate crisis. Governor Baker,
to his credit, has suggested that more than 1,200 to 1,300
people died last year in Massachusetts of opiate addiction.
Heroin is being sold on the streets of Springfield and
Hartford for $2.50 a bag, and clearly the movie HBO presented
called ``Heroin on Cape Cod'' is riveting. I would recommend it
to anybody who might be interested in what has happened.
The President's Drug Czar today, Mr. Michael Botticelli,
said that part of the problem clearly is the overuse of
prescription drugs, and that it has heralded a new era in how
to treat addiction.
Seventy-eight people as you noted lose their lives every
day as a result of these drugs, and you have offered several
proposals in your budget to deal with this alarming epidemic.
Could you give us greater detail as to how you suggest that
we might proceed?
And applause to the President for suggesting $1 billion in
new expenditure to address this issue.
Secretary BURWELL. So an issue that is deeply important to
me. As many of you know, I am from the State of West Virginia
where the problem has been acute for many, many years. So a
priority since I came.
When I came to HHS, we put together a three-part strategy
in order to make progress on it. The first has to do with
prescribing. We know in 2012 there were 250 million
prescriptions of opioids. I think you all know how many adults
there are in our country, and the idea that in 2012 there were
250 million prescriptions, the overprescribing is a problem. We
need to take that on.
As part of that, the CDC will be issuing new regulations.
We know pain is important. It is important to be treated, but
the overprescribing that has occurred, we need better
direction. So that's part one.
Part two is medication assisted treatment, and right now as
you reflect in terms of the numbers that are in your State and
in many of the States represented here, we need these people to
be in medication assisted treatment. There is not access to the
treatment, and that is one of the major parts of the funding
that you mentioned. It is to create an ability for States and
communities.
So the money would go to SAMHSA and a little bit to HRSA,
and that money would then go on to States and communities
because we need to build the capacity for the medication
assisted treatment for these people because right now they come
into law enforcement.
You were just meeting with the sheriffs. I have met with
the sheriffs. I met with them in Massachusetts with Governor
Baker. What they will tell you is we are not social workers,
but we see these people time and time again and have nowhere to
send them.
The third element of the strategy, and sadly we have to
have this element, is naloxone or some people call it Narcan,
which is the drug when people have overdosed because sadly we
have so many people that are in a state from either heroin or
prescription drugs and they have overdosed, and at that point
we are just trying to save lives.
And so some of the money will go to move and fund naloxone
at the community level.
Much of the money we are asking for is about moving it to
the States and communities that are in need so that they can
build their capacity to work against these three strategies.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Roskam, you are recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, two quick issues. I think they are pretty
straightforward and pretty simple. The House has inquired about
the basic health program, and I was able to receive a briefing
from your Assistant Secretary for Financial Management, Elaine
Murray, who is here today and came and gave me some good
insight into the process.
Out of that discussion, we put forward a request for
documents on something that we learned about, and that was a
document called ``the big ugly table'' that she said was
critical in putting together the basic health plan.
Now, recognizing that we are not in litigation so that
there is no concern there, we have requested this document and
other documents, including the memorandum of understanding
between CMS and the IRS.
The results have not been forthcoming. We have gotten, you
know, redacted information followed up, back-forth, back-forth.
The latest was literally a 234-page printout of public
information from the CMS Web site that is submitted to
Congress.
In the spirit of Congressman Rangel and the dispatch with
which you were able to easily answer his inquiry, can you get
us this ``big ugly table'' by the end of the day along with the
CMS-IRS memorandum of understanding?
Secretary BURWELL. So, Congressman, my understanding is
that we have turned over documents. We----
Mr. ROSKAM. They have not been responsive.
Secretary BURWELL. So I would like to follow up with staff
to understand. Our staffs need to get together to understand
this.
Mr. ROSKAM. Great. It is a complete mystery, and time is
short. So I want to move to another issue, but it is to the
point of absurdity. So if you can intervene and get us the
``big ugly table,'' which according to the briefing was
critical to the decision making, along with the memorandum of
understanding between CMS and IRS, that would be helpful.
Secondly, we heard testimony at the Oversight Subcommittee
about the fraud and erroneous payment rate from CMS. The Deputy
Administrator said the number is 12.7 percent. The remedy or
part of a solution Mr. Blumenauer and I are working together
for a common access card using the same technology that DoD
uses and has used in the financial services arena.
We received some technical assistance, but it was like
pulling teeth from CMS; had to get the Administrator personally
involved to get this done. Okay. Because he is meeting people
who do not want to change things.
But this, Madam Secretary, as we both know, is a system
that desperately needs to change. Would you be willing to help
Mr. Blumenauer and me, as we are trying to move forward, get
the technical assistance and put together a common access card
pilot program that we can see if it works and if it saves
money?
We are persuaded it will do that, but we need your help and
we need your personal help substantively because we are meeting
a lot of passive-aggressive folks that do not want to be
helpful.
Will you help us?
Secretary BURWELL. I will look into seeing what we can do
in terms of whether we have--is it statutory? Is that why we
are providing technical assistance?
Mr. ROSKAM. Yes.
Secretary BURWELL. Because it is statutory. Okay. Then let
us look into it and understand because I think hopefully this
is the kind of thing that will move us along the electronic
health benefits end using technology and data to do delivery
system reform. So I would like to understand it more fulsome
and figure out if we can provide technical assistance if it is
statutory.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. All time has expired.
Mr. Doggett, you are recognized.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Madam Secretary, the President's budget indicates
that, quote, ``The Administration is deeply concerned about
rapidly growing prescription drug prices.''
Certainly that is a concern that is so real to many
consumers who are basically faced with the choice: your money
or your life.
While I am fully supportive of the Biden Cancer Moon Shot
Initiative that you referred to to try to convert some of the
pain and grief that he and so many families have, unless the
Moon Shot addresses accessibility for so many of our neighbors,
it will really be just a shot in the dark.
The one thing that we already know without any more
research on drug effectiveness is that an unaffordable drug is
100 percent ineffective. I applaud each of the budget's
legislative proposals that you outlined to Mr. McDermott.
Together they would save taxpayers over $172 billion.
Republicans are always telling us about how entitlements
need to be brought under control and Medicare is unsustainable.
I think the place to begin is by cutting those who think they
are entitled to charge the highest drug prices in the world to
Medicare and Medicare consumers.
Clearly legislation is required, but you and I know that
lightning could strike the Capitol dome in the same place not
twice but ten times, and this Congress would not be willing to
stand up to the pharmaceutical lobby. It is essential that the
Administration use every tool at its disposal to prevent price
gouging.
You are aware that 50 of our colleagues have asked that you
and the NIH use existing authority to at least set some
standards for prices when taxpayers paid for the research that
led to a drug. Can you assure that our request is receiving
your thorough consideration?
Secretary BURWELL. It is. It is. Your letter we have
received. Thank you, and we are continuing to try and pursue
every administrative option.
We have proposed legislative and statutory changes as part
of the budget but are looking at a wide array, which we welcome
your letter and your suggestion.
Mr. DOGGETT. I am pleased with your Dashboard, with your
proposal on Part B payment models. I hope you can build on the
oncology care model from the Innovation Center.
I believe that when you ask that we mandate pharmaceutical
companies to provide certain information that is vital, that is
a good idea, but I hope that you will consider requesting that
they voluntarily provide that information this year and will
continue to look for ways to bundle pharmaceuticals with other
services, will implement your bio-similar reimbursement rule,
and take every step you can, knowing this Congress will do
little, but there are still steps you can take to help American
families on pharmaceutical price gouging.
Thank you so much.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. All time has expired.
Mr. Smith, you are recognized.
Mr. SMITH of Nebraska. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary, for your presence here today.
I do want to follow up on a characterization made earlier
that it is Republicans' fault for removing some funds,
therefore causing the co-ops, the Obamacare consumer oriented
and operated plans to collapse.
I do want to add though that on April 11th, 2014, from a
fact sheet from CMS they stated that, quote, ``We anticipate
that risk corridors' collections will be sufficient to pay for
all risk corridors' payments.'' I just want the record to
reflect that.
But certainly the collapse of CoOpportunity Health for
Nebraska and Iowa has been a huge deal in Nebraska. Many
Nebraskans are still smarting from it. Actually a constituent
named Pam has lost her coverage three times, thanks to the
Obamacare, the entire plan that certainly denied her the
coverage she was told she could keep, that she could afford,
that covered her preexisting condition.
And so I do have a question though. As it relates to the
Administrators of CoOpportunity Health for Nebraska and Iowa,
it is my understanding that they kind of saw trouble on the
horizon. So they requested the opportunity to suspend
enrollment, and that request was denied.
Can you speak to that?
Secretary BURWELL. We discussed this, I think, last year
when I was before the committee, and I would like to follow up
in terms of where they felt the request because we did not,
when I followed up, feel that there was a request at all that
came into us and that was denied.
So I would love to follow up because when I followed up on
this before, we had not received that request.
Mr. SMITH of Nebraska. Okay.
Secretary BURWELL. And so let us understand because we work
with all of the co-ops on this issue. Our number one priority
is the consumer, as you are indicating. That is our priority as
well. That is why, to be honest, a number of the co-ops came
out before this open enrollment as we worked with the States
that are their primary regulator. We worked with the States on
that issue.
So the consumer is the number one concern. So if we can
understand how they felt they did that because if there was a
process that is unclear or something there, I think it would
serve everyone else if we can learn from this example.
Mr. SMITH of Nebraska. Right. And overall, you know, we
heard a couple of months ago I think it was that the co-op
program is on sound footing, and yet we have now learned that
Maine, I believe, who was the only one at one point turning a
profit, is now beginning to lose money.
Where do we stand on that entire issue? Are they on as
solid footing as we were told some weeks ago?
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to that, as you know, at
that point as when we came to open enrollment, we worked with
all the States to make sure that the State Commissioners of
Insurance and we felt they were.
With the facts that we have and had at that time, that is
where we are. I think we also have taken steps to help the co-
ops in terms of how they can access capital if they need it.
That guidance was put out about two weeks ago as well.
We are going to continue to monitor closely with the
States.
Mr. SMITH of Nebraska. Thank you.
Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. All time has expired.
Mr. Thompson, you are recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, thank you very much for being here and the
outstanding work that you and your team do.
I've got a couple of issues I would like to get a response
on. The first is the recovery audit contractors, the RACs. I
have had dealings with these folks in my district, and I am
assuming other folks on the committee have as well.
The idea that a provider would have to wait 800 days for a
decision is just wrong, and I am hoping that you are going to
be able to tell me that you are working on fixing that.
And I know that the Provider Relations Coordinator Program
has done some good in this area. Are there plans to expand that
so we can get this number down to let people in some cases stay
in business?
And then also I want to talk to you a little bit about
TeleHealth. Congressman Black and I have legislation that would
expand TeleHealth. It is a way that you can accomplish two I
think very important goals. One is to save money, and the other
and most important is to save lives.
I know the President's budget has provisions in there to
expand the venues whereby TeleHealth can be used, and also to
allow it to be used in Medicare Advantage.
And I would be interested in knowing if you have some sort
of means by which to collect data on the cost savings because
if we can quantify that, I am sure it will help us expand
TeleHealth even more.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the first issue in the
RACs, we have made changes. And so if it goes beyond the 60
days, they don't get the money, in terms of the RACs. We've
actually put in place changes with the feedback.
Mr. THOMPSON. With the contractors?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes. Yes. And so if it goes beyond that
period of time, it doesn't. If at any point the decisions are
overturned in the process, they don't get the money either. And
so we put in place a number of steps in response to the
criticisms that we have heard about RACs. With regard to the
telemedicine issue, as you stated, we have several proposals in
our budget. We think this is an important place to make a
difference, both in terms of quality of care that we can
provide, access in rural areas, particularly. It's very
important.
And right now, we have, we have those numbers scored. And
so we have been able to score the savings that we think can
occur by using telemedicine. And so we can get to you all as
you all are considering your legislation how we score those
numbers. And there are two different provisions, both in terms
of our federally qualified and rural health clinics being
initiation sites for telemedicine, as well as making sure that
in Medicare Advantage it can be paid for. Which is sometimes
one of the prohibitive things with telemedicine.
Mr. THOMPSON. Well, we'd like to see those numbers and that
methodology, and also would love a commitment from you to work
with us to make sure we can further expand telemedicine.
Because it does save lives and does safe money.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes. And we'll probably come to it, I
think, if we're going to talk about the Indian Health Service
as well.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Ms. Jenkins, you're recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Madam. Or, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Madam Secretary, for being here. As many of my colleagues on
this Committee have already mentioned, the President's health
care law has continued to fail so many Americans. Over the past
few weeks, I've hosted almost 20 town halls throughout Kansas.
And folks back home often tell me how they face increased
premiums with fewer options for care. 2016 premiums are
expected to increase by 15 to 25 percent in my home state of
Kansas. This simply is not right, especially in the face of a
failed economic recovery. And I, along with my colleagues here,
continue to work to replace Obamacare, repeal it, find
proposals that drive competition, lower cost and improve health
care quality for all Americans. One particular provision of
Obamacare that's especially cumbersome and drives up healthcare
costs for the everyday American is the requirement that
individuals have a prescription from a physician in order to
purchase over the counter medicine with their health savings
accounts and flexible savings accounts. And I have worked on a
bill, HR1270, the Restoring Access to Medication Act, which
would eliminate this unnecessary requirement that's both
confusing and frankly, it's just a waste of time for patients
and physicians. And we've worked closely on this legislation
now for three years, with my colleague, Representative Kind,
from Wisconsin. When you testified in front of our committee
last June, I asked if you would support us on this type of
legislation. At the time you indicated you weren't familiar
with the issue. Have you had a chance within the last year to
review it now? And if so, would you support the legislation?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the issue in terms of
driving down the costs on the over the counter prescriptions, I
apologize in terms of the specifics of the legislation. We'll
need to come back to you on that. In terms of the basic
concepts of making things simpler and easier, we're working at
that across the board. And whether it's the announcement that
occurred yesterday with Walgreens about over the counter and
Niloxone and other drugs like that. So the concept of this is
something that I think we want to continue to work on. With
regard to the specifics, I will need to get back.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Well, I believe this is just a few easy,
common sense approach. It's bi-partisan. If the Administration
will just take a look at it. It's kind of frustrating, year
after year after year to have you come before us as if you're
not interested in looking for some of these common sense
solutions to help all Americans, especially when they do have
bi-partisan support. So thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Paulsen, you're recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you Secretary.
Secretary Burwell, Mr. Larson. Thank you, Secretary, Madam
Secretary, for being here. Madam Secretary, several states have
closed down their exchanges, and many other states are facing
some challenging financial situations with self-sustainability.
That includes MNsure, which is Minnesota's exchange in the
program. And a new audit found out that over a five month
period last year, MNsure repeatedly failed to properly
determine the eligibility of enrollees, resulting in
potentially 271 million dollars in overpayments. That's 271
million dollars of taxpayer money. And this is the headline
from the Minneapolis Star Tribune, just a week and a half ago.
I'd like to enter this for the record, Mr. Chairman. And these
are overpayments that occurred despite the fact that a report a
few months earlier had warned MNsure that it was not accurately
applying eligibility requirements. Now, the President's health
care law, it does require that state-based marketplaces, that
they be self-sufficient. It requires that they follow the law.
But HHS doesn't really seem to be doing anything to enforcement
it on the enforcement side. Instead, they've acknowledged or
they've given more money, in terms of no-cost extension
requests through the end of this year. And so it seems there's
no gatekeeper. There's no enforceable plan.
And this is really not about being against Obamacare. It's
about enforcing the law and making sure the taxpayers are
protected, and continuing to hold these exchanges accountable
is going to ensure that patients ultimately are not going to be
hurt when there's a change in health insurance. So my
understanding also is that after all these reports, after all
these audits, throwing away millions of dollars in taxpayer
money, HHS's own inspection, Inspector General, is also going
to be coming out potentially with a report in a few weeks that
will explore issues with MNsure's internal controls. So your
own Inspector General is acknowledging some of these problems.
So can you just share anything with us about the upcoming
report that might be coming out? And more importantly, just can
you give a little bit of plan of action for making sure that
MNsure is following the law?
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to the state based
marketplaces, as you reflected, a number of them are in various
states and have been able to achieve certain things and not.
And when they're not, you know, the Administration has engaged.
And HHS has engaged with them. And whether that's in Hawaii or
security issues in other state exchanges. And so we do engage
on that. The IG's report is something we look forward to, and
will be a part of us determining what are the appropriate next
steps for us in terms of that engagement.
But across the board, as different state based marketplaces
have had different issues, I think you probably know we have
engaged and at various points and times needed to switch them
to the platform, if they aren't able to meet certain of the
conditions that you articulated. That they are making sure that
there are adequate networks. That there are different types of
issues. Most have been technology related, but not all.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay. So we'll see some enforcement
mechanisms, some follow ups, some follow through?
Secretary BURWELL. We look forward to the IG's report, when
we will receive it. I think you know; we work with the IG as
part of program integrity across the Affordable Care Act. It's
something we work for. But also we want to let them have their
independent view. And then they come back and tell us what they
have found.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Larsen, you're recognized.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this hearing. And Secretary Burwell, it's always a
pleasure to have you here. And I wanted to thank you sincerely
for your continuing outreach. You are a model of how we believe
that the relationship between the executive and legislative
branches should work. And I want to thank you. I want to
commend the President and you for the budget. And especially,
as Mr. Neal has addressed already, the more than billion
dollars that have been put forward to address this long term
epidemic that we're facing with heroin overdoses and opiates.
And I also want to commend Senator Shaheen and Congressman
Courtney. The New England delegation has come together in
looking head on at this epidemic. I think this is something
that affects every member in this institution, in all states.
There's nothing partisan about it. We are in the throes of an
epidemic. And it is my hope that while I think the billion is
appropriate, by the time that we get through sorting out and
going to regular order, if in fact we do, that too many more
people are going to have passed away. And so what we're hoping,
in the New England delegation, I hope that Members of the
Committee can join with us in sending a letter to the
President. I think we need emergency supplemental funding now,
along the lines of Senator Shaheen and Congress Courtney have
called for, that would provide the 600 million dollars that
could be used immediately by those on the front lines of trying
to deal with this, this epidemic. I would note that just since
January 28th in New London, Connecticut, 24 deaths occurred.
The Zika virus is something certainly that needs our attention,
et cetera. But I dare say that this is a far greater epidemic
and needs our immediate attention. And for so long, has been
swept under the floor. I commend Mr. Neal for bringing this to
the attention of the entire New England delegation. It's my
sincere hope that the committee can join together to see if we
can't get supplemental funding. I hope you can join us in that
effort.
Secretary BURWELL. We look forward to working with the
Congress across the board in whatever appropriate way to get
the funding that we need. We think the funding and moving it to
communities is important, and we'll look forward to working
with the Congress.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Marchant, you're recognized.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Burwell, one of
the most significant things that's happened in Texas in this
last year as far as health care was that at least one of the
largest health care providers, it may be our largest, Blue
Cross, Blue Shield, completely walked away from and abandoned
its PPO program. And anybody that had an individual policy had
to convert to basically their HMO plan. That's, that has
basically created most of the calls about health care in my
office this year.
You're proposing, and you've just given notice of a benefit
and payment parameters regimen that's coming up. And my concern
is, does this new regimen that you're laying out, force the
private insurance companies more into abandoning their PPOs and
more into an HMO plan? Or will it provide them sufficient room
to where they can actually operate a PPO model?
Secretary BURWELL. Well, with regard to the, the rule
making and where that will go, I don't think it is something. I
think there are a number of things that these companies are
considering when they're making these decisions. And I think
they are two different things. There's the marketplace, in
terms of those folks who are going to the individual
marketplace. And then there's the employer based market. And
what we know in both of those marketplaces--and obviously the
employer based market is separate from the marketplace that we
see some narrowing of the networks.
One of the things in the marketplace though is that you
must have an adequate network. That there's at least a test for
that for the marketplace in terms of what we're doing. And so
many companies are making these decisions. They're making the
decisions. It is a private market. And they're following the
consumer. In terms of what we saw statistically, what happened
from 13 to 14 and 14 to 15, what we saw is the consumer
actually making choices that they were choosing a narrower
network and lower price versus a broader network and higher
price. And I think we see the insurers responding to that in
both the private market as well as the marketplace market, the
employer based market. And so we want to do this to make sure
that choice is available. And this year in the marketplace, in
nine out of ten counties for most of the marketplace
participants, there were three or more choices. And that's a
part of getting to that space. And this comes back to the other
question about the networks. What I think we believe is an
important part of this is downward pressure on overall
healthcare costs. Because that's what's driving insurer
decisions. And that's why this concept of delivery system
reform, an engaged, empowered, educated consumer at the center,
where we pay for value, not volume, where we use data and
information and where we change the way we deliver care, is the
important when we think over the long term.
Mr. MARCHANT. Mr. Chairman, if I can just ask one final
question. Is there a place that I can go----
Chairman BRADY. I'm sorry, Mr. Marchant. All time has
expired. Mr. Reed, you're recognized.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Madam
Secretary. Madam Secretary, a limited time, I'm looking for an
area where we may be able to advance some legislation this year
in regards to reform that we can agree upon. And one of those
areas is welfare reform. And I read the budget in particular.
And I was very interested in pages 55 through 59 of the summary
of the budget, dealing with TANF, and the issue of flexibility
and the Upward Mobility Project. Could you touch on what the
Administration's looking at in regards to giving greater
flexibility to local and state entities that you reference in
the summary portion of the budget in regards to things like
Upward Mobility and others?
Secretary BURWELL. I think this is something we'd want to
work with the Congress on. And think as was indicated that
there has been bi-partisan work in the space of what we need to
do further. I think we're very focused on the work elements and
making sure that the money goes, the TANF money. And our
approach is about that. And so this is a place where I think we
welcome the opportunity to work with Congress.
Mr. REED. And are there any areas in particular you could
identify for us in regards to greater flexibility, the
Administration would be willing to engage in a conversation
giving to local and state entities that are in this space doing
this much needed work?
Secretary BURWELL. I think we'd like to come back and have
that conversation. Is it all right if we follow up with staff?
Because I think the bi-partisan effort that was moving last
year had a number of these elements that I think we thought
were, were good and positive and would like to support, if we
can be specific.
Mr. REED. Are there any, any areas in particular you can
identify?
Secretary BURWELL. I'd like to come back on the specifics.
Mr. REED. Well, we'd appreciate having that conversation
and being involved in that conversation, as it's an issue that
we're taking up in our office. As we want to reform this area.
The other area that I'm looking at is if there is a better way
that in your opinion, Madam Secretary, that we could measure
the success of these outcomes? Often I find in this area
measurement of the success is how much money we spend in this
regard. Is there anything in your personal opinion you think we
could do better, other than just measuring cash or dollars
spent on these programs? That maybe we could have that
conversation of changing the metrics. Is there anything you
personally would like to work with us on in regards to changing
those metrics from a cash basis?
Secretary BURWELL. I think one of the metrics that we all
want is knowing how many people actually get into gainfully
employed situations for an extended period of time.
Mr. REED. Oh, I so appreciate that.
Secretary BURWELL. That's not the only measure, in terms
of----
Mr. REED. Are there any other measures you have?
Secretary BURWELL. But that is one that I do think is an
important one. And why, we believe, the money should be more
targeted than it currently is in terms of what it's being for
in states.
Mr. REED. I so appreciate, commend to that metric change.
Because I think it is much needed in this culture, to measure
the outcome based on success in regards to people getting into
a self-sufficiency mode, standing on their own two feet
themselves. Is there any other metric you'd be willing to
discuss personally that you think is a better metric, to see
how these programs are doing?
Secretary BURWELL. I think when we come back on the
specifics of the flexibility, let's have that conversation.
Mr. REED. I look forward to that. And I thank you always
for your hard work, and appreciate working with your office in
regards to the issues that we have addressed with you before.
With that, I yield back.
Secretary BURWELL. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Becerra, you are recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
thank you very much. And always a pleasure to have you with us.
Ma'am, before I ask my question, can I just say thank you for
what I know you had a hand in, in the President's proposed
budget, to try to deal with Medicaid reimbursement for citizens
on the island of Puerto Rico. And the fact that right now
Puerto Rico's going through a very difficult time financially,
they're trying to right the ship. And one of the worst things
that they can face is a situation where they are having a
really difficult time funding the healthcare that their
residents need. Which ultimately becomes an even worse crisis
if people aren't getting care now, before things get really
bad. So thank you for that proposal to try to balance the way
we treat the U.S. citizen on the island of Puerto Rico.
I'm interested in, if you can give me comment on the
Affordable Care Act's provision that expanded the use of
Medicaid so that families that are working but earn very modest
incomes can still qualify for healthcare through, if not the
exchange, then the Medicaid Expansion Program. I know a number
of states have incorporated that Medicaid Expansion Program.
Others haven't. Those states that haven't, can you tell us how
many states have not yet incorporated Medicaid? How many
individuals including children are impacted by not having
health insurance, as a result of states refusing to adopt
Medicaid Expansion? And can you tell us what the impact has
been for those states that have incorporated the Medicare--
Medicaid Expansion Program into their healthcare?
Secretary BURWELL. So right now, 30 states plus the
District of Columbia have done the expansion. And if all the
rest of the states that aren't expanded did it, we estimate
that there would be four million additional people who would no
longer be uninsured. 3.1 million directly in terms of the
individuals that would become eligible. But in all the states
where expansion has occurred, there are portions of the
population that were eligible but do not sign up, but as part
of the expansion, come to sign up. So the total number becomes
four million.
With regard to the proposal in our budget, in the
conversations with many governors across the country that are
not in, one of their concerns is, ``Will the Federal Government
stay and be a part?'' That's a question that, that I am
consistently asked. Our proposal gets to that fundamental of
making sure they know for the first three years, they know what
their budgeting will be, which is an important consideration
for governors. In terms of the benefits we're seeing to the
individual, the health and financial security that it means is
something that I think everyone can understand. With regard to
the economics, in Kentucky, we know that the estimates are
40,000 jobs created by 2021. 30 billion dollars into the
state's finances. In addition, when we have analyzed those
places where there are hospital closures--and we know that's
happening across the country for a number of reasons. But in
the states that have expanded, the hospital closures as a
percentage are smaller. And we believe that's attributable to
uncompensated care that is no longer occurring.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Young, you're recognized.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, I
appreciate being here. I, I came here a few years ago. I
haven't spent a lifetime doing this. And I came here to solve
problems. And I have to say I've been frustrated in the last
few years. And frustrated because of what I hear back from my
constituents. One of the main things I hear from my
constituents is that Obamacare isn't working. That they don't
like it. That their costs are going up. They regard their
health insurance as all but useless. Deductibles are
skyrocketing. Premiums are going up. And there's, there's data
to support these things. Premiums for example, CBO expects an
increase in seven and a half percent. Cost of bench mark plan,
across the 37 states that utilize the federal exchange. But you
know, eyes start to glaze over, when I talk to my constituents
about all of the specific numbers. They just want us to fix
this thing. And you know, meanwhile it's been talked about,
that availability of coverage continues to narrow. And you
know, I came here to solve these problems. It doesn't seem like
we have a functioning system when so many of my constituents
decide instead to pay the IRS tax penalty instead of buying
insurance. That seems like a real problem. It doesn't seem like
we have a functioning system when costs continue to go up. When
the American people are told that their premiums would instead
go down or be the other direction.
It doesn't seem like we have a functioning system, when in
the state of Indiana, one of our largest insurers, Assurant, a
national carrier, left the exchange. And so forth. And so I
guess in the interest of trying to solve problems, I've asked
this before. It's become a big ideological totemic battle
between Republicans and Democrats, conservatives and liberals.
But are there mandates that you as Secretary would be willing
to work with Congress on repealing, vis-a-vis Obamacare? If not
all of them. Which has been the position of the Administration
in the past. Are there specific mandates that you would be
willing to work with us on repealing? And I'll give you the
remaining 40 seconds to offer a response. And you can offer
whatever else you might have in writing, please.
Secretary BURWELL. There are many things I think most
people in America don't want to go back to a place where pre-
existing conditions keep you off your healthcare. Where if your
child had cancer at the age of 15, that they've reached annual
and lifetime limits. And these are some of the important
changes that----
Mr. YOUNG. Is Obamacare working? I guess I'll just
interject here. And you can supplement it with written
testimony.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes. So, yes. And I believe in the area
of access we've seen strong improvements.
Mr. YOUNG. Because I'm not hearing that from Hoosiers. I am
not hearing consistently that Obamacare is working.
Secretary BURWELL. I think the question is----
Mr. YOUNG. Do you have surveys that substantiate that?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, in terms of actually people in the
marketplace. We have seen the marketplace satisfaction----
Mr. YOUNG. I'm talking Americans more generally. Do they
like Obamacare?
Secretary BURWELL. Americans more generally? But what
Americans like is, that you don't have to worry about pre-
existing conditions. Is that the question that's asked?
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. All time has expired.
Secretary BURWELL. That is a different question that he has
asked?
Chairman YOUNG. We can deal with that issue together in a
different way. Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I'm going to--
--
Secretary BURWELL. And I think there are places we can.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. I'm going to recognize Mr.
Kelly. And then we're going to back to one. I just wanted to
make sure we can get everyone on. Mr. Kelly, you're recognized.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Chairman and Madam Secretary. I
appreciate your being here. We talked before, on the side. My
concern is, when it comes to the quality incentive payments in
the Medicare Advantage Plan--this is what we were talking
about--I don't expect you to be able to answer this now. I know
you're going to get back to me about it. But those plans were
set up to incentivize a more efficient operation. And under the
rule-making process, Mr. Kind and I have a piece of legislation
also with Mr. Doyle and Mr. Guthrie. And so it's bi-partisan.
Under the bench mark caps, we're rolling the QIPs into that and
saying, ``This is the cap.'' So if you're a four or five star
rated plan, there's no incentive for you to go beyond that. I
mean, it just isn't reachable. So essentially you're being paid
at the same rate. I mean, the cap sets a cap. You can get paid
lower amounts but you can't get paid higher amounts. And the
result of that--and I'm asking you--do you have to have
legislation to do that, or can you do it internally? I think
it's an interpretation of the benchmark cap.
Secretary BURWELL. And we will come back on whether or not
we have the statutory authorities across the board in terms of
the work that we're doing in the CMI, the Innovation Center, in
terms of making sure you have that ability to have that upward
movement for good, strong players. We have changed that. And so
this is a particular case I just need to understand what we
have. In the most recent proposals on our accountable care
organizations, we use the logic that you just articulated and
have made fixes. So in this particular area on the four and
five stars, do we have those still?
Mr. KELLY. Yeah. And I appreciate it. Because I think the
real issue is, how soon can we get this done? Because if it's
an incentive, then it has to truly be an incentive.
Secretary BURWELL. For good behavior.
Mr. KELLY. It can't be a non-incentive that's described as
an incentive.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes.
Mr. KELLY. So we will get that to you in writing. If you
can get back to us quickly, I appreciate that. With that I
yield back, Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Blumenauer, you are
recognized.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
I'm going to send you a little note about end of life care. And
I appreciate that I'm not talking to you about, ``Can we make
the change?'' It's made. I'm interested in how we can implement
it more effectively. And I would really appreciate a chance to
visit with you about that at some point. But I want to pick up
where Mr. Young left off. Because I feel sometimes like I'm in
an alternative universe. I have roundtable discussion in Oregon
repeatedly. And yeah, there are hiccups and problems. But it's
an entirely different universe. Providers like what's going on.
We've expanded service. We've put millions, hundreds of
millions of dollars into the system. Now, my friend from Kansas
talked about the problems. That's a state that didn't expand
it. And the question I would ask to you is, gee, if Kansas had
been one of the 30 states that had actually expanded the
program and had hundreds of millions of dollars in their health
care system, being able to take care of people who were too
poor to qualify for the ACA, would it make a difference?
Or in the case of Indiana, which has sort of expanded it,
but not in a clean, straight-forward way, it appears from an
untrained eye to be kind of a jerry-rigged system that doesn't
really work well in terms of the expansion. Can you talk for a
moment about what difference that would make and why I'm
getting almost universally positive reactions from hospitals,
insurance providers and people on the street? None of the evil
things that were rumored happened. Inflation is down. Premiums
are not skyrocketing like they used to. I remember the debates
we had. And my friends who are concerned have not been working
over the five years to refine it. They're trying to blow it up
or to chip away at it. What difference would it make if there
was actual straight-forward expansion in states like Indiana
and Kentucky?
Secretary BURWELL. I think the point you raised about the
premium increases, it is one of the things that, as we look at
historically what premium increases were before, in the
individual market they were in the double digit space. In the
employer based market right now, over time, for a family, what
that, what we have seen is four out of the five years have been
the four lowest on record since these records were kept in
1999. That is, that means things are increasing but they're
increasing at a much lower rate, to your point.
I understand that still feels like increases for consumers,
which is why we've got to move to delivery system reform. With
regard to the issue of Medicaid Expansion, I think we do see in
many of the states that have expanded, those benefits in terms
of what it means in the community and the money. It's the money
and the paid for services. In addition, for individuals, we see
many more people being treated for diabetes. That leads to
longer term reduction in cost if we can get ahead of diabetes.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Renacci, you're recognized.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Burwell,
thank you for being here and thank you for reaching out to my
office before the hearing. I'm sorry we were not able to
connect, but I really appreciate you reaching out to all the
committee members. I think that's important. You do not have an
easy job. We all recognize that. So thank you for what you do.
I'm hoping that as this year comes to an end, we can work on
some things together. As you know, the ACA included a new
program aimed at reducing hospital readmissions, called the
Hospital Readmission Reduction Program. The goal of this
program is one that I and many of my colleagues support. In
fact it's estimated that nearly 18 billion per year is wasted
on avoidable readmissions of Medicare patients alone.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes.
Mr. RENACCI. However, the implementation of this program
has been problematic, especially for those hospitals serving
low income populations. Evidence suggests that economically
disadvantaged patients, especially patients eligible for both
Medicare and Medicaid, are much more likely to be readmitted
within 30 days of discharge, regardless of a physician's
efforts to educate them on proper post-discharge care. This has
also an effect of disproportionately harming hospitals that
take care of those that need it most. I've said all along, this
is not a Republican or Democrat issue. This is really an issue
of fairness of service to those individuals. Do you believe
that readmission program criteria can be improved by adding
clear adjustments for dual-eligible status, as well as for
other plan readmissions, such as those following trauma?
Secretary BURWELL. We do believe in our studying and we
appreciate the money that the Congress gave us to do the actual
analytics, which should be completed by October. In the space
of dual-eligibles people with chronic conditions and the socio-
economic issues that you're talking about, those things come
together and they come together in high-cost people. And so we
are doing the work to understand analytically. We had put out a
proposal for some changes related to other areas where it has a
negative impact if you are taking. We got comments back that
people didn't like that as a solution.
So we we did not go forward with that as a change. But we
do believe this is a space where we need to understand where it
makes a difference and how our rules can help support those
that are taking care of those that are difficult to take care
of. You may also know about the piece we just announced, that
the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Innovation, where we're
actually funding the efforts to do support. So you connect
those people with the right services. As a means by which we're
going to test whether that improves quality and lowers cost. So
there are a number of steps we're taking. We believe it's an
issue that we are looking closely at.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you. I have a bill that I know has 75
co-sponsors, Republicans and Democrats. So I hope we can work
together on fixing this issue. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Kind in the corner you're recognized.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, thanks for your testimony today and for
the job that you're doing. See, I want to direct your
attention. Chairman Brady and I have been working on
legislation reform in the post-acute care setting for increased
efficiency, better outcomes, cost savings. So we'd like to
engage your office to make sure we're heading in the right
direction so we can get moving on that legislation.
Secretary BURWELL. We look forward to engaging.
Mr. KIND. Also, as you know, I've been a real stickler when
it comes to payment reform in the healthcare system, trying to
drive the system to more quality value outcome-based payments.
And there's a lot churning right now. I just want to give you
some time today to give us an update and what's been going on
to get to a value-based reimbursement system and if we're
starting to see some cost savings as a result.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes. So the commitment that we made last
January for the first time I committed that Medicare payments,
30 percent of them would be in value, not volume. It was the
first time we'd made that sort of commitment for Medicare, and
I am hopeful and expecting that we will meet our 2016 goal of
reaching that. We hope that by 2018 it will be 50 percent.
Obviously I will not be here, but we'll be here to make sure
that we are on that trajectory. And in terms of what that does
in terms of the savings, we believe that those are real.
The other place where we're actually starting to see
numbers and dollars in terms of the savings is in the
accountable care organizations, and we have done the models and
the demonstrations. You statutorily gave us standards that had
to be met. Quality could not be decreased and we had to have
savings in order for them to scale. The actuaries have scored
these, and we are able to meet that test. We've seen several
hundred million in just a one- and two-year period of time, and
so we are starting to see that.
We have taken the input and have rolled out an additional
group of the ACOs, the accountable care organizations, and
actually just today you saw the governor of Alabama speak
because we're working with him on Medicaid in this space as
well, and those are regional accountable care organizations.
Mr. KIND. We've also been seeing in recent years some
remarkable cost savings on a per capita basis in the Medicare
program in particular, but without a reduction in benefits for
the services that our seniors are receiving. Can you give us an
update on that?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes. We are in terms of those per capita
costs, and that's what we have to focus on. Because we have a
growing population in Medicare, focusing on the per capita is
where we're keeping our eye on the ball. And that's everything
from reducing those costs to making sure they're going into the
prevention and getting those free preventative services that
help us save costs over time. We're seeing some increase, we'd
like to see more.
Mr. KIND. I think if we keep setting those financial
incentives to value quality, we're going to see a lot of
innovation, a lot of reform by our providers themselves. We're
going to work very hard to hit the mark. So I encourage you to
keep your eye on the ball in that regard. I think it's one of
the keys to how successful healthcare reform is ultimately
going to be in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Meehan, you're recognized.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you.
Secretary, I was appreciative of your commentary regarding
the over-prescription of the opioids and the tremendous
precursor implications of that with the heroine problem. We
have a group of former prosecutors working on a comprehensive
approach. I would really enjoy if you would communicate back
with us while we're looking at this so we can collaborate on
this issue rather than discovering later what the intentions
are. Can I switch my comments for a moment?
And I appreciated your opening with the idea of a patient-
centered delivery model. You opened with discussions about
bringing healthcare to children at home, and the value of the
home now in a changing healthcare perspective in creating not
only just efficiency, but you know yourself when you can
deliver healthcare personnel into that setting, the
observations they make with respect to the patient and the
environment, support of the family, ability to maintain their
drug regimen, things of that nature have so many other
benefits.
And yet we're seeing a recommendation by the budget to
reduce compensation for copays, introduction of copays for home
healthcare that isn't generated after a hospital stay, home-
infusion therapy, another thing in which we can take an
opportunity for a patient to not have to go to a more expensive
setting for that same kind of service. These are examples and
ways in which I think we can find that home-centered care as a
way to drive down health costs as well as continue to see real
quality enhanced.
And I hope you can work on that and give me a sense why
would we be looking at copays when Congress actually in the
1970s found that that was counterproductive.
Secretary BURWELL. I think the overall concept is what
we're moving towards generally, and so with those specific
examples that you've given you need to understand why those
specific examples. Because the general premise in terms of the
demonstrations, the funding that we're doing is all about that
home-based care because we do believe it can both increase
quality and reduce price. And so most of the changes are going
in that direction. So I don't know if there are exceptions to
the----
Mr. MEEHAN. I know you've got the data exclusivity from
biologics and I know we're looking at that seven-year standard.
I have real concerns about what it's going to do for
innovation, and I hope that you will be able to characterize
what it is going to do. I mean we are all working on the
reduction of costs, but there's also going to be an impact.
That number of 12 years was reached for a reason, and it wasn't
something that was arbitrary.
And so the concern we have with a seven-year standard is
what it will mean and particularly as we're looking at new
challenges from Zika viruses to great new pathways to deal with
cancer. But that's an issue for another moment, and I thank
you, and I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Pascrell, you're recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Burwell, thank you for being here today. You've
been an outstanding secretary, and you've got a year to go. I
don't know who's going to take your place. Maybe Dr. Kevorkian,
who knows.
Last year at this very budget hearing, you pledged to work
with the Congress to find a solution to incorporate unique
device identifiers, UDIs, and to health insurance claims to
help improve patient safety and quality of care. I'm reading
and hearing day after day from all over the country about a
major problem which we are not addressing.
CMS has put forward no solution. CMS has indicated that it
would support pilot programs to demonstrate the feasibility of
UDI in claims. But to my knowledge, no such pilot has been
launched. CMS has not taken any steps to ensure that such a
pilot gets off the ground. Even if one were to launch today,
results would be back for years, and we would miss our
opportunity to implement this important policy that can help
save lives.
Quite frankly, the time is up. CMS has failed to come up
with a solution to incorporate UDI in its claims databases as
recommended by the FDA. Device safety experts have recommended
it and even you during your confirmation hearing. As you know,
CMS works for you, so what steps do you plan to take to ensure
that the agency starts to proactively support UDI in claims
using every tool at their disposal. And I would claim before
you answer the question that the industry itself, the industry
itself, it's looked at very, very carefully at chapter and
verse about this industry.
Madam Secretary.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to UDIs since our last
conversation about this, we have made progress in terms of what
we've done on the Office of the National Coordinator's side and
actually put out guidance that says that the UDIs will be a
part of the electronic health records. And when we think about
why we want the UDIs in terms of having a place where one can
go and find out if someone had something--if we need to track
back, having that be a part of the individual's record we think
moves a long way with regard to the questions of ensuring and
using this tool as a tool for safety. And so have taken steps
in that particular space.
With regard to those who make--we have external guidance
that comes from external boards on when we make differences and
changes in the claims and what we do in terms of claims
records. At this point they have not come to making a
recommendation. We still continue to engage and have those
conversations. But with regard to getting to the safety----
Chairman BRADY. Madam Secretary, I apologize. The time has
expired.
Ms. Black, you're recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, thank you for being here today. These are a lot
of topics, and I'd like to say that these are topics that are
certainly important to our taxpayers, they're important to our
patients as well, and I appreciate you being here to answer
these questions.
I want to hold up a report that just came out yesterday,
the Senate report that there were illegal benefits benefitted
from $750 billion in Obamacare subsidies. And the report goes
onto talk about how there is not a coordination between HHS and
the IRS on these subsidies. The report says that there were
over 500,000 immigrants that got these tax credits, but there
wasn't verification and never was there verification sent in to
show even after the tax credits went out that these folks were
here legally in the country.
And so what we've seen in other programs where the money
goes out the door, it's very difficult to get that money back
again. So there seems to be a lack of coordination in verifying
that these folks are here in the country legally, and this is
hard-earned taxpayer money that is going out the door. And so I
want to know what your plan is to make sure that before these
dollars go out the door that we can verify someone's status
because we know that once the IRS has to go back and try to
chase the money, very little of that money comes back. So do
you have a plan for making sure that this does not occur?
Secretary BURWELL. So with regard to one of the things I
think that was important in the report is it did reflect that
we don't know whether they were illegal or not. What we know is
they didn't provide the documentation. And as we----
Mrs. BLACK. And so how long a time period would you have
let go by with these tax credits going out before there was a
verification.
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to that, we follow he
statutory guidelines, and that's about 90 days. And so last
year 470,000 folks were cut off within that approximately 90-
day timeframe. And the thing that I think is also important to
recognize in terms of the connects that you're talking about is
those individuals that did not have verification will not be
able to get the tax credits. And the other thing is the IRS
will follow up in terms of their filing.
Mrs. BLACK. But the tax credits already went out the door.
Secretary BURWELL. For the period of time that is----
Mrs. BLACK. Yes. For that period of time, so----
Secretary BURWELL [continuing]. We follow the statutory--we
follow the statutory guidelines, and we don't know if there----
Mrs. BLACK. $750 million went out the door.
Secretary BURWELL. But we do not know that they weren't
supposed to receive them. Many of the people that go through
the process of verification actually have the right
documentation.
Mrs. BLACK. Excuse me. I'm running out of time, but I want
to tell you I do have a bill that says no subsidies without
verification whether that's in the self-cessation, verification
needs to be done before the money goes out the door. We have
seen this in so many of the entitlement programs where the
money goes out, we can't verify and there are billions--
literally billions of dollars that are going out in these
programs, and I just don't understand why someone can't come up
with their verification. I mean if I make out an application
for something and it's not complete, then I don't get whatever
service it is that I'm applying for. I think that's really the
direction we have to go.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Whole time has expired.
Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
There are many things that I really like about this
proposed budget, especially the continuous support for
federally qualified health centers, home visiting, the
addressment of behavior health, issues relative to substance
abuse prevention and treatment. But I also have some serious
concerns about the proposed funding for graduate medical
education.
Madam Secretary, I noticed that your budget once again
calls for a 10 percent cut in indirect medical education
payments to teaching hospitals. Yet my teaching hospitals tell
me that the cost of these programs are significantly greater
than the direct and indirect GME payments they receive.
In fact, most of the major teaching hospitals in Chicago
are training an excess of 100 doctors over the residency cap
and we still face significant access to care problems in my
community. I'm concerned that these cuts that are proposed
would result in fewer doctors being trained. That will heighten
the access to care problem. Wouldn't it make more sense or be
better to lift the cap and train more rather than fewer
physicians?
Secretary BURWELL. I think the changes that we propose on
both sides, on the Medicare side as well as the children's GME
side, are about trying to make sure that we do get the right
numbers of physicians and types of physicians. And so the
proposals that we put forth are both about targeting in terms
of higher need, higher-need communities as well as primary care
and the specialties where we don't. And that's what are changes
are targeted towards in terms of making sure that we are in the
Medicare space paying for those physicians that will do
Medicare and Medicare hospitals and making sure that we're
targeting the right things. And that's the objective of the
proposals.
Mr. DAVIS. And I note that you're also seeking authority to
kind of move more towards primary care.
Secretary BURWELL. That's correct.
Mr. DAVIS. Position training and I'm certainly in agreement
with that. But when I look at the aging of our population with
10,000 new seniors every day, don't we also need specialists,
cardiologists and neurologists to deal with the needs of this
population group?
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, we are targeting both primary care
underserved, getting positions to go to underserved as well as
the issue of specialties where we are short. And so we are
trying to have all of this assistance in the medical education
be more targeted to those areas. It is----
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. I thank you for doing a
great job and I yield back the balance of my time.
Secretary BURWELL. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Noem, you're recognized.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Burwell, I wanted to draw attention today to an
emergency situation I have in South Dakota with my Native
American constituents that aren't getting healthcare. And I
certainly know you're aware of the situation, but I want to
hear today how you plan to fix it.
The Federal Government has a responsibility to our tribes
to provide for their healthcare because of treaty obligations.
And frankly they failed to follow through on their promise to
do so. In fact, in the Great Plains area, we have reports of
inappropriate conduct including nepotism, favoritism in hiring
practices, reassignment of employees who are underperforming or
have been poorly trained as well all leading to very low
quality delivery of healthcare.
In fact, a bombshell 2010 Senate report laid out a lot of
these allegations, and these problems have been going on for
long before I've been in Congress, for a decade or more. And
the fraud, the abuse, the waste is rampant in the Great Plains
area.
And since then, even since that 2010 report, little has
changed within IHS. And I know you'll speak to funding levels,
but, before a Senate committee last week, your acting deputy
secretary specifically stated that there has been an increase
of 43 percent in funding into IHS in recent years. So we know
we can't simply throw more money at the problem, that there has
to be a whole culture change at IHS that has to happen.
And what I'm concerned about is that last year CMS
inspections of the facilities in Rosebud and Pine Ridge showed
that it was a dangerous situation. In fact, what was so ironic
was that CMS said that it was going to terminate its provider
agreements to IHS and the irony of that is that we have one
federal agency saying it won't make federal payments to another
federal agency when they're both housed within the same
department. And it shows the bureaucratic absurdity of the
situation we have going on in South Dakota.
And at this very minute, my Rosebud tribal members are
driving over an hour to get emergency healthcare services
because the IHS's hospital ER was closed due to dangerous care
being provided there. So it's not necessarily just funding;
there's other issues as well. The mismanagement, the misconduct
in the Great Plains area needs to be dealt with and frankly it
goes from one administrator to the next. I know that one has
recently been reassigned, but then I also hear that he's come
to Washington D.C. to a different position, wasn't necessarily
penalized for his lack of doing his job in South Dakota and in
the Great Plains area.
I want to hear your strategies for how you're going to
implement change in culture in this Great Plains region. But I
also believe that buried within your IHS budget justification
this year you have a paragraph that says IHS places a high
priority on corrective action in the Great Plains area. The
problem is that this paragraph appears to be literally copied
and pasted from the justifications over the last four years.
So there's nothing that indicates to me that we're going to
have a change. It tells me that, yes, you're aware of the
problem, but I don't know that you have a plan to fix it. And
frankly we're putting people's lives in jeopardy in South
Dakota. And we have emergency rooms that are closed down and an
agency that will not reimburse another agency because we have
people addicted to drugs and alcohol doing procedures on
people, sterilization of utensils that's happening by
handwashing.
So I need your answers, probably written, because I'm out
of time. I hope you know how serious I am about this. But if
you'd respond to me in written form, I would be eternally
grateful.
Secretary BURWELL. Yes, and I would just say this is a
place where I think we may need your help as well.
Mrs. NOEM. I will help.
Secretary BURWELL. Because I am committed but I don't have
a year--I have 11 months and days left.
Mrs. NOEM. Yeah.
Secretary BURWELL. But I believe we need to get a different
answer and outcome. And so this is a place where I may come
back to you for help and assistance.
Mrs. NOEM. I'm there. Thank you.
Secretary BURWELL. Because changing culture is both the
relationships on the ground. You know better than I do being
from the region. It's going to take a lot, but Dr. Wakefield
and I are committed.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Madam Secretary, thank you.
Mr. Crowley, you're recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, welcome. I, too, think you're doing a
great job. I'm pleased to see the Administration's initiative
to improve funding for mental and behavioral healthcare issues.
One of the often overlooked benefits of the Affordable Care Act
is that it's extending insurance coverage to millions of
Americans. It also has improved access to previously
unavailable or unaffordable mental health treatments.
For example, a recent GAO examined six of the states that
adopted the ACA's Medicaid expansion and found improved access
to behavioral healthcare. There is more work that needs to be
done in this area. Which the fiscal year 2017 budget
highlights. Can you talk generally about the changes we face in
expanding access to treatment for mental and behavioral
healthcare and how the President's budget proposed to address
some of those changes?
Secretary BURWELL. It's on a number of fronts, this money
will be used, and I think one is about actually supporting the
access to care in communities. And that's a big part of what
the money is about is making sure that we have the access to
care. The other is for providers, and this gets back to the
issue we were just discussion. The IHS is an incredible example
of this in the tribes in terms of making sure we have the right
providers.
Parts of this money actually will be directed towards the
IHS and other places to make sure we have enough providers that
can provide the care. The final element of the strategy is
about making sure for those who have severe mental illness that
we get them into care early. That's about connecting to them
and having places for them to go.
Mr. CROWLEY. One of the other areas that I'm very excited
about that you address in the budget is the issue of child
care. It's so critical to a child's development for school and
for life and it's also critical to helping working families,
minimum--who are trying to get into the workforce and stay in
the workforce, to make sure the child is taken care of in an
enriching environment, a loving environment. Can you discuss
very quickly or briefly the Administration's proposal to
improve access to the quality of child care in this country?
Secretary BURWELL. There are two elements to it. It is,
one, the implementation that we have been given in terms of
improving childcare and direction. We've been given
discretionary funding that will be used to implement what the
Congress has given us. But I think you also know we have a
large mandatory proposal that would be about expanding
childcare so that people could have that access and go to work
and do the things that they want to do as a family in terms of
young children and having care for them as they go to work. And
that is a large proposal that's on the mandatory side that
would be quality, but expansion in terms of those served.
Mr. CROWLEY. I'm very familiar with it because I'm working
with Senator Casey and with Congressman Frankel on this very
issue itself and sponsoring it----
Secretary BURWELL. We're excited about that legislation.
Mr. Crowley [continuing]. Here in the House. But thank you
for the proposal within the budget and for the great work that
you're doing. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Rice, you're recognized.
Mr. RICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Burwell, for being here. I
appreciate you reaching out to me earlier in the week. Very
thoughtful, and I appreciate the information you provided to
the Committee. I have a couple of questions, one with respect
to the Medicaid expansion and the 20 states that haven't
expanded.
I don't know if you heard, but the United States has $18
trillion in debt and both the Office of Management and Budget
and the Congressional Budget Office, they don't agree on many
things, but they agree we're on an unsustainable path. So let
me ask you: If you had a wonderful uncle who loved you so and
said, look, if you'll buy a house, maybe a more expensive house
that you can afford, I'll make the payments for you. And let's
say that uncle was just going into bankruptcy. Would you take
him up on his offer?
Secretary BURWELL. The question of the analogy, I would
just recognize that we've reduced the deficit in this country
by $4 trillion. And the budget that's before us right now has
an additional $2.9 trillion over a period in terms of
reduction. And so I think in terms of the accuracy of the
analogy in terms of where we are as a nation, in the
President's budget, we will keep the deficit-to-GDP ratio--will
get down to that 2.7 level which we haven't been in many years.
Mr. RICE. I served on the Budget Committee for three years,
and every official from OMB and CBO that I talked to that
entire time said that we are on an unsustainable path.
Let me ask you this: The South Carolina Exchange was the
ninth Obamacare exchange to close. It closed in December out of
23 that were formed nationwide. Twenty-two of the twenty-three
lost money in 2014. Nineteen of the twenty-three had claims in
excess of premiums. Why is that?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to the issue of the co-ops,
when we think about the co-ops entering and we think about
business, often stable players that have been in a business
enter new spaces. Or sometimes what we have is a situation
where you have new players entering an old business. In the
case of the marketplace----
Mr. RICE. Why are they losing money? Is it because our
government is inept to run the healthcare system, or is it
because we just did really bad projections and we didn't know
that we were going to actually pay out more in claims that we
collected in premiums? How could we have missed it that bad?
Secretary BURWELL. The co-ops are private businesses. I
think you're referring to the co-ops, not----
Mr. RICE. Yeah, I----
Secretary BURWELL. The co-ops are private companies. And
with regard to the decisions of those companies, you're right.
Those are business decisions that a company is making that we
the government do not have control over.
Mr. RICE. Weren't they created with government money,
taxpayer money?
Secretary BURWELL. They were created with government loans,
loans that were cut in terms of----
Mr. RICE. Let me ask you this.
Secretary BURWELL [continuing]. The support that they were
going to get.
Mr. RICE. I'm running out of time, but let me ask you this:
Eight million people in 2014 paid a penalty for not signing up
for Obamacare. How many were enrolled?
Secretary BURWELL. In terms of the enrollment?
Mr. RICE. Yeah.
Secretary BURWELL. Last year at the end of open enrollment
it was about 11.6 million folks.
Mr. RICE. So almost as many chose to pay a penalty rather
than sign up. Why is that?
Secretary BURWELL. Many people are making----
Chairman BRADY. Madam Secretary, if you would answer that
in writing, I apologize. All the time is expired. I know your
hard stop was 4:30. We have two members who have waited
patiently. Can we finish these out? And we understand your
schedule is----
Secretary BURWELL. Okay. I actually can delay the--yes,
let's stay.
Chairman BRADY. Great.
Mr. Smith, you're recognized.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Secretary, 37 percent of Medicare Advantage
beneficiaries have annual incomes below $20,000 annually. I
represent one of the poorest congressional districts in the
country. So protecting the Medicare Advantage program for low
income beneficiaries is extremely important to my constituents.
The Medicare Advantage program offers extra financial
protection such as maximum out-of-pocket limits, extra benefits
and care coordination activities.
If plans are focused to restrict some of these benefits as
a result of the funding cuts in the President's budget of
roughly $77 billion, do you believe that these cuts could
result negatively, impact low income beneficiaries who may then
face higher cost out of pocket?
Secretary BURWELL. So what we've seen in terms of the
changes that we've done to date in Medicare Advantage, the
program continues to grow and grow in a healthy pace. We've
seen premiums not have great increases and 99 percent of folks
have access and coverage. And so in terms of what we've done to
date, we have tried to take steps that are in ways that will
not have the kind of impact that you've described. We believe
what we're proposing won't.
We also know that when we compare--and this gets to the
entitlement issues that we began this hearing with, and it's
appropriate to end here, is the issue of in a world where we
know that the fee for service Medicare recipients on a per
capita basis are paying much less than these Medicare
Advantage. And MedPAC and other have analyzed that there are
changes that are important to saving the taxpayer money.
And so we're trying to get that balance so we don't have
the outcome you described. We don't want that. But also make
sure that as the taxpayers' money is being used in Medicare
Advantage that it's being used wisely.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. So, yes or no, do you think the $77
billion cut is going to affect my constituents on Medicare
Advantage?
Secretary BURWELL. No, we think that what it will do is
create many of the changes we're proposing about competition
coming back to the earlier point about markets. And so we
believe that what we're proposing will not have those negative
impacts.
Mr. SMITH of Missouri. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Dold for the final question.
Mr. DOLD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, first
of all, thank you so much for reaching out to our office. I
certainly appreciate that. And I also want to thank you for
being willing to work with the Committee. And I think that some
of the things that we want to do is we want very much the same
things. We want to access to quality care at an affordable
rate, and that's certainly what I'm hearing from my
constituents. That's what we're looking for.
Unfortunately, as you may know, we had some market
disruptions in Illinois in the fall of 2015. One of the most
popular PPO plans basically said we're not going to offer the
PPO. 173,000 Illinoisans were forced to scramble to find a new
plan in a much narrower network. And ultimately we heard--I
heard on a regular basis that moms would have to choose between
their oncologist or the pediatrician that they take their kids
to or those types of things.
The other interesting part of is that is that since open
enrollment has closed, several of those insurance companies
have expressed their concerns about remaining in the exchanges
for 2017. So the question I have for you is: What are you doing
or is the agency doing to try to help prevent market
disruptions going forward?
Secretary BURWELL. With regard to that in terms of the
marketplace, the two things are, one, is it a product the
customer demands, and, two, the issuers in the marketplace. We
just ended with 12.7 folks in. The issue of market stability,
we saw nine out of ten folks in the marketplace be in counties
where there are three or more issuers, which is about choice
and competition.
We know we have more work to do, though, to your point. And
we are taking those steps. We announced that there would not be
a special enrollment period for tax issues this year, and we
did that before December 15th to get people to come in before
January 1st. We've eliminated a number of special enrollment
periods. I'm sure you've heard this from a number of the
issuers. That's one of the things that they think will
contribute to stability.
The other thing they asked us for is estimates of their
risk adjustment numbers early. So there are a series of steps
that we're taking to continue to promote a stable marketplace.
Mr. DOLD. I appreciate that. A couple things with regard to
the budget. I want to thank you on the mental health side of
things, and there's a lot more work that needs to happen there.
But I also want to share my concerns with my good friend from
Illinois on the funding for graduate medical education, and I
also want to make sure I'm raising a concern on the biologics.
Taking it down to seven years I think is an enormous concern
with regard to innovation, and I think, again, signals
something that we have a 12-year date exclusivity right now. To
take it to seven is problematic in my view.
Finally, I wanted to just talk to you about something that
I think is important as we talk about waste fraud with in
Medicare, and that's the Medicare Common Access Card, something
I've worked with Congressman Blumenauer on, Congressman Roskam.
We're losing approximately $60 billion in fraud admittedly by
CMS. And what the Medicare Common Access Card would do is have
a chip in it. Right now we've got identity theft running
rampant. This is an issue for seniors. Would CMS be interested
or at least open to a pilot program doing a Medicare Common
Access Card?
Secretary BURWELL. As I mentioned when Mr. Roskam asked
about it, I want to look into figuring out what are our
authorities and how this would work.
Mr. DOLD. I certainly appreciate that. Thank you, Madam
Secretary.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you all. Time has expired. We had an
earlier discussion about the comparisons between Part D and the
VA. Without objection, I'll submit for the record a letter from
CBO outlining their reasons why it would simply not result in
savings. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Madam Secretary, I want to thank you for
appearing for us and extending your time. While we have
disagreements, you have been very professional, very responsive
and clearly dedicated to your job. So thank you very much for
being here today. Members may submit written questions be
answered later in writing. Those questions and your answers
will be made part of the formal hearing. With that, to Madam
Secretary and others, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:42 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Submission for the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
