- FIRST HEARING IN SERIES ON MOVING AMERICA'S FAMILIES FORWARD

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FIRST HEARING IN SERIES ON
MOVING AMERICA'S FAMILIES FORWARD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-HR01

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-281                          WASHINGTON : 2016
_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
DEVIN NUNES, California              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  XAVIER BECERRA, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               RON KIND, Wisconsin
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri

Joyce Myer, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM REED, New York                   JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota            JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of February 11, 2015 announcing the hearing.............     2

WITNESSES

Frances Deviney, Ph.D., Associate Director, Center for Public
Policy Priorities..............................................    46
Ron Haskins, Senior Fellow, Economic Studies, The Brookings
Institution....................................................     7
W. Bradford Wilcox, Visiting Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute......................................................    35
Scott Winship, Walter B. Wriston Fellow, Manhattan Institute for
Policy Research................................................    16

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

National Center for Policy Analysis (NCPA).......................    76

FIRST HEARING IN SERIES ON
MOVING AMERICA'S FAMILIES FORWARD

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:10 p.m., in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Charles
Boustany [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Wednesday, February 4, 2015
No. HR-01

Chairman Boustany Announces First Hearing in

Series on Moving America's Families Forward

Congressman Charles Boustany (R-LA), Chairman of the Subcommittee
on Human Resources of the Committee on Ways and Means, today announced
that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing series on moving America's
families forward. The first hearing will focus on Challenges Facing
Low-Income Individuals and Families in Today's Economy. Subsequent
hearings are expected to focus on engaging low-income adults in work
and training, coordinating benefit programs, reviewing lessons learned
in other countries, and using evidence to ensure programs help people
in need experience real progress. The hearing will take place
immediately following the Human Resources Organizational Meeting at
2:00 p.m. on Wednesday, February 11, 2015, in room B-318 of the Rayburn
House Office Building.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only.
Witnesses will include experts on how the current labor market affects
low-income individuals and families, the nature and dynamics of poverty
in recent years, and the shifting structure of households and families
in the United States. However, any individual or organization not
scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a written statement for
consideration by the Committee for inclusion in the printed record of
the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

While employment growth has resumed, our Nation's economy isn't
working as well as it should to help individuals and families escape
poverty and move up the economic ladder. Too many Americans are
struggling to find work, and incomes aren't growing as they should.
Poverty rates also remain high, even though the recession ended 5\1/2\
years ago. In each year since 2009, one out of five children lived in
families with income below the poverty line. Changes in family dynamics
and household structure have also had significant impacts on the
economic situation of families across the country. Recent surveys have
shown that many have even lost confidence in their ability to achieve
the American Dream.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany stated, ``Even though
this is technically the sixth year of the current `recovery,' far too
many Americans are struggling to get ahead in today's economy. With
poverty rates stuck at historically high levels and far too many unable
to find work, we need to make sure we're doing all we can to help
people get ahead. But before we try to address these problems, we need
to make sure we fully understand them. That's why we're holding this
hearing--to present a full picture of the challenges facing low-income
individuals and families today. This hearing will also lay the
groundwork for our efforts to fix the problem, providing us with the
information we need to help more people find jobs, escape poverty, and
move up the economic ladder.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

This hearing will focus on current labor market trends and their
impact on low-income families and individuals, trends in poverty in
recent years, how changing family and household dynamics impact
economic wellbeing, and how Federal policy may influence these issues.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to make a submission, and click on the link
entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once
you have followed the online instructions, submit all requested
information. ATTACH your submission as a Word document, in compliance
with the formatting requirements listed below, by the close of business
on Tuesday, February 25, 2015. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record,
and any written comments in response to a request for written comments
must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in
compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be
maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in
a single document via email, provided in Word format and must not
exceed a total of 10 pages. Witnesses and submitters are advised that
the Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record.

2. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name,
company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be
included in the body of the email. Please exclude any personal
identifiable information in the attached submission.

3. Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the
exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available at
http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

-------

Chairman BOUSTANY. We will call this hearing to order now
and welcome everybody to the Subcommittee and I will welcome
our witnesses here shortly.
Our first hearing this year is on the challenges facing
low-income individuals and families in today's economy. Our
basic purpose as a Subcommittee, our purpose stated in the
Subcommittee's very title is to promote the human resources of
this country. Those human resources, those individuals, that
untapped potential, in many instances, are really today's
workers and their children and the workforce of tomorrow.
Stretching back to the 1930s and accelerating into the
1960s, the Federal Government has operated an ever-growing
arsenal of programs that provide benefits designed in some way
to help low-income families with children as well as unemployed
workers to move forward. The bad news--and on this, I think
there is bipartisan agreement--is that those programs are not
working as effectively as we would like, especially given the
realities of today's economy.
And even though the pace has picked up lately, the current
jobs recovery has been the slowest in recorded history. It has
left far too many people unemployed, stuck in poverty, year
after year. Incomes fell dramatically during the recession and
really have not bounced back. Millions collected 2 years of
unemployment benefits without finding a new job. Many simply
left the workforce. Others transitioned into long-term
disability benefits or food stamps or both, and the sad result
has been a majority of Americans now believe the American dream
of hard work and getting ahead is impossible to achieve. And
younger workers, the background of our workforce for the next
40 years, are the most pessimistic about their chances.
We also know American families are experiencing major
stress. The stress is not just economic stress, but stress on
the very fabric of family life as well. Declining marriage
rates, rising shares of children born to single parents, and an
increasing number of children spending years raised in single-
parent homes adds to that stress and to the hurdles that must
be overcome by programs designed to help them.
Twenty years ago this Subcommittee faced a similar set of
challenges in crafting what became the landmark 1996 welfare
reform law. And in fact, by this point in February of 1995,
this Subcommittee had already held an amazing eight hearings in
less than a month. This documents some of that early work. So I
am afraid we are a little bit behind, but we will catch up
hopefully and move forward as the Committee continues to have
hearings to address these problems.
But back then, the late Subcommittee Chairman, the late
Clay Shaw of Florida, sat in this chair and said Members of
this Committee were on a rescue mission to save poor families.
And in many respects, it worked. After 1996, the number of low-
income parents collecting welfare checks fell dramatically as
millions left welfare for work. Poverty fell to record lows for
key groups as work and earnings rose. But over time, the roles
of other low-income benefit programs, especially those not
subject to the 1996 reforms, expanded even faster, even when
the economy was growing.
And while the number of people participating in these
benefit programs increased, poverty rates remained unchanged or
even worsened. Clearly, the economy and this broader array of
anti-poverty programs haven't been working as well as we would
like to help all families move up the income ladder, and that
is why this year we will engage in the first top-to-bottom
review since 1996, of how Federal policies across the board can
better support work, strengthen families, and move America
forward.
We will review our programs as well as their interaction
with other key programs, like food stamps, housing, healthcare,
so that we get a complete picture. We will cooperate with other
subcommittees and committees on this. Subsequent hearings will
explore how we could better engage low-income adults in work
and training, what should we do to better coordinate benefits
that families count on, what lessons may we learn from other
countries, and how should we use evidence to ensure we are
making a real difference, a tangible difference in people's
lives.
Our goal, consistent with the challenge set forth by
Chairman Ryan last year, is not simply to cut programs or
reduce spending; instead, it is to reform programs so that they
create real ladders of opportunity so that families can climb
to escape poverty and achieve the American dream. That is a big
but essential goal for us to achieve if we want our families,
and ultimately our country, to move forward.
I am excited to work with everyone here, including our
witnesses today as we get started.
And with that, I would like to turn to Mr. Doggett for his
opening statement.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
With nearly 5 years of month after month continuous private
sector job growth and with 3 million new jobs created in 2014
alone, I believe we have made steady progress in overcoming the
great recession set in motion by Wall Street fraud. While more
and more attention in this Congress on both sides of the aisle
focuses on what we can do for the middle class, we also need to
be concerned with the many Americans who are just struggling to
get up the first couple of rungs of that economic ladder to try
to climb into the middle class.
This Subcommittee, with its broad jurisdiction over many
programs designed to provide opportunities for struggling
families, should be a vital part of growing the middle class.
Just one example, one of the issues we have dealt with in
this Subcommittee is unemployed insurance. And in 2013, the
last year on record, about 1.2 million people were not
categorized as impoverished because they had unemployment
insurance benefits to tide them over as they searched for work.
The need for real, meaningful action is particularly
evident in my home State of Texas. There, one out of every four
children is below the poverty level, and about a third of all
Texans live in the shadow of poverty, meaning that their income
is less than twice the poverty threshold.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses, but
particularly from Frances Deviney from the Center for Public
Policy Priorities, who has provided objective, nonpartisan
information on poverty in Texas and a range of social services
there and across the country, and can comment on how some of
the programs under our purview can help those in poverty.
Our Subcommittee should be focusing on helping struggling
families. Clearly, it is not enough to just throw money at the
problem, as we so often hear. But neither is it a substitute,
as is sometimes offered in this Committee, to merely throw
words at the problem. Caring, soothing, empathetic words, but
words and no meaningful legislative action.
I believe there are four goals that are appropriate: First,
support incentives that strike at the early seeds of poverty.
Prevention, matters like the MIECHV or home visiting program
that you referenced in your statement, the Protect Our Kids Act
that we worked on in this Subcommittee, which had leadership
from former Chair Dave Camp on. That commission on child abuse
will have its recommendations, I think, later this year and
provide us an opportunity to take a look at their findings.
I think a second area is to increase efforts to help people
gain the skills that they need to secure jobs that can provide
a path for a better life. An example that we heard about last
session, Project QUEST in San Antonio, which has an 86 percent
job placement rate, is focused on helping poor people obtain
living-wage jobs and get the training and education and
matching them up with where there is a specific need in the
labor force.
A third area is to eliminate barriers to work. Certainly,
one of the biggest of those barriers is affordable child care.
The President talked about this in the State of the Union
address. Less than 20 percent of the families federally
eligible for child care assistance ever obtain any assistance.
Finally, we need a reliable safety net for families that
fall on hard times. In Texas, only one out of every 20 children
living below the poverty line receive any direct TANF
assistance. That is not temporary assistance for needy
families; it is no assistance for most, all the time.
Our experience since welfare reform, which I voted for
myself in 1996, shows that while we have experienced some
progress, too often TANF has meant less and less for fewer and
fewer. I believe we need to have evidence-based programs, but
we need to look at the evidence and I am pleased that you will
be focusing on review of that welfare law, so that we can see
what we can do to help people escape poverty through good work,
good jobs.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from all of our
witnesses and to continuing this discussion throughout this
session of Congress.
Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Doggett.
Without objection, each Member will have the opportunity to
submit a written statement and have it included in the record.
And I want to remind our witnesses, as is customary, we
have received your written testimony, and I would ask you to
restrict your oral statements to 5 minutes, give us a summary,
so it will save ample time for questions. However, without
objection, all the written testimony will be made part of the
permanent record.
And on our panel this afternoon we will be hearing from
four very distinguished witnesses. First, we have Ron Haskins,
Senior Fellow, Economic Studies at The Brookings Institution;
Scott Winship, the Walter B. Wriston Fellow at the Manhattan
Institute for Policy Research; third, W. Bradford Wilcox,
Visiting Scholar from the American Enterprise Institute; and
Frances Deviney, Associate Director, Center for Public Policy
Priorities, from Texas. Right?
VOICE. Yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Welcome. Welcome to all four of you, and
we look forward to each and every one of you providing some
insights.
So with that, Mr. Haskins, you will lead off. Thank you so
much for being here. You may proceed with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RON HASKINS, SENIOR FELLOW,
ECONOMIC STUDIES, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Mr. HASKINS. Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Doggett, Members of the
Committee, it is a great privilege to be here. I think it is an
honor to testify, and I am glad to be invited.
I want to concentrate on one thing. I brought a PowerPoint
that I think will make it clear. This summarizes my testimony
in these few words: ``Low-wage work plus work support benefits
reduce poverty.'' It has happened in the past and I am going to
show you how much it has happened. Our poverty rate would be at
least 50 percent higher than it is now if it weren't for these
government benefits. So they are extremely effective.
And I also want to point out, and I will conclude with this
point as well, that this is a bipartisan approach. Why? Because
Republicans favor work requirements. Half the Democrats in-
house when welfare reform passed also favored them because they
voted for it and implemented work requirements. And Democrats
like to make sure people are out of poverty. I think a lot of
Republicans like that too, so it is supplemented with benefits.
Here is how it works. First of all, I want to call the
Subcommittee's attention to the fact that kids who are in
female-headed families, as Brad will go into detail about, are
five times or four times--it varies from year to year--as
likely to be in poverty as kids in married couple families. We
have experienced demographic for the last 40 years in the
United States to increase poverty by putting more and more of
our children in female-headed families where their poverty
rates are four or five times as high. If we could stop that, we
would make a lot more progress. We have made some progress
despite it, but it is a big problem. So that is the first
thing. If you can get kids out of female-headed families, and
Brad will talk about this more.
The second thing is the work part of the solution I am
talking about. I think that this chart right here is one of the
most surprising charts that we have had in public policy of the
United States, having to do with social policy in the last 4 or
5 decades. The top line is all single parents. I want to focus
your attention for a minute on the bottom line. These are
never-married mothers. They are the most disadvantaged, the
least educated, the least likely to work especially before
welfare reform.
And I want to point out in the middle of the chart that
huge increase. I don't think there is anything like that in the
history of labor bureau statistics that shows this is roughly a
40-percent increase in work over a 4-year period by this most
disadvantaged group of low-income mothers. So in that sense,
welfare reform was successful. There is some problems. I will
get to those in just a minute.
And now I want to show you the impact it had on poverty.
This is really, I think, the bottom line. So first, this is
life in the state of nature. No benefits. Only earnings. And as
you can see, the poverty rate based only on earnings dropped
very substantially there during the welfare reform period,
started before, and we could talk about that if you want to.
And then, I think primarily because of the economy, it
increased, but I would urge you to look at the very last data
point. We are still, we are still below where we were before
welfare reform passed after the worst recession we have had
since the Great Depression and also a recession in 2001.
So I think this is a remarkable achievement. But we also
subsidize the mothers' earnings, and here is how we do it:
First, we do it with--I can't read the chart, but the first set
of benefits is cash, and that includes earned income tax
credit, SSI, and so forth. And as you can see, the poverty rate
falls very substantially. It still follows the course of the
economy and the course of employment because they are tied
together, but it drops it very substantially.
Now we give additional benefits, I think this is a food
stamp benefit, and that also reduces the poverty rate. And then
we add the earned income tax credit, the additional child tax
credit and subtract taxes, so this is net of taxes. And the
poverty rate still drops very substantially.
And finally, there is a kind of a category of benefits that
especially have to do with people that the mothers live with
who earn money or other members of the family that earn money.
And as you can see, we dropped the poverty rate by almost
half here with this most disadvantaged group. And the most
important point is, they have to work to get these benefits.
They have to work to get them. So we have created a system in
which to avoid poverty, you can't get out of poverty unless you
work. On welfare benefits, hardly anybody, or their children,
gets out of poverty. So to me that is a lesson. This system
needs to be expanded and preserved.
But it has some flaws, and I want to just mention those in
closing. I am going to mention three things just very quickly.
The first one is that I think we ought to have work
requirements in other programs. We are about to embark on a
demonstration with the food stamp program that I think will be
terrific. We have had a lot of problems trying to get people on
food stamps to work. I think we can do a much better job and
the States are going to help them and figure out how to do it.
They are going to have random assignment evaluations, and I
strongly suggest the Committee follow this carefully because it
is a very important step.
Second thing, we know that there is some disconnected
mothers, a term that researchers and advocates have used. They
are not on welfare, they don't have a job, and some of them are
worse off. Most of them are worse off. That is a problem. There
have been a couple of experiments to try to figure out what to
do about it. Nothing has worked very well. So I think that is
something the Committee should tend to.
And finally, I think we can do a lot more with work
programs. When this Subcommittee and the full Committee passed
the ARRA back in 2009, it had money--an emergency fund and
States set up jobs and they supplied 260,000 jobs to low-income
families. In the private sector and in the public sector. So
that is a very promising thing. I strongly suggest you look
into that.
The bottom line is we have made a lot of progress. But we
can make more.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Haskins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Winship, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT WINSHIP, WALTER B. WRISTON FELLOW, MANHATTAN
INSTITUTE FOR POLICY RESEARCH

Mr. WINSHIP. Thank you.
Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Doggett, Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
How to address the challenges facing low-income individuals
and families is one of the most important questions facing
policymakers today. To me, personally, I think it is the most
important question.
In my written testimony, I assess long- and short-term
trends in the American labor market over the past 25 years. I
discuss trends in employment, unemployment, and labor force
participation between the business cycle peaks of 1989 and
2007, to show that many of the challenges we face, not all, but
many that we believe to be worsening are not.
I also describe what has happened since the onset of the
Great Recession in order to examine the recent departure from
these longer-term trends. My written testimony includes a
series of 24 fun charts displaying the trends that I will
thankfully just summarize here.
So, the highlights of my analyses are as follows: First,
over the last 25 years, the enduring strength of the American
economy, I think, shines through. In particular, there was no
increase between 1989 and 2007 in the share of adults who are
unemployed or in the share of workers who are working part time
involuntarily. This is true for adults between the ages of 18
and 24, those 25 to 54, and those aged 55 to 64, for both men
and for women. Nor has employment fallen among women aged 25 to
54 or among older men and women. These trends are shown in
Figures 1A through 1F and 2A through 2F in my written
testimony.
Second, the share of adults under age 25 who are employed
has fallen over time. But the decline is primarily explained by
increasing school enrollment, and it is entirely explained by
an increase in the share of adults in that age group who tell
Federal surveyors when asked that they do not want a job, and
that is in Figures 1A and 1B and Figures 4A and 4B.
Third, the share of men between the ages of 25 and 54,
prime-age workers, the share of those men who are employed has
also fallen, again, driven by a fall in labor force
participation. The drop in labor force participation is
entirely explained, on the one hand, by increases in the share
of men, who, again, say they do not want a job and the share
who report that they are disabled. These are shown in Figures
1C and 4C.
Now, the prevalence of self-reported disability and its
rise over the past 45 years does not accord with trends in
physical or mental health, which have not worsened over time.
While much of the increase in disability is due to demographic
change, policy changes that have made it easier to qualify for
Federal disability benefits have increased the number of
working-age men outside the labor force.
Fourth, as shown in Figures 3A through 3F, unemployment
spells have grown longer even though the share of adults
experiencing unemployment hasn't risen. Because relatively few
people are unemployed, however, relatively few, and many of
them are out of work for less than 3 months, the risk of
experiencing long-term unemployment remains very small. So if
you take the most disadvantaged group you see in the day, the
young black men, they experienced a 16-point increase between
1989 and 2007 in the share of unemployed who have been out of
work for more than 26 weeks. But the increase in the share of
young black men in the labor force, jobless or not, who are
unemployed that long, was only from 1 to 4 percent.
Okay. Fifth, the Great Recession worsened most indicators
of labor market strengths for sure. Employment fell
significantly, and has recovered only among older adults.
Unemployment remains higher than in 2007, and labor force
participation remains lower among adults under the age of 55.
Involuntary part-time work has increased as a share of all
part-time work. Full-time work has declined as a share of
employment among younger workers and among men aged 25 to 54.
And the long-term unemployed grew as a fraction of the jobless,
and the share of adults outside the labor force who said that
they wanted to work, has risen.
The worst is behind us, however, as nearly all of these
indicators began improving between 2009 and 2011. The exception
is the labor force nonparticipation among men and women, aged
25 to 54, which peaked in 2013 among women and probably in 2014
among men.
Turning quickly to policy solutions, I think efforts to
revive business creation would ensure the replenishment of new
firms who account for an outsize share of new jobs. And they
might therefore lower the duration of jobless spells that we
see.
Experimentation through State and local pilot programs
would allow for the testing and evaluation of safety net
reforms to promote work and to support low-income families. And
reforms to Federal disability programs could benefit those with
marginal ailments, real ailments but marginal ones, who in past
years would not have dropped out of the labor force, while at
the same time helping those with serious impairments who want
to work become better integrated into the workforce.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that we do face economic
challenges as a Nation. Low-income individuals and families
face more challenges than other Americans. Too many are hard
pressed to make ends meet while their children enjoy too little
upward mobility.
But I think it is important to keep in mind that the
ability of the U.S. economy to provide work for those who seek
it has not diminished. I think, above all, we need to remember
that.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Winship follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Wilcox, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF W. BRADFORD WILCOX, VISITING SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. WILCOX. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Doggett, and
other distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to participate today.
In thinking about today's topic, the challenges facing
lower-income families in our economy, let me be clear, I think
economic factors, such as declines in the wages of less-
educated men, and social factors, for instance residential
segregation, inhibit economic mobility, contribute to poverty
and make family life more challenging for lower-income
Americans.
But the research also indicates the Nation's retreat from
marriage is inhibiting economic mobility, making poverty more
common, and driving up inequality. Where we are now we are
witnessing a growing marriage divide. Where well-educated and
affluent Americans enjoy comparatively stable, high-quality
marriages, and lower-income Americans are less likely to
benefit from the social and economic advantages associated with
growing up within or being a member of a stable, married
family.
Today I am going to make three basic points about this
retreat from marriage. First, I think we need to understand the
demographic trends in play. And, in Figures 1 through 3 in my
testimony, I outline these basic trends. In Figure 1, for
instance, I show that marriage is in retreat across the board,
but still today a majority of college-educated Americans in
midlife are in their first marriage. By contrast, less than a
majority of less-educated Americans are in a first marriage in
midlife today in the United States.
The trends in Figure 2 in nonmarital childbearing are even
more dramatic. The figure shows, for instance, that less than
one in ten college-educated moms are having their kids outside
of marriage, or about one in two moms who don't have a college
degree are having their kids outside of marriage. So clearly,
there is a big class divide in nonmarital childbearing.
And then the third figure shows, I think most importantly,
that family and stability is on the rise among less-educated
Americans but remains comparatively not a problem for college-
educated households. So kids who are being raised in lower-
income households are experiencing more family instability and
more single parenthood. That is not true for college-educated
Americans.
The second question or point that I want to dwell on is,
why does it matter that marriage is in retreat in this country?
Well, it matters because it undercuts the American dream, it
fuels poverty, and it drives up economic inequality. For kids,
for children, we know that they are less likely to acquire the
human capital they need to thrive in today's labor market. They
are less likely to avoid major detours in young adulthood,
things like a teen pregnancy or incarceration if they grow up
outside an intact married family; and Figure 4 makes this
point, I think, very clearly.
And yet at the community level, we have seen from Harvard
economist Raj Chetty that when it comes to poor kids' mobility,
quote, ``The strongest and most robust predictor of mobility is
the fraction of children from single parents,'' unquote, in a
community. So there is clearly a link between mobility for our
Nation's kids and being raised in a family in a community where
the two-parent family is strong.
And then for adults, my own research with Robert Lerman at
the Urban Institute indicates that men tend to work harder,
they work smarter, and they make more money if they are married
compared to their single peers. They make about $16,000 more
compared to their similarly-credentialed peers if they are
married. And this benefits both themselves, of course, and a
family of which they are a part of. So all this is one reason
why poverty is markedly lower among both married Americans and
their families.
Now, in my testimony I talk about why marriage is in
retreat, and I talk about both economic factors, which
progressives tend to stress, which I think are accurate, as
well as cultural and policy factors, which I think
conservatives tend to stress and are actually also accurate to
an important extent.
But given all this, what can we do to renew marriage and
bridge America's growing family divide? I have three brief
comments on this.
First, I think public policy should do no harm when it
comes to marriage. And in my prepared testimony I detail some
ways in which policymakers can eliminate or reduce marriage
penalties in many of our means-tested policies.
Second, I think public policy should explore ways to
strengthen the economic foundations of middle- and lower-income
family life in three ways: One, by increasing the child tax
credit; two, by expanding the EITC for single adults; and
three, by expanding and improving vocational education and
apprenticeship programs, all of which would make men,
especially lower-income men, more marriageable.
Then third, I think that Federal and State governments
operating in partnership with the private sector should support
a public campaign around what Ron Haskins and Belle Sawhill
call the success sequence where we encourage young adults to
sequence schooling, work, marriage, and parenthood in that
order. And a campaign like this could be modeled upon the
success of the national campaign, the success they have
achieved on teen pregnancy.
Now, I recognize that some of the policies that I have
proposed today, such as the EITC expansion, are not yet proven.
Given that, it would be wise to roll them out in an
experimental fashion as we are seeing right now in New York
City.
But we need to continue to experiment with a range of
policy efforts like these if we seek to bridge the growing
marriage divide in American life.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilcox follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

--------

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Ms. Deviney, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF FRANCES DEVINEY, PH.D., ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, CENTER
FOR PUBLIC POLICY PRIORITIES

Ms. DEVINEY. Thank you, Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member
Doggett, and the Members of the Subcommittee.
I appreciate the opportunity to join this distinguished
panel and testify about the challenges facing low-income
families in today's economy.
And as an Associate Director at the Center for Public
Policy Priorities, I track the wellbeing of Texas children and
families. And I would like to focus on three points in my
testimony today.
First, to move America forward, we have to focus on what is
best for kids, which means we have to focus on what is best for
families as well.
Second, to significantly reduce poverty, you must have
strong job creation and a well-functioning safety net to be
able to stabilize families.
And third, we must look locally for innovative new
strategies and then invest in them to take them to scale.
So first, I would like to say that, you know, Texas is a
bellwether for the U.S. regarding these issues. Now, it is not
just because Texans say that we are the most important State in
Texas, I know we are not, regardless of what people tell you,
but it is just a basic numbers game.
Today, one of every 11 U.S. kids lives in Texas. So, in
other words, if we can move the poverty needle for kids in
Texas, we can move the needle for kids across the country.
So, we can all agree that the best way to end child poverty
is to make sure parents have a good job. And in Texas, it would
seem that we have the perfect formula for that. We are the
leader in job creation among States, and we have one of the
lowest unemployment rates in the country.
Unfortunately, working hard is not always enough to get by.
Even with strong job creation and a low unemployment rate,
child poverty, as we have said already today, is higher today
than before the recession, and one of every four Texas kids
lives below the poverty line.
Why would that be? Well, there are a lot of reasons, but
one of them is good-wage, mid-wage jobs disappeared during the
recession, and during the recovery they were filled in by low-
wage jobs. In fact, Texas relies on a larger percentage of low-
wage jobs for our economy than most other States. And
consequently, a big percentage of our working families live
below the poverty line.
So how do low-income workers get into good jobs? Well,
ironically, it is not just about creating more good jobs.
Texas' data shows that. To get out of poverty, people need the
stability that is provided by what we call the safety net to be
able to train for and get those better jobs. Struggling to feed
your family or find child care can become insurmountable
barriers to improving your financial situation.
Now, in Texas, during the recession, unemployment insurance
was the only lifeline for more than 713,000 Texans who lost
work through no fault of their own. And the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program made sure that 3 million Texas
families didn't go hungry when times were toughest over several
years. And the earned income tax credit, one of the country's
most successful anti-poverty programs, pulled over 760,000
Texans, over half of whom were kids, out of poverty in the
years following the recession.
Unfortunately, one key safety net program, TANF, falls
short on this level of success. After years of disinvestment,
TANF, the preliminary program for helping people in poverty get
back on their feet and find work, only reaches 5 percent of all
Texans in poverty.
Today, Texas spends less than a quarter of our TANF block
grant on basic cash assistance, work-related activities, and
child care combined. The other three-quarters basically go to
fill holes in our State budgets and allow the State budget
writers to invest less overall in our anti-poverty efforts.
But the TANF story can have a silver lining. There are
proposals to allow States to use TANF dollars for more sectoral
job training, and Texas has many strong innovative strategies
that could be scaled up to the State level. As Congressman
Doggett already mentioned, we have the Project QUEST in San
Antonio, and we have a similar program called Capital Idea in
Austin. They have had great success with both sectoral training
and additional educational opportunities and connecting
committed-yet-underemployed adults to higher education and to
those employers who were in need of those highly-skilled
workers.
But of course, there is limitations to the successes that a
local innovation can achieve on its own. Obviously, home-grown
solutions are excellent at matching select community needs and
thinking outside the box. But to have a significant impact on
poverty, only significant investment at the State or Federal
level can create the infrastructure to take small successes to
scale.
So how do we move America forward? As you continue these
important hearings, I encourage you to ask yourself, what is
best for kids? If a parental job is the best antidote to child
poverty, ask yourself, what do families have to have in place
to make sure they can get and keep a job?
How do we create an environment that gives everyone the
chance to compete and succeed? From that perspective, the
safety net clearly serves as a foundational step to
strengthening American families so that they can move out of
poverty and stay there.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Deviney follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

-------

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you very much for your testimony.
The buzzing you heard earlier were votes that were called.
We have about, what, 5 or 6 minutes left, I believe, so I think
what we will do now is the Committee will stand recessed. We
will vote. We have three votes, and we will return promptly and
resume with questioning of the witnesses.
And with that, this Committee stands recessed.
[Recess.]
Chairman BOUSTANY. Given that we have already heard your
oral testimony, we will begin with questioning. And I will
start off.
One of the main responsibilities of our Subcommittee is to
look at strategies to reduce poverty. And, of course, when we
talk about poverty here in Washington, you know, we talk about
numbers and all the information you provided is very, very
compelling. But my hope is that we can eventually get to a
point where we are getting beyond some of that and look at what
kind of policies do we need to develop to help people escape
from the poverty trap, to escape from, you know, the assistance
programs and move up the ladder of opportunity.
And I know, Mr. Haskins, I am certainly aware of the
decades you have spent studying and working with your time on
the Committee. Take a step back and give us a little indication
of what someone, you know, what happens, what does it look like
when somebody actually does make that transition out of poverty
and off these assistance programs.
We need to understand what is working, you know, whether it
is anecdotal or--systemically what works and what doesn't. And
I know there are all kinds of other factors, whether it is
substance abuse, addictions, things of that nature, too. But I
want to, I guess, try to personalize this a little bit and give
us some ideas on how we--what we need to look at to try to
create that opportunity ladder. Because we have so much
untapped potential in this country that is languishing and it
becomes generational.
So with that, I would just open that up for comment.
Mr. HASKINS. First of all, I think it is very important to
realize that we have millions of low-income mothers and fathers
and people of that age, early 20s and so forth. Our goal should
be to get them to work, not necessarily to escape the programs.
Because, as I showed, the programs are what really takes them
and their children out of poverty. So it is going to be very
difficult.
And the reason is simple, it is because at the same time
that education has stagnated among low-income families, the
demands of the American economy have increased very
substantially. There is a wonderful book about this by Katz and
Goldin at Harvard about the race between education and
technology. And I doubt anybody on this panel disagrees, so I
don't think you can find anybody that disagrees, that to make
$50, $60, $70,000, let alone over $100,000 now, you have to
have skills and education.
The one intermediate position that I think might be hopeful
and that the Committee could look at more carefully is
certificates in other kinds of skills, like welding and
carpentry and so forth, and especially apprenticeships. Because
then people--employers like that because they can pay a reduced
wage for 2 years or however long it takes for the person to get
enough skills to be certified in whatever the area is.
So I can tell you when we first passed welfare reform in
1996, a lot of people thought, both Republicans and Democrats,
that once these mothers got in the workforce, they were going
to start out making $8 or $9 or $10,000 a year. But come back 5
years later, to making 15 or 20. It did not happen very often.
And it didn't happen, I think, because they just did not get
the skills and education they would need to move up. It wasn't
just a matter of experience in a, you know, in a service-sector
job. They needed skills and education.
To me, that is the big issue. The Committee can figure out
ways to help low-income mothers that are rearing kids and
working at the same time with very few benefits and so forth.
If you can figure out how to help them get education of the
kind that will actually help them, I think the community
colleges have to be involved, that will be a big success.
Ms. DEVINEY. May I add a comment to that, Chairman
Boustany?
Chairman BOUSTANY. Sure. Sure.
Ms. DEVINEY. One of the research projects that we have done
at the Center for Public Policy Priorities is to look at how
much it actually costs for families to be able to make ends
meet in each of our big metro areas in Texas. And to confirm
the point that Dr. Haskins just made, what it would take for
families to be able to make ends meet, cover basic rent based
on Section 8 housing, to cover low-cost food, buying food in
bulk, and never eating out, never eating much meat, not saving
for, having any kind of emergency savings, not buying Christmas
or birthday gifts, it would cost a two-parent, two-child family
about $11 an hour each that they would have to make in
Harlingen, which is our least expensive city in the State, and
up to about $17 an hour per worker in the family for both two-
parent families to be able to make ends meet.
So our choices are this: Do we then expect businesses to
pay all of their workers $17 an hour? Which, of course, we are
going to say no, that is not, you know, practical or possible
for any small business to try to meet. So then what do we have
to do to be able to fill that gap for families so that they
don't fall through the cracks? And I just wanted to kind of
reinforce what Dr. Haskins had to say, that, you know, it does
require some additional supports to be able to subsidize work
and help the families make ends meet.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Either of you want to opine on that?
Mr. WILCOX. Just to sort of build on the apprenticeship and
vocational front, we have, I think, to be aware of the fact
that, sort of, college is not the only route for success in
America today. And there has been good evidence from Bob
Lehrman at the Urban Institute on apprenticeships. And also in
terms of vocational education, career academies and our high
schools across the country have been serving younger adults,
particularly younger men, get the skills they need to flourish
in today's labor markets and also have higher marriage rates
down the road as well. So thinking about education in a variety
of ways and in diverse ways, including, kind of, vocational
education, apprenticeship, well, you know, models as part of
our thinking would be important.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. WINSHIP. I would endorse just about everything that the
other three of my panelists have said. I would just add two
other ideas. I think if we are looking at higher ed reform, I
think income share agreements, which Brad's colleague, Andrew
Kelly, at AEI has talked about, the idea that you remove a
small number of regulatory barriers and you could actually
create a market for investors to finance higher ed for kids,
which sort of the immediate benefit is you are helping kids pay
for college. But I think in the long run, the more important
benefit is it injects some competition and some accountability
for higher ed institutions.
If you are doing a terrible job getting your kids out and
well educated and prepared for work, investors are going to
offer pretty lousy returns to the kids who are attending your
school. That forces you as an institution to think harder about
what you are doing.
I also think if we are talking about opportunity, you know,
a lot of these gaps in terms of test scores and things like
that are there at age 5. And so I really do think it is
important to try to look at the early years. We don't have
great evidence at all on models like Head Start, for instance.
I would argue that the evidence there is pretty discouraging.
There is a lot of talk about pre-K. I think the evidence on
pre-K is pretty ambiguous.
I am not here to say that we have a ton of evidence of a
model that works. But we could promote a program that
essentially would give poor families a voucher to use in
whatever way they think makes sense. Russ Whitehurst, who was a
former colleague of mine when I was at Brookings, has proposed
something he calls early learning family grants. And
essentially it would voucherize our Federal early education
policy. And by evaluating different approaches, hopefully find
models that work better than others.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Well thank you.
Just to conclude my time on this, these are all very good
ideas. And going back to the formula, Dr. Haskins, that you put
up there, I think your first slide, low-wage job plus the
supports, we need to also look at the educational component
that moves them on.
But, Mr. Winship, you said something that caught my ear and
that is metrics. Understanding--we have all these support
programs. Which ones are really working and which ones aren't?
What can be done differently? And I think that is going to be a
major task in this Subcommittee going forward.
So thank you all.
Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the testimony of each of our witnesses.
Dr. Haskins, I think you referenced this in your original
testimony but you think it is important that we extend the
Family Home Visiting Program, Family Nurse Partnership, those
types of programs that are about to expire this March?
Mr. HASKINS. Right. And for several reasons.
First, in the case of early education, Scott mentioned Head
Start, for example I think the evidence that some of the home
visiting model programs are successful is very, very strong. I
am thinking especially of the Nurse Family Partnership program.
So to defund those I think moves us in the opposite direction.
It is not just that kids are behind at 5, they are behind at 3.
So the earlier, the better and that is where home visiting is
so important.
The second thing is a very nice aspect of home visiting is
it assumes a mother's competence. And it helps a mother become
more competent and presumably with her other kids as well. And
it isn't just about direct interaction with the kid, it is
about the rest of her life, about smoking, breastfeeding,
drinking, and so forth. So I think that is a really important
thing.
The third thing is, that I hope I am going to be able to
study, in fact, I have an appointment to talk to people in
Texas because Texas has I believe more programs than any State
in the country, and that is the organization at the State
level. That is something we often ignore in Washington. But the
State-level organization of home visiting programs, the States
had to do, had to do a problem analysis, have a written plan,
focus the resources on the communities that are most
disadvantaged. We are right in the middle of this. We are
having a lot of real high-quality evaluation. Everybody talks
about accountability. Well, we have more accountability in this
program than any program I am aware of. Plus we have a
spectacular national evaluation going on that is being done by
MDRC in New York City. We are going to learn a ton from that.
So to me, if we stopped home visiting at all these various
levels, it would be really a shame.
Mr. DOGGETT. I really appreciate your testimony. Because,
as you know, we don't have a funding source identified at this
point. Next month the program expires. And I think it is really
important to renew it. It is not a panacea. But it helps
parents be what they really want to be. And, as you mentioned,
it has benefits for the parent and their attitudes about work
and participation.
Similarly, I believe your testimony indicates that it is
important on the earned income tax credit to increase it for
childless adults to better incentivize work and reduce poverty.
Mr. HASKINS. Yes. Chairman Ryan has proposed that. And the
President has proposed it. And the proposals by the President
and Chairman Ryan are really similar in many respects. So I
think it is a question of figuring out a way to finance it. And
I think there would be a big bipartisan vote to do it.
And it is really crucial because we have not had any
success with young males, especially young black males. And if
you could lure them into the labor force by increasing the
amount of money that they will earn, because they are in the
same situation as mothers, they are not going to earn much
money, that would be a big step in the right direction.
Mr. DOGGETT. And you support the more generous child tax
credit provisions that will expire in 2017 if we don't----
Mr. HASKINS. For the additional child tax credit, yes,
absolutely.
Mr. DOGGETT. And, Dr. Deviney, if I might redirect you to
home for me in Texas--and since Chairman Ryan was mentioned,
there is a belief in some quarters that if we will just package
up everything from Pell Grants to school lunches, as the House
Study Group suggested a few years back, and put it all in one
big package and just with a bow give it to the States, that
they will figure out what the best way is to spend it and
everybody will be happier. What has been the experience in
Texas with doing that on TANF?
Ms. DEVINEY. Well, that is a really good question. And
Texas actually has a lot of things that we can teach both other
States and the Federal level about those block grant programs.
Now, one of the best things I can say about Texas is that
we spend our dollars really wisely. Whether it be a big pot or
a small pot, we spend them in the right ways. The problem with
our TANF block grant in particular is that we are only
dedicating a quarter of the money that we get to the original
intention of the program in the first place.
Now, the other three-quarters of the dollars we are
spending, we are spending on goods things. I mean it is not
like we are buying flowers and candy for everyone at the
Capitol or anything. We are actually spending it on child
welfare programs. And we are----
Mr. DOGGETT. In some cases, child welfare programs that the
State was doing before it used this money----
Ms. DEVINEY. And that is the key point. So when you start
using those dollars for other programs that the State has a
mandate----
Mr. DOGGETT. And no maintenance of effort.
Ms. DEVINEY. There is no maintenance of effort. And they
are using it to fill, particularly during the recession when we
had a decline in our State budget, we used those moneys to fill
holes where the State had a responsibility to actually cover
the basic services. And then we are relieved of that
responsibility, so funding for anti-poverty programs goes down
overall.
So that is a really big concern we have about block-
granting programs. It is not that States are necessarily going
to do bad things with the dollars. But you have lower
investment overall in anti-poverty programs.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you all.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The gentleman, Mr. Young.
Mr. YOUNG. I thank the Chairman for convening this hearing
and the Ranking Member for his constructive participation.
Really, it is an honor to be a Member of this Subcommittee
and to have all of you here before us today.
I see this area, poverty alleviation, addressing the needs
and even aspirations of low-income individuals and families, as
an area ripe for not just review and rigorous evaluation but
innovation and restructuring here at the Federal level. The
timing is right. There is a lot of public attention on this
area. I think there is plenty of bipartisan agreement.
I have to say I was really encouraged about the things I
heard from our Ranking Member, a focus on prevention, on
skills, on eliminating barriers to work, on ensuring we have a
reliable safety net, on focusing not just on inputs or on
specific programs and their authorization or so forth, but also
on outcomes, more importantly on outcomes.
And so my temptation is to skip to the subject of
evaluation and try to elicit from all of you how we can ensure
that more programs are rigorously evaluated, to get your
thoughts on how many have been rigorously evaluated and what we
have learned. I think I know the answers to many of those
questions. But I understand there will be further hearings that
will be in a more targeted fashion focused on just those items.
Since this is sort of a hearing to establish a baseline
about the challenges facing our low-income population, I would
like to ask a broader question of our panel and that is if one
grows up poor, what impact does that have in today's United
States of America, on that child's, that adolescent's future
prospects? The American dream has long been associated, it is a
vague concept but I know it includes certain elements and these
are pretty much commonly held, I think, among all Americans. It
entails defining one's own destiny. It means harnessing one's
own God-given capabilities and making the most of those
capabilities. And it also entails becoming happier, at least
pursuing happiness through earning your success.
But there is at least a sense in the country and maybe it
has been documented, maybe it is more than a sense, I think it
is, that if one grows up in the humblest of circumstances, it
is harder to move up the income ladder than if one grows up in
a securely middle-class atmosphere or so forth.
And so if you could speak to some of the data on this
subject, mobility and how it drives--or lack thereof and how it
might drive inequality and how that has changed over time, and
the extent to which existing social programs here at the
Federal level have helped mitigate some of the challenges of
moving up the income strata, and how much further work we have
to do? It is a big question.
Mr. HASKINS. Let me say something quickly about the data.
First of all, there is no question that if you are born
into poverty, that you face serious disadvantages. And it has
shown up generation after generation. I will just give you one
number. If you divide the income distribution into 5ths and
compare kids whose parents were in the bottom 5th, so it would
be 20 percent needs distribution if we have perfect equality.
There is more like 45 percent of the kids from the bottom,
lined up in the bottom. And even more alarming, they have about
a 5 percent chance of making it to the top. So we do not have
equal opportunity in the United States.
The second point, though, there are 60 percent of kids that
escape. And if you focus on that, you say well, some kids can
do it. Some of them even make it all the way to the top, not
enough, but these kids are doing something right.
So I think a main point is we tend to, especially when you
read about this in the media, they say oh, warn these kids,
they don't have a chance. They do have a chance. But it is less
of a chance than their peers that are from wealthier families.
Now, we are not going to be able to change the income of all
those families.
Mr. YOUNG. Has it become harder in recent years for----
Mr. HASKINS. No. That was going to be my next point.
Mr. YOUNG. Okay. All right.
Mr. HASKINS. I think it is amazing, Scott and I used to
write stuff and argue all the time, it hasn't changed. And then
a guy at Harvard named Chetty did a new study based on tax data
and showed it hasn't changed in three generations or four
generations. So I think there is a----
Mr. YOUNG. Okay, time is limited. So it hasn't become
harder in your opinion. But can we do better? I think I will
see affirmative nods from everyone there.
All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
We will go to Mr. Holding next.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the statistics and research around family
structure and how it affects poverty and the economy, you know,
are just mind numbing. It is stark. But, you know, they were
stark when Daniel Patrick Moynihan first came out with his
study, as you know, showing that correlation.
What do you think the underpinning of the decline of the
family is? Is it poverty came before it declines the family, so
you result in more poverty? Or is there a different
underpinning? And can you take it back in time to when we first
started looking at this in the 1960s?
Mr. Winship, we will start with you.
Mr. WINSHIP. Well, Brad is certainly the expert on this. So
I won't say very much. You know, I do think the argument that
it is primarily economics really has to contend with the fact
that, you know, our family structure problems have sort of
arisen since the 1960s.
And even in the 1960s, we were a much richer society than
certainly in the 19th century or any other earlier time in the
20th century when we didn't have nearly as much single
parenthood as we do now. So I do think at root the problems are
around changes in the culture in the United States and in the
policy incentives that are embedded in some of our programs
but----
Mr. HOLDING. Mr. Wilcox, do you want to expand on that a
little bit?
Mr. WILCOX. Yeah, I guess I would disagree a little bit
with Dr. Winship in terms of the economic story. And that is
simply that we are seeing declines in real wages for less
educated men and, probably more importantly, less of them are
in the workforce for a variety of reasons. So there is an
economics, you know, piece to this.
And it is no accident, of course, as I said in my
testimony, there is a marriage divide in America now where
those who are educated and affluent are doing pretty well. And
those who are less educated and lower income are doing a lot
worse. So that is part of the story. And shifts in men's place
in the labor force, I think, since the 1970s helps to account
for this growing marriage divide in America.
But I think it is also the case that cultural changes,
changing, you know, of views about the importance of marriage
for having kids, about divorce, about fulfillment, you know--
are part of the story. I think changes in our civic sort of
sector, we are seeing much greater declines both in secular and
religious engagement among less-educated Americans compared to
college-educated Americans. That is part of the story. If you
are not connected to these civic institutions, you have less
support for getting and staying married.
And then I think public policy too since the 1960s has
often unintentionally penalized marriage. I have, you know,
some quotes in my testimony that reflect basically that a lot
of our means-tested policies, you know, make it sort of----
Mr. HOLDING. Maybe we can tease that out with some
examples. I mean, the research says that if a child is going to
have a better chance of breaking that cycle of poverty, they
come out of a two-parent household. So, you know, looking at
some social policies now, you know, point out how support would
differ between a two-parent family and for a single-parent
family and to the degree that maybe it encourages a single-
parent family rather than a two-parent family?
Mr. WILCOX. So the EITC is complicated because, you know,
when you have one member of a couple who is earning a lot more,
there is actually, you know, some incentives to get married.
But when you have both members of the couple who are earning,
you know, comparable wages, they can incur some substantial
penalties.
But then more generally, many of our means-tested policies,
like, for instance, Medicaid, you know, penalize folks who get
married, you know, because obviously they are getting more
income into the household. So there is an incentive for them
just to cohabit or not get together if they are concerned about
continuing to get access to Medicaid.
So that would be one concrete example where I think many of
our means-tested policies unintentionally make it economically
non-rational, you know, for folks who are living together to go
ahead and get married.
Mr. HOLDING. So really some of the safety net, you know,
that we have in place discourages a married, two-parent family
is in sum what you are saying?
Mr. WILCOX. In simple economic terms, that is true. What we
don't know is sort of what percentage of the low-income
population is sort of making decisions about marriage based
upon, you know, means-tested policies. And that is something we
need to know but we don't yet know the answer as to what share
of our population is really making decisions about marriage and
family life based upon how it would affect their access to
something like Medicaid.
Mr. HOLDING. All right. Ms. Deviney, do you want to use a
few of my last seconds there to----
Ms. DEVINEY. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
Yes. The one thing that I wanted to add in was that in
Texas, because of the way we use our TANF program and the
amount of dollars that we dedicate toward cash assistance as
one example of the means-tested programs, the average is about
$74 per person and it is primarily child focused. And so I
would argue that that amount of money per month is not
encouraging women to stay single, that the benefits of having a
two-income family would be much greater than the additional
resources that they get from the $74 a month.
Mr. HOLDING. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. DEVINEY. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you and the Ranking Member for calling this
hearing, especially on this subject. It happens to be one that
I have been familiar with all of my life.
Practically everybody that I grew up with would have been
called in poverty if we based it on the income of their
families. Many of the people that I have known my entire life
would have been impoverished based upon their incomes. And yet
many of these people have overcome whatever it was that they
initially were, in whatever ways that they came.
Education and work opportunities we have mentioned a great
deal. We also have learned and we know that much poverty can be
found in single-parent families that are often headed by
females. And that is because children oftentimes more often are
with their mothers.
I was intrigued, Mr. Winship, as you were talking about
individuals who indicated that they did not necessarily want to
work. I happen to believe that work is an absolute virtue. And
that those individuals who are cut off from the world of work
are missing an integral part of life, the fulfillment of having
a job, going to work, earning money.
Dr. Haskins, as you talked about people moving into the
workforce and I am thinking that in the city where I live,
especially in the building trades and places where there are
apprenticeship opportunities, individuals are denied, barred
from and locked out of that.
I appreciate all of the programs that we talk about. And
especially was I delighted, you know, to hear about home
visiting. I have been engaged with it, I guess, for at least 40
years or more, from the time that I worked in community health
centers and we were taking health workers out, knocking on
people's doors, telling them about what was available. And so
it helps.
Could each one of you just take a little shot at how do we
increase two-parent families? I mean what, what do we do? What
can we do to increase two-parent families?
Mr. HASKINS. Here is one idea that has a lot of data behind
it, the longer a woman waits, the more goods and income that
she accumulates. And as she gets older, the males that she is
likely to marry get older as well. And they also are more
likely to work. And it helps a lot if she has not had a
previous child, especially outside marriage.
When you interview these mothers, they say they don't want
to have children. And yet they get pregnant. So I think if we
had more effective policies to offer birth control to mothers,
that that would be a step in the right direction. That is not
going to be the whole solution. But that is a step in the right
direction. Because they will get older without having children.
They can continue their education or get experience in the
labor market, have more time and more maturity to pick out a
better male because they say they want to get married.
So I think that would be one thing, we should have free,
long-acting, reversible forms of contraception available to
low-income women.
Mr. WINSHIP. So I sort of look at the earned income tax
credit as a big policy success. You know, for a long time, I
think we tried to sort of convince people through moralizing
that they ought to work more, that work was good for them. But
I think it was really the earned income tax credit that
convinced a lot of people to do it. It was a real financial
incentive.
I think we ought to consider a kind of married parent tax
credit that says to heck with trying to convince people to get
married or stay married and sort of moralize it, give them
financial incentives to do it. So, that is what I am sort of
thinking about.
Mr. WILCOX. I think continuing to try to subsidize lower-
income work, trying to minimize marriage penalties and means-
tested policies and also trying to figure out some kind of
cultural campaign like we had with teen pregnancy that would
encourage Americans to put marriage prior to parenthood would
also be helpful. Just three ideas.
Ms. DEVINEY. I actually don't disagree with anything that
my other panelists have said so far. But I would say, I would
reiterate the issue around birth control. Because in Texas, we
have actually had an active attack on women's health. And we
have defunded women's health extensively. It is not just about
some of the more controversial issues but it is also about
access to birth control and family planning that would actually
help women to delay childbirth and engage in expanding their
education and moving ahead.
The other thing I would put forward, in addition to the
ideas that have been put out here today, is using financial
planning, which in Texas we have added to our curriculum a
basic financial planning as part of the public education
curriculum, where kids actually learn about what does it
actually take to be able to make ends meet, how much money,
what kind of job does it take, what kind of education do you
have to get to get that kind of job to actually help you be
able to make ends meet.
And it is a real, you know, shock to the system to actually
really look at those dollars and think like okay, if I am going
to make this work in my life, what do I actually need to do?
And you get it early and it helps you be able to set some goals
and to plan. Now, is that going to prevent any kind of single
parenting? You know, not on the grand scale. But it definitely
puts people on a right path in thinking about what are the
steps that it takes to be able to be financially secure as an
adult.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentlemen.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The USDA Economic Research Service defines counties as
being persistently poor. And their definition there isn't a
result of counties that for 30 years, that more than 20--20
percent or more of their population is considered in poverty.
And what I found quite alarming, of the 353 persistently poor
counties, 85.3 percent are from rural America, not urban areas.
In fact, 13 of my 30 counties are classified out of those
353 as persistently poor. And we have had record levels of
spending on anti-poverty benefits over the years. And I feel
like rural counties are being left behind. And I would like for
all of you, or whoever might want to respond, but I would like
each one of you to address the rural-urban divide when you are
looking at poverty and maybe any ideas or strategies that you
think might be addressed that could help rural America.
Mr. HASKINS. There is likely to be a lot of silence. I have
looked into this a little bit. And it is very difficult to find
any programs that have been well evaluated that are able to
solve the problems of rural America. I think the Congress makes
a legitimate effort to try to make sure that the Federal
resources are distributed fairly. Maybe they fail in some
cases. But at least there is some equality there in investing
resources. But it hasn't resulted in kids being smarter and
getting better jobs, more innovation, more job creation and so
forth.
So I think if you look at the numbers, it is a distressing
picture. Because in addition to what you just described, there
has actually been an exit in the last 3 or 4 years from non-
urban counties. And there is more inequality, higher levels of
poverty. So there is a whole range of problems. And I don't
think it has been a focused area of the media, of the scholarly
world, of advocates.
I am not sure we can do anything. We can't point to
something and say oh, it shows, like we can with home visits,
oh, this works great. We don't have things like that that I am
aware.
Mr. WINSHIP. I grew up in a working-class community in
Maine. It wasn't poor but it certainly wasn't middle-class. And
I think about kind of where some of my classmates have ended
up. And it is interesting, I think there is this tension that
you also see when you think about inner-city poverty. On the
one hand, you can try to invest a lot in the community and
convince people to stay and improve people where they are.
An alternative strategy, I think, is to encourage more
residential mobility. And, of course, it doesn't help if you
sort of want to preserve a robust community. But I think we
underestimate the extent to which people better themselves by
moving to opportunity. And so I am not quite sure this is the
answer that you are looking for. But I do think we have seen
residential mobility decline over the last couple of decades.
And I think if there are ways through the Unemployment
Insurance program or otherwise, to be able to help people if
they want to move to places that are booming.
If we could get a bunch of people to move to North Dakota
or South Dakota these days, a lot of folks would be quite a bit
better off, shifting people to where the opportunity is.
Mr. WILCOX. And I think one thing that is important to
realize too is, you know, for a long time, there was concern
about sort of family life in inner-city America. But we now see
that the trends I have been talking about today are distributed
pretty evenly. So this retreat from marriage that I have been
talking about today is very much a rural thing as well.
So part of the problem facing many rural communities is
that there are many more young adults who are cohabiting,
having kids outside of marriage, experiencing family
instability and single parenthood. And that affects both, you
know, their odds of making it in America but also their kids'
odds of making it in America as well.
Ms. DEVINEY. I am not going to pretend that I have a really
good solid answer for you. But I can say this: What we are
talking about there is resources. Because so much has been
dedicated to what happens in urban communities in terms of our
anti-poverty programs because the resource is already there to
build on, the infrastructure. So something that comes to mind
for me is our combined spending program in Texas where we
actually recognize when people are coming from poverty and are
able to support schools with some extra funding to be able to
help close that gap in terms of the needs of children in
poverty.
What I wonder is because we are talking about a gap in
terms of resources for rural communities is if there would be
an opportunity to be able to dedicate specifically job creation
funding or other technology funding to rural communities as a
way to balance out the gap between the infrastructure that
already exists in urban communities and what exists in rural
communities.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Meehan.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you each for all of your work in this
area. I mean it is so critical and so vital and important to
actually be looking at what is effective and the most and best
use of the resources that can be put into this. But I am
still--I am struck because we can look at this at various
points along the spectrum and each of them is influential.
But I go back, let me start at the very beginning because I
am getting a little ambiguity in your testimony. There was
discussion about the effectiveness of Nurse Family Partnership
and how there can be a real impact. And then we talked about
pre-kindergarten education. And I think your testimony was that
well, it is sort of not certain. What do we know? You are
confident in an early program. We are still waiting to see. And
I have had educators say to me oh, invest in pre-K. But is that
effective? I mean, how do we know where the more effective ways
are to make a difference?
Mr. WINSHIP. Yeah again, I am going to largely defer to my
colleague because Ron just wrote a book about evaluation. I
think the difference between Nurse Family Partnership and pre-K
is that the, I would say the evidence on Nurse Family
Partnership and home visiting is less ambiguous than the pre-K,
Head Start research.
You can find studies that are supportive of pre-K and even
Head Start. You can find a lot of studies, including federally-
sponsored ones, that show that there is not a lot of reason to
bank on it.
Home visiting, the evidence has been more positive I think.
I am actually a little bit more skeptical of it than Ron is.
But I think the way that we are approaching it is exactly the
right one where we are putting relatively small amounts of
money into it. We are evaluating it.
Mr. MEEHAN. Is it because of the spectrum of issues that
can be resolved by somebody coming in in a Nurse Family
Partnership may touch with health care, it may touch with
getting somebody in a family counseling for abuse or something
like that? I mean is that--are those things because of the
broader issues you are dealing with, you are having more of an
impact?
Mr. WINSHIP. I think it is possible--certainly home
visiting is less ambitious in terms of what it is trying to
impart to people. You are trying to teach a fairly basic kind
of parenting and healthcare skills to parents, as opposed to,
you know, Head Start, setting up a big institutional center and
curricula. In some ways, it is more ambitious. That could have
something to do with it but----
Mr. MEEHAN. Mr. Haskins, did you have----
Mr. HASKINS. I think there is a way to bring some coherence
to the literature. You are right, there has been a huge debate,
especially since President Obama introduced a $90 billion or
$80 billion, whatever it was, pre-K program and now childcare.
We spend at least $30 billion the Federal Government states on
these various types of preschool programs.
A lot of that is Federal money. I think if you look at all
the research, you will come away with this conclusion, that
there are programs that have shown that they can be very
successful, they boost kids' test performance, the kids behave
better, they do better in kindergarten, and they do better,
say, through 3rd or 4th grade, but not very many programs like
that. And the reason Head Start is such a disappointment--and
you see the same thing in Head Start, you can find Head Start
centers that are spectacular, their kids do well, they do well
in the public schools. But most of them are average. Some of
them are terrible. That is the problem. And this is----
Mr. MEEHAN. Is it program to program?
Mr. HASKINS. This is the Federal disease. We try to have a
big network of programs. And to maintain quality control in
1,000 or 5,000 or 10,000 programs is almost impossible. That is
the nut that we have to crack. We have to figure out what the
definition of a high-quality preschool program is, teacher
training----
Mr. MEEHAN. But your point being that that same program may
be well operated in Houston and, therefore, successful but not
as well operated in a particular neighborhood in Cleveland and,
therefore, not successful?
Mr. HASKINS. Exactly. Exactly. But if you look carefully at
the programs, you will see differences between those two
programs, in the teachers, in the curriculum, in the way the
whole building is organized, in the leadership, and in
especially something new that a lot of people think is
important, it is called coaching where teachers are constantly
subjected, have the opportunity to have their performance
appraised and someone, a master teacher, helps them do better.
So if we could build a big network of thousands of
preschool programs to do that, I think we would be successful.
Mr. MEEHAN. Ms. Deviney, I am at the end of my--you have
spoken about pre-K. You have talked about half-day pre-K. Is
that different than full-day Pre-K? What are your thoughts
about Head Start?
Ms. DEVINEY. Well, what I can say is we have a lot of
momentum in Texas around pre-K right now. Governor Abbott has
it as one of his major initiatives that he wants to engage in
this year which is really exciting. And the reason it is so
exciting is because we actually have one of the preeminent
researchers in pre-K, Aletha Huston, out of the University of
Texas who just came out with a big study showing the impact of
half-day pre-K, even looking at programs across the spectrum.
And I will say there is a quality difference between
programs even across Texas or even within Houston. And even
still, the impact doesn't just go to 3rd grade, it goes to much
further beyond. And a study by Texas A&M University shows the
actual dollars saved. It is $1 invested for $9 saved down the
road for better outcomes for kids because they are not going to
jail, they are graduating at better rates. You have heard of
these studies before, right?
So we have data in Texas that actually shows the value of
pre-K and the value of those programs. And if you can get them
to be high quality, then you are actually going to have a
better impact on kids. But even half-day pre-K is great. The
reason half-day is different than full-day, is economic
opportunities for parents.
So if you have a half-day pre-K program and parents are
trying to get their kids to the program and then go rush off
and work for 2 hours, because half-day pre-K is about 3 hours,
and then come back, it doesn't create a work opportunity and it
ceases to be a work support. Full-day pre-K actually enables
parents to be able to work for the most part a full day and
then kids can stay in some after-school care if needed. And
that really creates great economic opportunities for families.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member, for holding this hearing.
Thank you, members of the panel, for being here.
I was in Texas, I was in Houston on Sunday night. I am not
sure of what it was called--it was a huge place, it was
sponsored by the Houston Library and the Library Foundation.
And there were hundreds, maybe 2,500 students, young children,
parents, mothers, teachers. And these kids, elementary, middle
school, seemed to be so bright and so smart, just intelligent,
asking me all type of questions.
I am not prepared to give up on single mothers. I see so
many single mothers. I think we have to start where we are. I
think it was the late Booker T. Washington who said, who
founded Tuskegee Institute, now Tuskegee University, cast down
your bucket where you are. That is where we are in America.
Everybody is not going to get married. We are not going to
force people to fall in love and get married. It is not going
to happen. It is just not going to happen. Our society is a
different society. We live in a different world.
So we have to reach these mothers and fathers, to encourage
their children and young people to get the best possible
education. Education is the great equalizer. So if it is Head
Start, early childhood education, wherever, we need to spend
our resources. It rescues those that may be wavering or, we
think may be lost. How do we do it?
Ms. DEVINEY. Well, thank you for that point. I think that
what we have been talking about a lot today is about the
sanctity of marriage and about the decline of marriage. And the
strategies we take are about trying to increase marriage before
you actually get down the pike and you have a family, right? So
increasing marriage is great. I am a developmental psychologist
by training. And I know that the research shows that kids do
better and have better outcomes when they have two parents in
the home.
And from poverty measures, just from that basic math, when
you have two people earning more money, you are going to have
more income in the home. It is all, you know, all really good.
But I think your point about starting where we are, we don't
give up on the kids that exist today.
Mr. LEWIS. I think that is my point--we never ever give up.
Ms. DEVINEY. Yes. We never give up on the kids. And one of
the things that we actually put out a study recently looking at
the economic opportunities for Texas women was that when you
look at, even when women actually get higher education degrees
or even just a post-secondary degree or even just a high school
degree, they make less than a man who has more education than
they do--I'm sorry, less education than they do. So a woman who
gets a college degree makes less than a man with a high school
degree. And so there is that gap between what kind of wages
women can earn.
Now, part of that is because of the different kinds of jobs
women may be encouraged to go into. But a lot of it has to do
with, even when you are looking within sector and even when you
pull out the data just looking at women who have never left for
childbearing, who have never--all these reasons we give, there
is still a difference. And so one of the things I think we
really have to focus on, in addition to trying to create good,
solid, strong families for children, is making sure that women
have access to the same economic opportunities that men do
because the reality is we have single-parent families today
that need support and need help.
Mr. LEWIS. Is it different in a household headed by a woman
or a household headed by a man?
Ms. DEVINEY. Are outcomes different?
Mr. LEWIS. Yes. Right.
Ms. DEVINEY. To be honest, the research shows that it
differs depending on the age of the child, it differs depending
on the gender of the child. There are some differences. But
what really matters most and some of the strongest research
shows that children who are in chaotic homes, be they two-
parent families or single-parent families, suffer the worst
outcomes.
So trying to create an environment where the family,
whatever their structure is, has less of that toxic stress
going on is going to have the best outcome for kids. Again, two
parents earning two incomes supporting the child equally and
loving them is always the best opportunity. But if that is not
the case, what can we do to make sure that child has the same
opportunities as other kids.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Lewis.
Thank you for injecting the realism into the debate. It is
important. And I can tell you it is my intent as Chairman of
the Subcommittee to not leave anybody behind in this. And we
have to focus on strategies that help single women with
children to climb out of this and seek opportunity. So we will
work with you on that.
Ms. Noem.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It has been an interesting discussion for me because I look
at what we have today currently in the United States and the
situation we face with the different kind of households that
children will come from, single, two parents in the home,
whether they live in rural areas like all of South Dakota is or
in urban areas.
But I keep coming back to then how can we level the playing
field? And it seems to me, and this is just my brain thinking
during this hearing, that we could potentially get better
outcomes if we have a program that has some kind of
participation from the parents with the child. So if there is
something required of the parents to do, you talked about home
visits, because there is some participation with the parents
and an opportunity for them to learn or benefit from that
experience that potentially then helps the child go even
farther and achieve even more, rather than a parent who might
drop their child off at a Head Start program and then go to
work and then leave them.
Or are there other programs where it is more of a, I am
thinking of, we have nutrition programs where some of them
there have nutrition counseling that goes along with the
program. Does that one do better than ones where there is a
nutrition program where there is no counseling, it is just the
benefits and there you go?
Is there a general synopsis that you all can give me on do
you believe we do have better outcomes in situations where
there is some type of support, partnership, ability for the
family to partner together to help that child succeed rather
than just having a benefit? We will start with Ms. Deviney.
Ms. DEVINEY. Thank you for that question. I actually spent
a good portion of my early 20s working on a project called the
Families and Schools Together Project. It is in several States.
It was in Tennessee, North Carolina, and Washington. And it
looked at how kids who were at risk for later juvenile
delinquency or other kinds of negative outcomes as teens, if we
intervened early, how would they do. And in that program, we
actually made it a full family kind of wrap-around program
where we actually engaged with parents and helped them gain
skills to be able to support kids in doing homework and talking
about being on time and talking about the importance of school
and giving them parenting skills was a huge part of the
program, in addition to being able to support the kids in terms
of basic tutoring in math and reading support. They are just
now releasing 20-year results on these kids. And it has been
really exciting because what we have seen is that when you
actually support not just the child but the whole family and
you are supporting the concept of the family working together,
creating that unit in support, you actually get much better
outcomes for kids than kids who, our control group, didn't
participate. And so the kids were much more likely to delay
childbearing. They were much more likely to have higher
educational attainment. They were much more likely to have
better earnings as an adult with these 20-year results. And so
I think it points exactly to what you are saying is that when
you kind of support the whole family as a unit, you really do
get better outcomes for kids. The trick is that those kinds of
programs, they are expensive. They are expensive. And so we
have to decide as a country, you know, if we really do value
the family unit, how are we going to back that up with the
support that they need to be able to make those really strong
connections.
Mrs. NOEM. And you may need to continue that support for an
entire generation before you start to see the impact on your
culture. Anybody else want to weigh in?
Mr. HASKINS. Let me make two quick points. First of all,
there is a new review that is about to come out by one of the
best people in the field, a guy named Greg Duncan at the
University of California Irvine. And he looked carefully into
what is called a meta analysis of all the research literature
on programs that are just preschool and ones that have a
parenting component. But it is defined, it can't be just
sending a note home to the parents or have the parent meeting
once a month or something like that. It has to be an actual
program where they are working with the parents. And it does
make a difference on average. Those programs are more
successful. The second thing is that in the last 2 or 3 years,
there has been a big movement called Two Generation programs.
So in preschool, even in the public schools to some extent, in
employment and training programs, the idea is to work with the
parents and the child at the same time. And it has really
caught on. I am not really sure why because the evidence is not
great. But I think what it shows is that people believe just
what you said in your question, that if you involve the
parents, you are involving someone who is going to be with the
kid until they are 18 and maybe more than that and still
supporting them after that. If you can increase the bond
between the parents and show parents, give them ideas about how
to work with their children, that the program will be more
successful. So I think there is a lot of agreement with that.
We will see if it turns out.
Mrs. NOEM. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
panel for this conversation today. Just to try to solicit
information here and also to try to start our conversation from
a room of consensus, what are the barriers in your humble
opinion as to what keeps people in poverty and from escaping
poverty? Let's start from the left and we will go all the way
right. So what are the top three barriers?
Mr. HASKINS. They don't work enough. They don't have enough
education. And they have babies outside marriage, or divorce.
And they try to raise children in a one-parent family.
Mr. REED. Okay.
Mr. WINSHIP. If I think about little kids and kind of what
the big barriers are for them, I think to an extent we don't
appreciate the kind of upward-mobility problem in the United
States. To a large extent, it is a failure of the country to
have better outcomes for African American kids.
Mr. REED. Okay. But what are the barriers here? I am going
to run out of time.
Mr. WINSHIP. So I think the two that I would mention would
be growing up in unstable families, but also neighborhood-
concentrated poverty. I think growing up in a place where a lot
of people are poor and a lot of people have challenges.
Mr. REED. Unstable families, concentrated poverty. Mr.
Wilcox, quickly.
Mr. WILCOX. I would echo what Ron said. I would put a thumb
also on doing more for kids who are not on the college track.
Mr. REED. Okay. That is a barrier? Not doing more for
college, that is an outcome, that is an action item. So what is
the barrier of those kids not going into college?
Mr. WILCOX. The barrier is we don't do enough for kids who
are not on a college track.
Mr. REED. So an education. Education. Okay. Ms. Deviney.
Ms. DEVINEY. So when you start in poverty, you are more
likely to end up in poverty. So it is a huge barrier for kids
who actually start in poverty. Poverty itself is a barrier. And
that actually leads to you start out in the education system
with gaps. So a huge barrier is closing the gaps in terms of
language development.
Mr. REED. So education.
Ms. DEVINEY. Education. And then affordability of the
options that help you move out of poverty.
Mr. REED. So cost. Let me ask you this question, let's take
two of our largest welfare programs in America, TANF, cash
welfare, and SNAP, food stamps. How does TANF measure
addressing the education barrier? How do you measure that TANF
is overcoming the education barrier? And does it?
Mr. HASKINS. Well, you can look at the caseload over a
period of time and see if their education increases. And the
answer is it does not. And part of the reason there are----
Mr. REED. Sir, Sir, Mr. Haskins, does TANF require that the
people that are administering the program have an outcome that
the people that are participating in the program have an
education component to their welfare check?
Mr. HASKINS. No.
Mr. REED. Okay. Is that a correct understanding from
everyone? If one of the barriers is to overcome educational
barriers, why doesn't our program, cash welfare, one of our
largest welfare programs in America have as one of its major
drivers as an action item to get people an education?
Mr. HASKINS. There is a straightforward answer. We gave the
States, States can use the TANF dollars for education if they
want to. Part of the idea of the TANF program in sharp contrast
with AFDC, which it replaced, is that the States were going to
be the real actors. They knew what their people needed. And
they were going to use the resources for the most important
thing for these families. And most States have not chosen to
invest a lot of the money in education. And there are
restrictions in the Federal statute about how much education
they can get.
Mr. REED. So it is countervailing to the goal that we are
trying to get people out of poverty with and that is to get an
education. There is a Federal statute that prevents us from
achieving that goal.
Mr. HASKINS. Yes. But for good reason.
Mr. REED. And what is that reason?
Mr. HASKINS. The reason was the Congress intended for the
program to be a work program and not an education program.
Mr. REED. Okay.
Ms. DEVINEY. But what we find in Texas is that because it
is trying to get a job first, there are education and job
training programs in Texas, but the real goal of the TANF
program is to get somebody into a job. So if you can get into a
really low-paying job first, then that is the push and it is
not the push for education to be able to get to those better
jobs.
Mr. REED. Is that overcoming one of the barriers? So one of
the barriers is education.
Ms. DEVINEY. No. That is reinforcing the barrier.
Mr. REED. That is reinforcing the barrier. That is what I
would say. How about SNAP? Any requirement there that there be
an education component to it? How about LIHEAP? How about
housing, Section 8? This is one of my biggest concerns here,
and I have been a big advocate of the old super waiver, the
demonstration and the whole silo effect that we are seeing in
this field across America and a lot of these programs actually
have unintended consequences of keeping people in poverty
because they are just not designed to work hand in hand and
give people the tools to get out of poverty. Am I misreading
anything, as my experience has told me as I looked across
America, as to the problems with most of these programs?
Ms. DEVINEY. For example, with the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program or SNAP, what we see there is when you look
at a family's budget and what it takes for them to be able to
get by, what SNAP does is be able to allow families to put some
of their money toward let's say making sure they get gas in the
car and paying rent. SNAP helps to stabilize families.
Mr. REED. Aren't you just essentially giving a person a
fish and not teaching them to fish under that analysis?
Ms. DEVINEY. Well, if there were education requirements
that went with it, certainly that would be a different
conversation that we could have. But right now, it does serve a
very important point in that it helps to stabilize a family.
Now, should we also then create opportunities for those
families to be able to move ahead?
Mr. REED. See, I'm looking forward too. I'm trying to
reform the program. So going forward, wouldn't it be wiser to
put that type of reform in place, to say we are going to teach
people how to fish, not just give them a fish?
Ms. DEVINEY. So for many families who live in poverty and
particularly extreme poverty, it is not just about putting food
on the table. It is about so many barriers.
And so I think we have to take a really close look at
making sure that, what do we have to get families stabilized
first, before we can actually help them to be able to move
ahead?
Mr. REED. That is a fair point. And I understand. So
crisis, overcome the crisis----
Ms. DEVINEY. Yes.
Mr. REED [continuing]. But then for the long term, why
don't we design programs, in my humble opinion, that give the
people the tools to break through those barriers of poverty?
Ms. DEVINEY. Certainly, giving people the opportunity to be
able to access good jobs is the best pathway out of poverty,
and our programs like SNAP should be stabilizing.
Mr. REED. But in order to have those jobs they have to have
an educational component. They have to be able to pass a drug
and alcohol test, I would assume, or a drug test. There are
other barriers to getting that job that we have to overcome,
correct?
Ms. DEVINEY. Uh-huh.
Mr. REED. All right, with that, I am sorry, Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Well, I want to thank all of our witnesses for this very
compelling discussion, your wonderful testimony, in helping us
to examine the challenges facing low-income individuals and
families.
I think this has been a great foundation for us to start
with, with the Subcommittee, and so I really appreciate all you
have done to help us with these important issues.
I appreciate you taking time to come here today. Your
knowledge and experience is really important, and we are going
to fall back on your knowledge and experience as we go forward
with trying to solve some of these problems.
Let me just say that if Members have additional questions
for the witnesses, they will be submitted to you in writing,
and we would appreciate receiving your responses within a 2-
week period. Of course, all that will be made part of the
record.
And with that, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:24 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submission for the Record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
