- PROMOTING OPPORTUNITY FOR DISABILITY INSURANCE BENEFICIARIES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROMOTING OPPORTUNITY FOR DISABILITY
INSURANCE BENEFICIARIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 9, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-FC07

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-229                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
DEVIN NUNES, California              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  XAVIER BECERRA, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

Joyce Myer, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of July 9, 2015 announcing the hearing..................     2

WITNESSES

Jill Houghton, Executive Director, U.S. Business Leadership
Network........................................................    29
John Kregel, Ed.D., Professor, Special Education and Disability
Policy, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia...    39
James Smith, Budget and Policy Manager, Division of Vocational
Rehabilitation, Vermont Agency of Human Services, Burlington,
Vermont........................................................    17
Paul N. Van de Water, Ph.D., Senior Fellow and Director of Policy
Futures, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities................    53
Mike Zelley, President, The Disability Network, Flint, Michigan..     6

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOR THE RECORD

James Smith......................................................   100
John Kregel......................................................   105

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, CCD...................   112
Employment Network Advocacy Coalition, ENAC......................   122
WorkFirst........................................................   129
National Council on Independent Living, NCIL.....................   136
National Employment Network Association, NENA....................   140

PROMOTING OPPORTUNITY FOR DISABILITY
INSURANCE BENEFICIARIES

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 9, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in
Room 1100 Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Paul
Ryan [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. The Committee will come to order. I think we
have most of our members present.
This is our first, full-committee hearing on Social
Security since 2008. Our goal here is to get ahead of the
curve. As we all know, the Disability Insurance Trust Fund runs
out of money next year. And that means, if we do nothing, under
current law everybody on the program will see a 20 percent
benefit cut.
Now, Subcommittee Chair Sam Johnson, along with the ranking
member, Mr. Becerra, have been working on solutions all year
long. And a few months back, Mr. Johnson laid out four
principles for reforming DI, all of which I fully endorse.
First, no 20 percent cut. Stop that from happening. Not
going to happen. Second, make sure all the benefits are paid on
time. Third, make the program work better. Fourth, help people
who can and want to work get back to work. This is the last
point, the last point here I want to dwell on, because Chairman
Johnson and his team have been looking at how to strengthen the
DI program. And what they have found is the rules actually make
it harder for people to work more.
Here is the crux of it. If you make just one dollar more
than you are allowed, you get kicked off the program. In other
words, it is a lot safer to stay on the sidelines. It is no
surprise, then, that only one half of one percent earn enough
to get off the program. The program is way too complex. If you
want to work--and 40 percent of recipients do--there are all
sorts of rules and regulations you have to follow.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. To give you an idea, here is a chart on work
incentives from the Social Security Administration. If looking
at this makes your head hurt, then you are not the only one.
We need to reboot our thinking here. Later this month we
will celebrate the 25th anniversary of passing the Americans
with Disabilities Act. And I agree that a disability should in
no way diminish a person's right to fully participate in all
aspects of our society. And that should be the spirit of DI. It
will be there for you if you can't work. But if you want to
work, we don't want to get in the way.
We should recognize everybody has something to offer.
Everybody can contribute. And we should encourage that. So I
want to make clear to members on both sides of the dais that we
are not here to cut DI. We are here to strengthen Disability
Insurance. That is our mission.
I also want to thank our witnesses for joining us here
today. Every one of you here brings a unique perspective on
Disability Insurance. And we are very interested in hearing
your perspective. So I want to thank you again for taking the
time to share your expertise.
And I just want to say to our friends on the other side of
the aisle we want your ideas, as well. We want to work
together. We want to come up with a bipartisan solution. So
let's get to it.
And, with that, I want to recognize the ranking member for
any opening statement that he would like to make.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much. Today's hearing is on work
incentives for Americans who qualify for Social Security
because of a severe disability, illness, or injury. Nine
million Americans and two million of their spouses and children
currently receive Social Security Disability Insurance.
All Americans pay into SSDI--I want to emphasize that--so
that one accident or one diagnosis doesn't mean a lifetime of
poverty. In order to qualify for SSDI, disabled workers have to
prove that their condition is so severe that it prevents them
from working at a self-supporting level, and will last for more
than a year. They must also provide evidence to the Social
Security Administration that they have worked long enough to
qualify for their benefits.
On average, SSDI recipients worked hard, and paid into the
program for 22 years--for 22 years--before receiving benefits.
Despite the severity of their impairments, some of these
Americans with disabilities continue to make efforts to work,
and we should continue to support their efforts, while not
harming those who cannot.
Congress has created special benefit rules in Social
Security called work incentives. These rules are designed to
encourage work by giving individuals time to test whether they
can work at a self-supporting level before their benefits end.
Before Congress enacted these work incentive rules, many
disabled Americans were afraid to even try to return to work,
fearing they could lose their Social Security just for trying.
In addition to these work incentives, Congress has also
created a wide range of other programs designed to assist
disabled Americans to work. The Ticket To Work program, enacted
on a bipartisan basis in 1999, provides services to help Social
Security beneficiaries understand the impact of work on their
benefits, and get the employment support they need to be
successful.
The federal-state vocational rehabilitation program, which
is not in our Committee's jurisdiction, helps people retrain
for new work if they cannot do their old job. I hope there will
now be displayed a chart. Let's see if modern technology works.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LEVIN. It does. As you can see, this is a chart on the
return-to-work experience. Even with the support of services,
vocational retraining, and special benefit rules, only about 15
percent of beneficiaries have any earnings within 5 years of
qualifying for Social Security. Many attempt to work, but are
not able to sustain a job because of their impairment. Of those
who do, most are only able to work part-time, or for very low
pay, earning less than $750 a month. Under current law, those
individuals are able to keep all of their earnings to help
support themselves. As seen in this chart, a very small
fraction--about four percent--mostly younger workers, are able
to earn enough to work their way off of Social Security.
So--and I emphasize this--as our Committee reviews the
Social Security Disability Insurance program, and considers
improvements, it is important that we know the full facts, and
not rely on anecdotes. I would like to repeat that. It is
important that we know the full facts, and not rely on
anecdotes. We should do so with an understanding that all of us
support combating fraud.
Indeed, Mr. Becerra and Mr. Johnson have similar proposals,
although a key difference is whether we provide the resources
needed to make the proposals work. And we should do so,
understanding the power of work. People want to work, both
because of the earnings and the dignity that comes with having
a job.
So I just want to emphasize, as we proceed, we need to
understand the facts, and understand who are the people, the
vast majority of people, who are now on Social Security
disability, and who have gone back to work. And, because of
their disability, for how long they can work.
Social Security Disability Insurance plays a vital role in
the lives of millions. I hope we can work together to make sure
that it continues to be there for all Americans. I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. I would like to invite the
witnesses to paraphrase your remarks to conform with the five
minutes. Your full written statement will be included as a part
of the record.
And, Mr. Zelley, why don't we start with you?

STATEMENT OF MIKE ZELLEY, PRESIDENT, THE DISABILITY NETWORK,
FLINT, MICHIGAN

Mr. ZELLEY. Good morning, Chairman Ryan, and Ranking Member
Levin from Michigan, as I am, and members of the Ways and Means
Committee. I am honored to speak to you today regarding
barriers to work actually caused by our Social Security
Disability Insurance system, which I will call DI.
I am the president of the Disability Network, a company
that provides services and supports to thousands of people in
Flint and Genesee County. I am also a paraplegic, use a
wheelchair, who has benefitted from and been frustrated with
disability insurance policies. My experience with DI began 36
years ago, following an auto accident that took me out of the
work force for several months, as I went through surgery and
rehab at Craig Hospital in Denver. I was the senior vice
president of a bank holding company at the time. And while at
Craig I was encouraged to apply for DI benefits because I had a
significant disability that could affect my ability to work.
And, after all, like you, I paid for disability insurance
coverage.
So, even though I wanted to return to work, my company--and
my company wanted me back, nothing was certain. So I was
awarded DI, and received the benefit of about $800 a month,
which is not a meaningful wage, with a family. I had seven
children at the time.
So, after months of rehab, I gradually returned to full-
time work. And when I informed Social Security that I was going
back to work, they told me that I was beginning a trial work
period, and, if successful, my DI benefits would stop. That
didn't make much sense to me. The remarkable paradox was that
Social Security strongly encouraged me to return to work right
after I told them that I was injured seriously enough to affect
my ability to return to work. It just didn't make sense.
So, eventually, the DI check stopped coming, including an
overpayment, which I paid back, and that is a whole other
story. My career continued until I founded the Disability
Network organization, where we believe the best way to lift
people out of poverty and not be poor is gainful employment.
People with disabilities need supports from organizations and
companies like us, and DI policies that encourage employment
and have an expectation of work.
Why would we require people to pay for federal disability
insurance to help them in the event of a disabling condition
that affects their ability to work, and then penalize them if
they do work and make a meaningful wage? When people with
disabilities access the very benefit we require them to pay, we
immediately take it away when they earn more than a so-called
substantial gainful activity, SGA, about $1,000 a month, which
is not substantial. Most people would call this a cliff, a
poverty wage activity, rather than a substantial gainful
activity, because it does not allow for a meaningful income.
This is especially true when the cash benefit is commonly
used for products and services related to our disability, like
aids to daily living, or transportation, or personal assistant
care. So I strongly encourage you to consider a proposal to
ramp off the current wage cliff associated with SGA that
prevents people from the American Dream of independence and
freedom. Our policies discourage work, force people into
spectator stands, watching the world go by, and we know life is
not a spectator sport.
We need people in the game, in the economy, working. All of
our people. And, unfortunately, because of these DI policies,
they are not even on our talent bench. A recent study--ACS from
Cornell--showed that there are half-a-million working-age
people with disabilities in Michigan who are not working. And
yet 43 percent of them have a college education or degree. What
is wrong with this picture?
Leaders from across the nation you will hear today--like
Randy Lewis from Walgreens; Rick Keyes from Meijer in Michigan;
Jeannie Stone from Trijicon--are publicly stating that they
want to hire not only people with disabilities, 20 percent.
They have a quota of doing that. They see the talent,
dependability, motivation, and proved workforce that occurs
when people with disabilities are back in the workforce.
It is hard to imagine a cost-neutral, simple way to change
DI policies, and yet, at the same time, it is common sense that
working people with DI will pay back a portion on that two-to-
one sliding scale, pay back the actual benefit they are
receiving. So you have the opportunity to make a difference, to
replace a fear-driven poverty-entrapping system with a simple
ramp-off change. Don't let our intended safety net system
continue to actually trap people in a poverty net, like a
spider web, rather than help them bounce back to work, like a
trampoline.
So, thank you for this opportunity to appear before you
today, and I look forward to any questions you may have.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you. Thank you very much. Very well
said. I appreciate your comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zelley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. Mr. Smith.

STATEMENT OF JAMES SMITH, BUDGET AND POLICY MANAGER, DIVISION
OF VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION, VERMONT AGENCY OF HUMAN SERVICES,
BURLINGTON, VERMONT

Mr. SMITH. Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member Levin, and Members
of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to talk to you
about a major work disincentive built into the Social Security
Disability Insurance, or SSDI, program. My name is James Smith,
and I work for the Vermont Division of Vocational
Rehabilitation.
Over the years, my staff and I have talked with thousands
of SSDI beneficiaries about returning to work. Based on our
experience, the SSDI program rules do not make work pay. In
fact, they do the opposite. They discourage work and encourage
dependence. In particular, I am referring to the so-called SSDI
cash cliff. The cash cliff works as follows. After a nine-month
trial work period and a three-month grace period, if a
beneficiary earns a single dollar over the so-called
substantial gainful activity, or SGA level, $1,090 per month,
that single dollar results in a complete loss of the SSDI cash
benefit. It also could result in loss of eligibility for the
program all together.
In my written testimony I share Susan's story. Despite her
severe mental illness and repeated hospitalizations, Susan
worked with VR to try to go to work. At first she was careful
to keep her earnings below the cash cliff level, because she
received a benefit for herself and her dependent child. In 2014
she was offered a supervisory role that would have put her
earnings over the SGA cash cliff. She was thrilled to be
recognized for her good work. However, she understood that
taking the promotion would result in a net loss in her total
income that she simply could not afford. She did not take the
promotion, and is currently keeping her earnings below the cash
cliff. She is only in her forties, and I suspect she will never
leave the SSDI roles.
The obvious alternative to the SSDI cash cliff is a gradual
one-dollar-for-two-dollar earnings offset, just like the SSI
program. A one-for-two offset would gradually reduce the SSDI
benefit, as the beneficiary increases earnings. So the
beneficiary is always better off, the more they work.
There is research to support this approach. Data from a
four-state pilot study, including Connecticut, Wisconsin, Utah,
and my state, Vermont, provides clear evidence that an earnings
offset for SSDI would result in increased earnings above SGA.
Overall, the studies showed an offset led to a 25 percent
increase in the number of beneficiaries working above the SGA,
or cash cliff, amount.
In my written testimony I share Donna's story to show what
the offset meant to one beneficiary. Donna was diagnosed with
stage three melanoma. Because of the severity of her illness,
she was not expected to survive. Donna made multiple attempts
to return to work through four separate reoccurrences of her
illness. In 2013 she was able to access a one-for-two offset
through the benefit offset national demonstration. The offset
allowed Donna to work at a level that her health allowed, and
keep a portion of her benefits. It also gave her extra income
to help her children through college. Donna was recently
offered a job with the Veterans Administration at a level that
will help--that will zero out her SSDI benefit.
So, how do we improve the SSDI work incentives for people
like Donna and Susan, and be cost effective to the trust fund?
First, implement a graduated one-dollar-for-two-dollar
earnings offset to always make work pay.
Second, start the offset at a threshold of less than the
substantial gainful activity, or cash cliff level, to generate
savings to the program. Right now, Social Security pays 100
percent of a beneficiary's benefit, unless the beneficiary
earns above the SGA threshold. Therefore, most work activity
does not result in any savings for the program. Starting an
offset at less than SGA would be more likely to generate
savings to the program, just like the SSI program.
Third, eliminate the trial work period. Right now, Social
Security pays 100 percent of the benefit during the nine-month
trial work period, regardless of how much a beneficiary is
earning. With an offset, savings could be generated from the
first month the beneficiary goes to work, just like the SSI
program.
Finally, allow beneficiaries' continued attachment to the
SSDI program, regardless of how much they work, as long as they
continue to be medically eligible. Disability can be unstable
and unpredictable. Beneficiaries like Donna and Susan may have
periods of time when they can work full time, and other periods
of time when they may not be able to work at all. Continued
attachment will give beneficiaries the security they need to
try work without the fear of being completely cut off.
So, in summary, the current SSDI work rules provide a
powerful disincentive to work. In contrast, our proposed
changes would support return to work by always making work pay,
potentially save money by eliminating the trial work periods,
and starting the offset in SGA, and provide security to
beneficiaries who want to try to increase their work activity.
Such an approach would provide people like Donna and Susan a
change for a better life, despite the challenges of living with
a severe disability.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you
today.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. Ms. Houghton. Did I pronounce it correctly?
Ms. HOUGHTON. You did.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF JILL HOUGHTON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, U.S. BUSINESS
LEADERSHIP NETWORK

Ms. HOUGHTON. Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of this Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
provide testimony today. My name is Jill Houghton. I lead an
organization called the U.S. Business Leadership Network. We
are a national, non-partisan, business-to-business network
focused on the premise that business responds to their peers,
and can teach each other how to include people with
disabilities across the business.
We have more than 50 BLN affiliates across the nation. We
represent more than 5,000 businesses. And I am here to tell you
that countless companies across this nation are recognizing
that there is a value to include people with disabilities, to--
in jobs, earn the same pay, work side by side, and be held to
the same standards.
My testimony is grounded in my professional experience
working with these businesses who represent the demand side of
the employment equation, as well as my personal experience. I
am married to a gentleman with a spinal cord injury who is one
of the people who worked his way off of the Social Security
Disability Insurance program.
In preparation for our--for my testimony, we reached out to
our members. And here is what they had to say. One of the
greatest challenges that they face is finding the qualified
candidates with disabilities that can do the job with or
without a combination. That is a really complicated matter.
But if we dig through it, there are a couple things that
come to mind. One, it is very hard for business to navigate
government and all of the sea of non-profit organizations out
there. But, secondly, it is also hard for them to understand
that the Social Security Disability Insurance program
eligibility requirements do not appear to be supportive of the
individuals that want to remain employed or increase their
hours worked.
Now, while the SSDI program provides a very vital,
important safety net to those with disabilities that meet the
eligibility requirements, the complexity of the rules appear to
cause some individuals who want to remain employed to reduce or
limit their hours worked, to limit their earnings, and to, in
some instances, quit their jobs. In fact, we hear regularly
from mid-level managers that are really perplexed. They don't
know how to help their employees.
Now, while our members are not experts on the SSDI program,
they would be the first to admit that there are significant
obstacles that these beneficiaries face related to losing
program eligibility, loss of health care benefits, and fear of
overpayments. These type of challenges inhibit businesses'
ability to recruit and hire people with disabilities. And this
is a really large, growing problem, because many of these
companies are federal contractors, and they are subject to the
new Section 503 regulations that were issued by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance
Programs.
Now, this new regulation basically encourages federal
contractors to set a utilization goal, to set a goal that seven
percent of their workforce across job groups be people with
disabilities. And they have to hold themselves accountable. And
if they don't meet this goal, then they have to show that they
are going to fix this goal. And while this isn't a bad thing--
it is not a bad thing--and countless companies are trying to do
better, we need Congress to make the SSDI program work better
for the beneficiaries, and to promote opportunity for those who
want to work. This, in turn, is going to help our members to
hire people with disabilities.
From an opportunity perspective, I would just like to call
your attention to the fact that we created a Disability
Equality Index, in partnership with the American Association of
People with Disabilities. This is a benchmarking tool. It is an
aspirational recognition tool that we are using to help
corporate America advance their disability inclusion.
We launched the first annual DEI, and 80 Fortune 1000
companies participated. Nineteen of those companies that
participated received 100. Now, 100 doesn't connotate
perfection, but what it does demonstrate is that these
companies are committed, and they want to do better. When a
company puts their commitment out there, that speaks loud and
clear to people with disabilities, that these are companies
that want to recruit, want to hire, want to retain, want to
advance employees with disabilities.
We are getting ready to celebrate the 25th anniversary of
the Americans With Disabilities Act. And my organization has
launched a disability rights mobile museum that is traveling
the nation. In fact, we were at the Pittsburgh Pirates field
yesterday. We are going to be at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
on Friday, July 31st. We did this because business wants to
work together. We want to raise awareness, and leverage the
untapped potential of Americans with disabilities.
We applaud your leadership, and we will look forward to
working together.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Houghton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. And Mr. Kregel.

STATEMENT OF JOHN KREGEL, ED.D., PROFESSOR, SPECIAL EDUCATION
AND DISABILITY POLICY, VIRGINIA COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY,
RICHMOND, VIRGINIA

Mr. KREGEL. Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of the Committee, my name is John Kregel, and I am
principal investigator of the Work Incentive Planning and
Assistance National Training Center at Virginia Commonwealth
University. Thank you for this opportunity to discuss ways in
which the Social Security disability benefits program can work
better to assist DI beneficiaries to obtain and maintain
employment, improve their financial independence, and decrease
their reliance on federal benefits.
My testimony will address four major points. First, SSDI
beneficiaries make employment decisions based on their personal
financial situation, health, and other personal factors.
Seventy percent of the beneficiaries are over the age of 50.
Many report their health to be poor or very poor. An estimated
28 percent live in poverty. Most have not worked for a long
time. Yet many SSDI beneficiaries have long-term employment
goals, and have recently taken the steps to reach those goals.
Based on analyses of the National Beneficiaries Survey that
identified work-oriented individuals, it is estimated that 1.5
million DI beneficiaries have work goals or aspirations, and an
additional 1.4 million beneficiaries have the same ambitions,
and have taken steps toward achieving their goals in the past
12 months. We should focus our efforts on helping these
beneficiaries overcome the obstacles that currently make it
difficult for them to pursue their employment goals.
Second, we must keep in mind that virtually all DI
beneficiaries are dealing with a major disruption in their
lives, such as severe injury, debilitating illness, or
progressive condition. They face many challenges when
attempting to return to work, and need time to adjust to a new
career. Extensive research over the past two decades has
documented that beneficiaries repeatedly identify very specific
barriers to employment that restrict their ability to pursue
their vocational goals.
Foremost among these barriers are fear of losing benefits,
fear of overpayments, and lack of confidence in SSA's ability
to accurately administer their DI payments. As a result, DI
beneficiaries who are capable and desire employment are, far
too often, choosing not to work, restricting their earnings so
as not to jeopardize their entire DI payment, or leaving
employment in the face of disruptive overpayments or benefit
termination, all related to the all-or-nothing rules of the DI
program.
Third, working DI beneficiaries must comply with rules that
are complex, difficult to understand, time-consuming, and, too
often, result in unnecessary overpayments and unexpected
benefit suspension. In my written testimony I included the
chart referred to by Congressman Ryan in his opening remarks.
The chart provides a very complete, accurate description of the
DI return-to-work path. It is important to note that each of
the steps requires significant processing by SSA, and may
result in sometimes lengthy delays, and require time-consuming
actions on the part of the beneficiary.
For example, beneficiaries are required to continuously
report earnings, including actually mailing paper copies of pay
stubs, and submitting other records manually to SSA. Also, SSA
processing of substantial gainful activity determination or
work incentives, may sometimes take several months leaving
beneficiaries uncertain as to their future income or potential
overpayment. The current DI return-to-work process is not
sufficiently automated, and often results in confusion and
uncertainty on the part of the beneficiary.
Fourth, future improvements to the DI program rules should
eliminate the all-or-nothing aspect of a beneficiary's decision
to return to work. Under current program rules, each
beneficiary must decide if the personal or financial benefits
of working will outweigh the potential risk of abrupt benefit
suspension. Extensive research has been done to understand how
individuals make financial decisions by examining the risks and
rewards of their potential actions.
We know that individuals who are not in good health, who
are not employed, or who have fewer resources may be more risk-
averse than other individuals when making employment decisions.
Research also shows that a person is more likely to choose what
is certain or established over what is possible, even if the
possible event would be a much better circumstance.
Unfortunately, the perceived high-risk nature of their
employment decision too often leaves beneficiaries
unnecessarily restricting their earnings below the SGA level,
referred to as ``parking under the cash cliff.''
SSDI beneficiaries would benefit from a change in the DI
program rules that would provide a gradual reduction in benefit
payments as the individual advances in their career and avoids
the abrupt total loss of payments after completion of the trial
work period. This change would allow beneficiaries to pursue
their employment goals, while moderating the high-risk choices
that are inherent in the current program rules. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kregel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. Mr. Van de Water.

STATEMENT OF PAUL N. VAN DE WATER, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW AND
DIRECTOR OF POLICY FUTURES, CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY
PRIORITIES

Mr. VAN DE WATER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Congressman
Levin, and Members of the Committee. I appreciate the
invitation to appear before you this morning.
Promoting opportunity for Social Security Disability
Insurance beneficiaries, especially those trying to return to
work, is an appropriately lofty goal. Policy-makers should
continually seek new and better ways of helping people with
serious impairments return to the workforce. But expectations
should be realistic, and grounded in experience.
Disability Insurance already provides many inducements for
beneficiaries to work. Most important, beneficiaries can earn
up to $1,090 a month, called substantial gainful activity, or
SGA, indefinitely, and still collect benefits. For an average
beneficiary, this would nearly double his or her income.
Beneficiaries are also eligible for employment services and
supports to help them return to work.
DI's eligibility criteria are very stringent, however, and
research consistently finds that most beneficiaries have
limited work capacity. Only a minority ever work again, and
just four percent are able to earn enough to work their way off
the DI rolls.
Social Security has undertaken many demonstration projects
over the years to test new ways to encourage beneficiaries to
return to work. But they have consistently shown limited
results, or proved not to be cost-effective. Further efforts to
promote work are, therefore, likely to have only a small
payoff. In fact, some options could increase DI costs, harm
vulnerable beneficiaries, increase payment errors, or even
discourage work, rather than encourage it.
One approach would eliminate DI's cash cliff, which several
of the other witnesses have discussed this morning. Instead,
this proposal would reduce benefits gradually by $1 for each
$2, once earnings exceed a certain level. Applying this benefit
offset, starting at the $1,090 SGA level, would indeed create
an incentive for beneficiaries to earn more than that amount,
but would also raise program costs.
Starting the offset at a lower earnings level would reduce
costs, but it would also create a work disincentive for
beneficiaries with monthly earnings between the proposed
threshold and $1,090. These beneficiaries would face an extra
50 percent tax rate on their earnings in that range, thereby
reducing their income and making work less attractive.
For example, consider a typical DI beneficiary with a
benefit of $1,200 a month. If he earns $800, his total monthly
income would be $2,000, under the current rules. But if
Congress passed a benefit offset that started at $300 in
earnings, his benefit would drop by $250, 50 percent of his
earnings above the threshold amount, and he would lose one-
eighth of his income.
As a result, it is uncertain whether proposals such as a
benefit offset would increase or decrease work overall. In
addition, a benefit offset with a threshold below the current
SGA level would shift income from poorer, sicker beneficiaries
to those with higher earnings. In view of these concerns, any
benefit offset proposal should be thoroughly tested and
evaluated before it is implemented.
It is worth testing some promising changes to DI through
carefully structured demonstration projects, but those
demonstrations won't yield quick answers. Congress should also
consider other ways of rewarding work for people with
impairments. Extending provisions of the Earned Income Tax
Credit and Child Tax Credit that are now slated to expire after
2017, and improving the EITC for childless workers, a proposal
that is backed by both Chairman Ryan and President Obama, would
boost the rewards for work for many low-wage workers with
disabilities.
First and foremost, however, Congress should take steps to
assure sufficient financing for Disability Insurance, and
thereby avert a 20 percent cut in benefits. The Congress should
not expect to find a magic bullet that will simultaneously trim
costs, make beneficiaries better off, and avert the need to
replenish the DI trust fund in 2016 and beyond. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Van de Water follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman RYAN. Thank you. I would like to ask each of you a
lot of questions, but I want to be mindful of everybody's time
here.
First, like the retirement trust fund, once the disability
trust fund is exhausted, then the across-the-board cut comes.
That comes, in this case, next year. And so, we have to prevent
that from happening, and that is our goal, to prevent that from
happening. That is point number one.
Point number two, there is a lot of experience right here
that we want to gain some insight from.
So, Mr. Zelley, let me ask you. You went into this in your
testimony, but go a little deeper, if you could, about the
cliff. How, in your view, from just seeing it in people's
lives, does the cliff affect a person's ability and willingness
to work? What fear is associated with this? Do people plan and
organize their lives around this cliff? Give me a sense of what
this is like, what people are experiencing right now.
Mr. ZELLEY. Well, I agree that the testimony--we heard
about people want certainty in their lives. And the system we
have is so complex, it gets in the way.
The fear comes in two ways. Fear comes from people with
disabilities, having gone through a traumatic experience, and
also fear on business's side, in terms of ``I am going to say
the wrong thing,'' or, ``My health care costs are going to go
up,'' ``I will never be able to fire them because of this ADA
thing,'' all of which are not true. You will hear businesses
testify just the opposite of that.
The fear comes as I am certain that I am going to get
$1,000 a month, and if I get one dollar more, I will lose
everything. I faced that, but the reason it wasn't a problem
for me at the time is that I had a company who wanted to hire
me back. I was fortunate that I wasn't a plumber, electrician.
I had a skill that was valued, and I could return to that job,
and the company wanted me back. So I was able to return, hit
the floor running. And then the $800 a month went away. It
would have been nice, because that helped with my disability-
related expenses.
But again, Mr. Chairman, you are asking about the fear, and
the fear is the cliff, more than anything. It is not a fear of
going back to work. We all want the dignity of work. We all
want the value of how--what is the second question people----
Chairman RYAN. Well, we see the statistics. We see the
economics. We see the tax rates, and things like this. But we
want to get a sense of what a person is experiencing as they
try to get themselves back to where they were in life, or where
they want to get to. And that is--the cliff fear is what I am
trying to get a sense of, and I think that is pretty helpful.
Let me--since you talked about the complexity of it, let me
just go to one person over. Mr. Smith, you ran the
demonstration project in Vermont.
Mr. SMITH. Yes.
Chairman RYAN. And the results, from what your testimony
says, a 25 percent increase in the number of beneficiaries who
worked above the SGA amount, correct?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, that was for all four states.
Chairman RYAN. That is right, for all four states,
including Wisconsin.
Walk me through your belief, your impression, on whether we
can scale this up, nationwide. Do you think Social Security can
administer a benefit offset approach? That is question number
one, meaning can we scale this up. Because the purpose of a
demonstration project is to see if an idea works. And then, if
it does, scale it up for the rest of the country. That is the
whole purpose of it. So, can we do that?
Number two, your recommendation. And some others have been
recommending this. Why do you recommend starting a benefit
offset at an amount lower than was tested at the four-state
pilot? Other groups also recommend starting the benefit offset
below the SGA level. Tell us why you proposed doing it that
way.
So, can we scale it up? And give us the rationale for your
recommendation.
Mr. SMITH. Sure. Yes. I believe that the Social Security
Administration can certainly implement benefit offset. They
already do so for the----
Chairman RYAN. SSI, right.
Mr. SMITH [continuing]. Program. And if you get rid of some
of the--if you get rid of the complexity of the trial work
period, the extended period of eligibility that is built into
the SSDI program, and have a simple offset, it would be simpler
to administer for Social Security. And Social Security has made
that proposal under what they call the Work Incentives
Simplification Project. So, yes, I believe Social Security
could administer an offset.
The second question. The reason why I and others have
proposed an offset starting at less than SGA is that we
recognize that if the offset started at SGA, that it would
indeed increase cost to the program. And so, it's, in a sense,
a real balance, from my perspective, in that we see from our
experience, we see the cash cliff, and the fear of going off
the program completely, and going into an overpayment as a far
more powerful disincentive to work than a more graduated
approach, a more predictable approach that folks can rely on.
That is why--in addition to that, that is why I think
continued attachment to the program, based--allowing folks to--
continued attachment to the program, no matter how much they
work, would be a key balance to that.
Chairman RYAN. Meaning if you have a good month and a bad
month, you can go back----
Mr. SMITH. Right. And so, my staff, who work with thousands
of beneficiaries, could say to someone, ``Look, no matter what
happens, the more you work, the better off you are going to
be,'' and that would be wonderful.
Chairman RYAN. Yes, that makes perfect sense, because, I
mean, we have two issues here. We have got a fiscal problem, we
have got bankruptcy coming, you know, insolvency, and we have
got a messed up work disincentive. And so we have got to try
and find a way of harmonizing those two objectives and fixing
both those problems.
I could go on and on. I don't want to, because I want to
recognize we have a lot of Members who want to ask questions.
So I would like to recognize Mr. Levin.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you. As you said, Mr. Chairman, there is
agreement. We have to avoid the 20 percent cut. Also, we want
to reduce complexity.
But I want to get, if I might, to the nub of this. All of
us want very much that those who are disabled and who are able
to work, and want to, should be able to do so. There is much
talk about the cliff. But the challenge is this. If you adopt a
position of revenue neutrality, the danger is you are going to
end the cliff by deepening the hole for those who are making
much less as they work.
So, Mr. Van de Water, your testimony talks to us about
this. So, talk to us about how much most of the people who are
disabled who are now working, how much they earn, and what the
consequences might be if you set a level in terms of this new
proposal. What happens to many people, disabled, who have
returned to work?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Mr. Levin, the data that we have indicate
quite clearly that, of the beneficiaries who work, most of them
are earning amounts that are substantially below the so-called
substantial gainful activity level that I and the other
witnesses have been talking about. That is, there are very few
beneficiaries who are earning near this $1,090-a-month cutoff.
Now, the implication of that is that, the lower the
threshold at which you start the benefit offset, the more
people would be potentially disadvantaged. I have seen
estimates that suggest, for example, if we wanted to have a
benefit offset that was truly cost neutral, it would have to
start at around $300 a month. So that would mean that for
someone who was earning $500 a month, which would be more
typical than someone earning, say, $1,000, that person would
face losing part of his benefit. So, in that case, instituting
a benefit offset would actually be a work disincentive for that
person, rather than an incentive.
So, in order to figure out whether the program, as a whole,
and the proposal as a whole, was a work incentive, you would be
balancing the benefits for some and the disadvantages for
others.
Mr. LEVIN. Let me ask. Who disagrees with that? Indeed, I
think it is very clear, Mr. Smith, that CBO estimates that
changing it the way it was done in the states that you discuss
would increase the overall cost for SSDI.
I mean we face a real challenge here, and a real dilemma.
You go to an offset, and you are focusing on those who are
making more than $1,090, and you are going to essentially, if
you have revenue neutrality, reduce the amount that is being
received by those who are disabled, which--they are earning
$300, $400. They are not rich. And you end the cliff for those
who are making more than $1,090 if you have a 1-2 proposal.
So, everybody who is proposing that has to face up to this
issue, and that is why the Chairman and I and Mr. Becerra and
our good friend from Texas have said we need to look at the
facts. Those who are disabled who are able to return to work
should have an incentive to do that, not a disincentive, and to
also make sure that the system gives them a decent standard of
living.
So, anybody who says, ``Let's have an offset, it has to be
absolutely revenue neutral,'' is essentially, I think, having
to deal with consequences for the individual lives of, I think
numerically--we don't know exactly how many. The vast majority
of people who are returning to work are earning much less than
$1,090.
I mean, Mr. Smith, that is true, isn't it?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, that is true. Based on our experience in my
state, we serve currently about 10 percent of the SSDI
beneficiaries in the state. And my staff, we looked at it
yesterday, over the last decade, have spoken to about 10,000
beneficiaries, about half of whom were SSDI beneficiaries.
And what we see clearly is that people are--if you look at
this like an economist, and you are assuming that people are
doing the math, and they understand the--exactly, you know,
where the cliff is, the reality is--what we see is that folks
are fearful. And so they actually suppress their earnings well
below the SGA level, because they have heard a story from a
friend or a neighbor who was suddenly cut off the program, and
suddenly got a letter saying they had a $10,000 overpayment
because of the all-or-nothing nature of the DI program.
And that is the other issue, I think, that is critical to
understand is that the all-or-nothing nature of the SSDI
program creates large overpayments, because if you get it
wrong--and it is very easy to get it wrong--it takes months for
my staff to learn the SSDI----
Mr. LEVIN. So I think we need a system so that overpayments
are corrected more quickly. And many of us have been asking for
more funding to carry out the program. And often, for years,
that has been resisted. And there is under-funding, I think, of
the personnel of the department. We have to adjust that. But we
need to look at this not only as economists, but as the people
who are disabled.
Mr. SMITH. Yes.
Mr. LEVIN. In most cases severely disabled. And where there
is a desire to return to work, make sure that, as we worry
about those who would be affected by the cliff, look at those
who are not earning anywhere near where they would reach the
cliff.
And so, you have to make sure, when you are talking about
offsetting, that you are not essentially setting off some
consequences for a lot of people who have returned to work who
can't make anything close to $1,000, and who, under a proposal,
would have their monthly benefit reduced.
I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. I think this is a great conversation, and we
want to continue. I want to turn to Mr. Johnson.
But I think that what we are trying to get at here is the
existence of the cliff, what does it do to the psychology of
the person? And it is not something that we can look
antiseptically as a statistical problem, like an economist. But
what does it do to the nature of a person and their decision-
making? And that is what we are trying to get a hand on here.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding a hearing on promoting opportunity for those with
disabilities. Mr. Chairman, I would say that we have a moral
responsibility to help those with disabilities who can get back
to work. And according to a recent survey, 40 percent of the
beneficiaries said they were interested in working. Yet in 2013
only one-half of one percent left the rolls. Bottom line, we
can and must do better.
Ms. Houghton, welcome. Good to see you again. As you may
know, a few years ago I had the pleasure of touring the
Walgreens Distribution Center in Waxahachie, near my district.
And there, with the help of the Texas Department of Assistive
and Rehabilitation Services, those with disabilities, including
former disability beneficiaries, worked side by side with other
workers, doing the same job for the same pay with the same
performance. What I saw there was impressive, and spoke to the
fact that a business can know the value of individuals with
disabilities, and wants to make these folks be part of the
team.
Ms. Houghton, let me ask you, does your organization help
companies who want to employ individuals with disabilities?
Ms. HOUGHTON. Nice to see you, Congressman. And,
absolutely, the answer is yes. We are at a tipping point.
Business is--countless companies, large, medium, small, in all
different sectors, are joining our organization. And the way
that we help business is twofold. Most importantly, we connect
them with each other. There is a lot that they can learn from
Walgreens, from Procter and Gamble, from Microsoft, from IBM.
They can teach each other best practices. And we become a
bridge to the myriad of resources that are out there through
strategic alliances that we have with different non-profits.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, I appreciate you seeking help from the
business community overall. Is Walgreens a rare exception, or
is someone else in the area doing the same thing?
Ms. HOUGHTON. They used to be a rare exception, but not any
more. There are numerous--I repeat, numerous--companies that
see value, that see that disability is helping them drive their
financial performance, and innovate and develop new products
and services.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. Dr. Kregel, while we talk a lot
today about how to help disability beneficiaries return to
work, I am also concerned about those individuals that apply
for benefits, are denied, and then try to return to work. At a
local hearing office, it takes 435 days, on the average, for
someone to receive a decision by a judge. That is well over a
year, waiting on a decision, and valuable time spent out of the
workforce.
As you may know, I have got a bill to require Social
Security to provide denied applicants with information on
organizations that do provide employment support. What are your
thoughts on that?
Mr. KREGEL. We think that that would be a very helpful
benefit to people who apply but do not get awarded benefits.
Remember, well over half of the individuals who apply for
Social Security do not get accepted at the disability
determination level. The longer that they are out of engagement
with the workforce, the longer they go unemployed, the more
challenging it will be for them to return to work.
So, as soon as they can receive help, that will give them
the assistance that they really need in order to do this. So we
would be very supportive of sending information to employment
service providers and other organizations who could help those
folks.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes, it--unfortunately, it seems to me that it
is just too complicated for folks right now to do something
about it. Some are able to work with benefit counselors, but
what about those who aren't working with a benefit counselor?
Would a website, as outlined in my Promoting Opportunity
Through Informed Choice bill help at all?
Mr. KREGEL. Yes, I think that all additional information,
accurate, complete information that can be provided to
beneficiaries, help them make the choices that they need to
make. A lot of them, when they first are awarded benefits, they
get a brochure about what will happen if you return to work,
but they may go a lengthy period of time, they may be still
dealing with their illness or their condition. When they think
about working, it is hard to locate that brochure and move
forward.
There are resources available in the community that can
help them do that. But, just as significantly, if they can
search the web, if they can identify resources, all those tools
are very, very valuable. They need to be specific to individual
states, because the health care programs in states may vary
considerably. But all tools will be useful to the
beneficiaries.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman RYAN. Mr. Rangel.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me really
thank this panel. It has been a political process that the
Majority picks most all of the members of the panel, and then
the Minority selects one member. But the credibility and
experience that all of you have, it is hard for me to see any
sense of partisanship or politics in your roles, or the
testimony which you have given.
And I certainly hope that it would be possible to take
advantage of this opportunity for you to see the issues that we
are wrestling with, and know that we recognize that you deal
with these issues far more than we do, every day, and sometimes
lifetime career, and try to get together and help us with
recommendations as to what we should be doing.
And I hear Chairman Johnson talk about our moral
responsibility, and I am certain that other people on his side
of the aisle will be talking about the Federal Government's
obligation to do something for people who work hard every day
and, through no fault of their own, need a little help.
I want to take advantage of this moment, because there are
just some people in this Congress that, if the President of the
United States says he wants it, they are going to be against
it. There are other people who believe that the United States
Government has no responsibility to our citizens in education
or in health, but that should be a local issue.
I think this hearing gives us an opportunity to see what we
can agree on, and how we can use this to bring us together so
the American people might have reason to believe that when
there is a crisis, it is going to affect millions of people
that Congress, and especially this historic Committee, can come
together and deal with it.
So, I hope you would consider outside of this hearing room
getting together and giving to all of us the recommendations
you have, especially to the politically challenging questions
that we will be facing.
In addition to that, I have been annoyed with my profession
of lawyers, as I see their appeal on television. ``Do you
believe you are entitled to the disability benefits? If you are
working and still think you are entitled, come see us. We have
doctors, we can examine you, there is no charge, there is no
payment. You don't owe us anything if we get you on Social
Security. So get on with your life and let us get you Social
Security benefits.''
I know all of you have heard about these. Do you have
anything positive or negative to say about these advertisers
that encourage people to get on disability?
Mr. ZELLEY. I am not a lawyer, and I don't want to
disparage lawyers----
Mr. RANGEL. If you don't want to wrestle with the question,
please don't take time of the five minutes. To me, it is clear
cut. They do it for accidents, they do it for everything. They
do it for one-third of the commission of any awards. And I know
it is immoral, and I know it is probably legal. Now, if you
don't want to say anything one way or the other, I can go to
the bar and get attitudes. But you are professional, and they
either help or hurt.
How about you, Mr. Van de Water?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Well, I do, Congressman, believe that we
are--this is something you are paying for, right? You are
paying. And when you are working for this benefit, so----
Mr. RANGEL. I am trying to really zero my question in on
just one issue. And I am not going to repeat it, because I
don't have the time. So why don't we pass? I apologize for
being short.
Mr. Smith, you have any views on this?
Mr. SMITH. This is not an area that I----
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. Ms. Houghton?
Mr. SMITH [continuing]. Am expert in, but I--but we----
Mr. RANGEL. Has anyone any views on the encouragement of
people to get on Social Security disability, and they come into
the law firm, and they will provide you with the necessary
documents and they get paid for doing it if they are
successful? If you don't, then just say that. If anyone has any
views, I would appreciate it this time----
Mr. KREGEL. Congressman Rangel.
Mr. RANGEL. Yes, sir.
Mr. KREGEL. I think that the Social Security Disability
Determination Office does a very good, very accurate job.
Mr. RANGEL. Of doing what?
Mr. KREGEL. Of determining who is eligible for benefits and
who isn't.
Mr. RANGEL. But I was talking about----
Mr. KREGEL. Goes to the level----
Mr. RANGEL [continuing]. Paid advertisement on TV.
Mr. KREGEL. Yes. It goes to the level, then, of an
administrative law judge, and that is where the lawyers get
involved. And that is where a decision--do you meet eligibility
criteria----
Mr. RANGEL. This is the problem that some of us had in
Congress, and not rocking the boat, and I am surprised that
this panel is affected the same way by powerful people that
decide policy on health care, as well as disability. Thank you,
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON [presiding.] Thank you. The time of the
gentleman has expired.
Mr. Brady, you are recognized.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is a lot of
common ground in this hearing today. Both parties, I believe,
want to help those who are truly disabled. We want to eliminate
fraud in the system. There is too much robs from those who are
truly disabled. And then we want to encourage those who want to
go back to work to go back to work.
The good news is our economy has changed. Fewer people are
digging ditches. You know, other skills are needed in the
workforce. The workforce has never been more accommodative,
both from the new technologies that are remarkable, plus the
changes businesses have made to encourage workers who are
disabled to get back to work. So what a perfect time to look
with 21st century fresh eyes on the disability program.
Mr. Smith, you know, while Disability Insurance and the
Supplemental Security Income program share many things, they
are often very different in how they treat earnings. You gave a
hypothetical example. I just want to sort of highlight that
again.
Let's say Dan Disability gets $1,100 a month. That is about
average. Sally Supplemental--and, believe me, I already regret
using those names, but we are going to stick with them--Sally
Supplemental gets about $700 a month. Again, right with
averages. So, they both get jobs of $1,200 a month, roughly
minimum wage--but above substantial gainful activity. In this
example, Dan Disability loses his entire disability benefit. So
his income goes from $1,100 to $1,200 a month. Sally
Supplemental, though, because there is a glidepath, gets an
extra $650 a month. So she has nearly a $1,000 gain for going
back to that first economic rung on the ladder back to work.
So, $100 loss to get off disability and go back to work,
nearly $1,000 gain to do the exact same thing, two people who
sincerely want to get back into the workforce. In your
experience, have you worked with individuals and disabilities
who have faced that exact choice when they want to return to
work?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, all the time. And it is made sometimes more
complicated because there is--I don't think--I forget the exact
number. There is about 20 percent, 25 percent of beneficiaries
receive both benefits at the same time, and so they have one
work incentive for the SSI program, an offset, and then the
cash cliff built into the DI program.
But until I heard your question, I never really thought
about the disparity in the example that you give. But, yes,
indeed, the person on SSI would be financially better off
taking the same job than the person on SSDI who would lose
their entire check. So the person with SSI's net income would
be greater in that example, which is not--which is--doesn't
seem equitable to me.
Mr. BRADY. And I use that example because I think those who
are on disability who want to go back, the biggest decision
they make is for that first job back, because they have to
weigh what are the pros and cons of doing it. Once they get
back on that first economic ladder, you know, they start
building from there. And the way I see it, there is a huge
incentive--or disincentive for those on disability to make that
first leap back into the workforce, even at roughly a minimum
wage job, because we just--that cash cliff is just--you just
cut it off behind them, you know?
And it seems to me the proposals we have heard today about
eliminating the cash cliff, giving people incentives to go back
to work, sort of have that safety net under them, so they are
actually, A, encouraged to go back to work and to earn more
money, stay in the workforce, continue to grow. It seems to me
to be sort of the 21st century thinking that we need to bring
back to disability.
And so, Ms. Houghton, from your standpoint, does that make
sense, that illuminating that cash cliff would encourage that
first step back? And I am almost out of time.
Ms. HOUGHTON. Yes. I am--we are certainly not experts, but
it absolutely makes sense.
Mr. BRADY. All right. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. McDermott, do you care to question?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would take
this hearing more seriously if, on the 7th of January 2015, the
House had not passed a set of rules that set in place a 20
percent cut on these SSDI folks. The Washington Post reported--
and their title is ``Social Security Disability Payments Will
Be Cut By a Fifth if the Congress Does Not Act.'' So they have
set in place the cut already. They have said you can't shift
money from old age assistance to the SSDI program. So we are
stuck. We have to act in this Committee.
Now, we can't pass a transportation bill, we can't hardly
pass an ESEA bill yesterday. We can't pass anything around
here. And to think this is going to get through by 2016 is
really believing in the Tooth Fairy, because you are talking
about passing through two Houses of Congress, conference
committee and everything, and we have to cut people off the
program to have enough money to keep the benefit plan up.
Now, Mr.--Dr. Van de Water, you have a Ph.D. in economics
and all of that. Tell me. How many people will have to be cut
off of disability benefits in order to have enough money that
we can have the same benefit level for the ones who stay on?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Well, the short answer is that it is not
possible in any reasonable way to assure sufficient financing
for the disability insurance trust fund simply by cutting
people off the rolls. Instead of----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. What are the----
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Instead of cutting the average benefit by
20 percent, you could, theoretically, somehow remove 20 percent
of the people from the benefit rolls. But, as I say, there is
no practical way to do that between now and the end of next
year, nor, I am sure, would anyone on this Committee,
Republican or Democrat, have any interest in doing that.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So there is going to be a cut in benefits.
Because, practically, it is not possible to do what--it is Q in
the rules, in case anybody wants to look--it is the Social
Security solvency rule that we passed that says you can't shift
money. So we are stuck with this problem, right?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Well, the rule doesn't say that you have
to achieve a balance solely by cutting benefits, but it does
say you have to include some overall savings as part of a
package.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Somebody who is on Social Security--I agree
there are problems in this program. I could give anecdotes of
people who wanted to go back to work. None of the testimony I
have heard up here is unusual, because--the AIDS epidemic is a
perfect example where people had a death sentence. They got an
SSDI. Then came ARTs, and they are treated, and they could go
back to work, but they would lose their health care. And if
they had a relapse in their disease, they then would have a big
problem getting back on to Medicare SSDI. So they didn't want
to leave. So there is--I know there are problems.
But the question is how many people do you think really can
be taken off the rolls in order to get the savings necessary? I
mean we are doing four percent now come off. That is about
360,000 people out of 9 million. How many more people have to
be somehow bumped off by these new rules that we are going to
put together here in the Committee in the next 18 months?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Well, I think the likelihood of
encouraging large numbers of people to leave the benefit rolls
is fairly small. Mr. Smith discussed the experience with this
benefit offset pilot demonstration. He talked about a 25
percent increase in people earning more than substantial
gainful activity. That is great, but that is 25 percent of a
fairly small number. And that demonstration project as a
whole--again, as Mr. Smith indicated--showed that adding a
benefit offset starting at the $1,090 SGA threshold would add
to program costs.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. If somebody is on Social Security
disability, they have $1,090 that they have earned, plus their
benefit. What is their average benefit from SSDI?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. The average benefit is a bit under $1,200
a month.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. A bit under?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Twelve hundred. It is $1,165 per month--
--
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So that is $2,200 a month to live on. What
is the poverty level for a person?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Oh, it is roughly at the poverty level. I
don't know what the exact----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So we are talking about people at the
poverty level.
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Well, if that were their only source of
income. Now, for single individuals, it is often the only
source of income. For married beneficiaries, they may also have
espousal earnings.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And that is not counted against their
income.
Mr. VAN DE WATER. No, DI is not income-tested.
Mr. JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired, thank
you.
Mr. Tiberi.
Mr. TIBERI. Great testimony from all of the witnesses.
Thank you so much. First slide, please.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. TIBERI. Kind of to pick up on Mr. Brady's point, Dan DI
here, the cliff that has been talked about that some of you
actually have in your testimony, pretty darn clear at 1,090.
Sally SSI, the offset approach.
Next slide, please.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. TIBERI. Oh, there you go, the offset approach with
Sally SSI.
Just a one-word answer, yes or no. Starting to my left, do
you support us going to some sort of offset system for DI?
Mr. ZELLEY. I am going to say yes, if that is what I am
limited to. Lots of ways to skin a cat.
Mr. TIBERI. Yes, agreed, agreed.
Mr. ZELLEY. You could raise----
Mr. TIBERI. I understand that. Just an offset system. I am
not saying what type of offset system. Next?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, I would support an offset.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Ms. HOUGHTON. Yes, it appears that people would be better
off.
Mr. KREGEL. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. VAN DE WATER. It would depend upon the details of the
proposal.
Mr. TIBERI. So we all know, and you all know, that Social
Security runs these systems. And the two programs share many
things, but the work rules are obviously different, even aside
from this approach to what happens to the beneficiary when they
work. Aside from the offset in the SSI program, how earnings
are counted, as you know, is very different, as well.
Dr. Kregel, in the DI program earnings are counted when
they are earned. In the SSI program they are counted when they
are received. Can you tell us, from your experience, do
beneficiaries know the difference? And what is the difference?
Mr. KREGEL. Yes. This adds tremendous complexity,
unnecessary complexity, to the calculations that individuals
make and the administrative work that Social Security has to
do.
So, in the SSI program, as you mentioned, it is when you
are paid. So it is easy to do documentation if you have to do
things related to earnings or impairment-related work expenses,
or that type of thing. SSDI counts in terms of when you did the
work. And so there may be people who are paid throughout the
year, but only work 10 months out of that year.
Mr. TIBERI. So that change, if we change the DI work rules
and earnings requirements to the SSI ones, that would be a
simplification that would be helpful?
Mr. KREGEL. That would greatly reduce the administrative
burden, and it would definitely help concurrent beneficiaries,
people both on SSI and SSDI, not to have to follow two sets of
rules when they communicate with Social Security.
Mr. TIBERI. Ms. Houghton, can you comment on that from your
experience?
Ms. HOUGHTON. That seems to make sense.
Mr. TIBERI. Oh, very good. Mr. Smith?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, I agree with Dr. Kregel.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Zelley.
Mr. ZELLEY. Yes.
Mr. TIBERI. Sir?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. I think that simplifying the work rules
would, in general, be a good thing, yes.
Mr. TIBERI. Wow, we are finding agreement. Except for the
Tooth Fairy. I hope my daughters aren't watching; they would be
very disappointed.
So, in just another way that the DI program is complicated,
Mr. Smith, you talked in your testimony about the disincentive
for the beneficiary. Can you expand upon that, in terms of the
comparison between the two programs?
Mr. SMITH. Sure. So, from our experience, from the
beneficiary's perspective, the SSI program is far more simple
to explain, in terms of you have--if you earn above this level,
your benefit will be adjusted $1 for $2. The SSDI program has a
trial work period that can be non-consecutive, it has a grace
period, it has an extended period of eligibility----
Mr. TIBERI. So all those things--the point that I think you
made----
Mr. SMITH. Right.
Mr. TIBERI [continuing]. Is all those things actually put
fear into the beneficiary----
Mr. SMITH. Right.
Mr. TIBERI [continuing]. To fall well short of what they
could actually earn. And so, going to some kind of benefit
offset, as well as simplifying those rules, will give
beneficiaries less stress. Is that what you are trying to tell
us?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, yes, that we--that my staff would be able
to tell beneficiaries and--that would be able to--it would be
simple enough that most beneficiaries would be able to
understand, and would be much easier for the folks that support
those beneficiaries to understand.
Currently, the DI rules are terribly complex. I have to
send my staff to training with Dr. Kregel's staff to understand
the rules.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Lewis, you are recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me thank
each of the witnesses for being here today.
Dr. Paul Van de Water, thank you so much for being here.
Thank you for all of your learning. You know a great deal about
this issue. Some of the witnesses have suggested that disabled
workers receiving Social Security choose not to return to work.
They have suggested that these workers may intentionally lower
their earning so they won't lose Social Security benefits. I
want you to tell Members of the Committee. Does the data
support that theory?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Mr. Lewis, that is an excellent question.
There have been a lot of studies over the years about precisely
this issue. And I think the general conclusion is that, while
there are certainly some beneficiaries for whom that is true,
as I said in answer to a previous question, the fraction seems
to be pretty small.
In particular, some writers talk about something which, in
the jargon, is known as ``parking.'' That is whether
beneficiaries earn just below the $1,090-a-month level to avoid
triggering loss of benefits. And the various studies have
suggested the number of beneficiaries who engage in that sort
of behavior is on the order of a few tenths of a percent. So it
is a phenomenon, but it is not a very large one.
Mr. LEWIS. Let me ask you. Why is it so difficult for
individuals receiving disability Social Security benefit to
return to work?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. The reason is, as I and the other
witnesses have indicated, that beneficiaries have very severe
impairments, they tend to be older. Dr. Kregel mentioned that
70 percent are age 50 or above. They tend to have very limited
education. In many cases, not having completed high school. And
all of these factors create great impediments to their ability
to return to work.
Mr. LEWIS. Is there some correlation between people who go
out and do the hard, back-breaking work, and others who sort of
desk work, people that work on the farms and the mills?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Oh, absolutely. The likelihood of a
person, with a college education receiving disability insurance
is much, much less than for someone who has only a high school
education. And, in turn, that person's likelihood of receiving
disability insurance is much, much less than for a person who
has never completed high school. So there is a very close
relationship between receipt of disability insurance and the
person's education and training.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. Appreciate that.
Mr. Reichert, you are recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the
witnesses for your testimony and taking time from your busy
schedule to be here. I really like the analogy used by Mr.
Smith, the spider web versus the trampoline. I think that
clearly illustrates a picture that everybody can attach
themselves to and understand.
I want to see if I can continue on with Mr. Tiberi's
successful efforts in getting agreement. So the Chairman
mentioned early in his comments that we don't want a 20 percent
cut, we want the system to pay on time. We want the program to
work better, and we want to help people get back to work. We
want to strengthen the disability insurance program to protect
those beneficiaries. Everyone agree with that, with those
premises?
Mr. ZELLEY. Absolutely.
Mr. REICHERT. Okay, good. We are on--we are still on the
positive side, then.
So I want to ask Dr. Kregel a question that relates to one
of those anecdotal stories. There is a disabled veteran in my
district who has shared with us that, because of the
complexities and confusing rules of SSDI work incentive
programs, he went back to work, was hit with overpayments, and
now he is struggling to pay those overpayments back. And he
also understands and recognizes that he actually would have
been better off, he would have had more money, if he had simply
remained on disability and not gotten a part-time job.
So, we know the Social Security Subcommittee has recently
had a hearing on overpayments. How common is it to receive an
overpayment, and what causes overpayments? Mr. Kregel.
Mr. KREGEL. Congressman Reichert, it is very common for
individuals to receive overpayments. If you look at the
percentage of overpayments, SSA says that they make 99 percent
of their payments on time and accurately. Well, 10 percent of
the people on DI work. And so, if it is 10 percent, then it is
10 percent of people who are on DI who may have an overpayment
at some point in time.
What happens then is it relates to another huge
administrative issue, and that relates to reporting earnings--
the beneficiary has to report earnings to Social Security. If
they do that accurately, and if Social Security immediately
logs it in, then it should not result in an overpayment.
However, it may take weeks or more for it to be logged in, and
it may be logged in inaccurately, or the individual may not
understand the rules. And so they don't report their earnings,
and that is when you get overpayments of 40, 60, $70,000 that
you may hear of.
There are also overpayments in the SSDI system that has the
gradual ramp-off, as individuals' work progresses. But these
are smaller overpayments, that may be affected one month, and
then recovered in the next month, and you don't have these
traumatic tens of thousands of dollars of overpayments that
some individuals receive.
Mr. REICHERT. And, just out of curiosity, why does it take
weeks to log in this information?
Mr. KREGEL. I am sorry?
Mr. REICHERT. Why does it take weeks? You said it sometimes
takes weeks to log in the information provided.
Mr. KREGEL. This has to do with the workload within the
local offices, the priority that is given to this particular
work. Remember, they are dealing with a paper process. To log
it, you mail in your actual pay stubs, or copies of your pay
stubs, and somebody manually logs that in. We are not using
automation in the process that could be done that would really
reduce the administrative burden and make these payments more
accurate.
Mr. REICHERT. All right. I have one other question. My
father is on disability. I am the oldest of seven children, Mr.
Zelley, so I can identify with this in a different way. My
father was injured at work, and so I worry about the kids.
So, the recipient loses his or her benefits, the injured
parent. What about the kids' benefits? They also get benefits.
Mr. Kregel, what happens to those benefits?
Mr. KREGEL. Yes. If your benefits go into suspension
because you have completed the trial work period and you go
over substantial gainful activity, your benefit is suspended,
and then the children's benefits are immediately suspended, as
well. This is a very, very important issue that needs to be
taken into account.
Mr. REICHERT. I am sure it affects the person's decision as
to whether to go back to work or not go back to work. Right?
Mr. KREGEL. That is very true.
Mr. REICHERT. And my time is expired. I was going to go to
Mr. Zelley, but, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Neal, you are recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank the panelists.
This has been very helpful, as we try to sort data and try to
get information from those who are experts in the field. And I
appreciate the conciliatory tone of the Members of the
Committee today as we try to probe the issue.
Would you agree that there has been an uptick or, some
would argue, a surge in disability applications during the
recession? You could just shake your heads, because I will
pursue the questioning after that.
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Yes, there is generally an uptick in
applications during recessions. But the rate of awards goes
down, so that the number of beneficiaries goes up only slightly
during poor economic times.
Mr. NEAL. The others agree that there was an uptick during
the midst of the recession. And some of this is linked to the
worker participation rates. Some would ascribe the problem to
being--but it is hard, after Mr. Zelley testified that he had
gone from gainful employment to a benefit of $9,600 a year, I
don't think there was an incentive for him to say, ``I would
like the $9,600,'' as opposed to what had been a pretty good
career. And I think--and part of the atmosphere that we have
been discussing this in, there has been the suggestion in some
quarters that there had been more disability income
applications because of the fact that it has been harder to
find work.
Do any of you want to comment on that?
Mr. ZELLEY. I would comment that I don't believe that is
true. I believe that we are following the population increase
of Baby Boomers. We just heard testimony that says the actual
awards are less. So, even if you are applying for it, so what?
The actuality is that, no--I mean people, if acquire a
disability, are looking for ways to get back to work. And
Social Security is one way to ramp--it can be one way to ramp
back on. It is just too complicated.
So, I don't know if I answered your question----
Mr. NEAL. Yes, that is perfect, as a matter of fact, yes.
Any other panelists who would like to----
Mr. SMITH. I just had one thing to add. I can't speak to
the increase in the rolls, but I--as working within vocational
rehabilitation, we serve folks both who receive SSDI and SSI
and folks who don't. And it is clear to me that there are folks
who are not currently on SSI or SSDI----
Mr. NEAL. Can you speak up, please?
Mr. SMITH. There are folks who are currently not on SSI or
SSDI who would probably be eligible, but also, given some early
intervention and some employment supports, may be able to delay
or maybe never go on to the program if they are given the
appropriate employment supports at that point.
Mr. NEAL. And other--for the panelists, anybody who wants
to offer an answer--if one gets back to the workforce and they
give up their benefits, if the problem reoccurs, can they
reclaim, or can they go back to disability, Social Security
disability?
Mr. ZELLEY. I can state that that actually happened to me.
Mr. NEAL. Okay.
Mr. ZELLEY. And I can testify to that. I was able to
bounce--went from a job, off the job, SSDI came back right away
with the health care insurance. Granted, it wasn't a lot of
money in my case, but it did come back. So, yes, that occurs.
And that trial work period starts right again. You bounce, you
are back into it. And it is the same thing.
I do want to comment that you have done this, you know,
this 20 percent cut. Don't do that. You figured this out. I
know it must be so complex, but you have done it on SSI, you
have done it on early retirement. You guys can--men and women
can figure this out.
And because people are depending upon you to figure it out,
just let--get out of the way and let us go back to work. I mean
that is really what we are trying to get across to you today,
is that there are barriers in the system that prevent us who
want to go to work going to work. And I see thousands of people
with disabilities. That is who I am speaking about. I am not a
math major. You have got very talented math folks, and--but it
must be very frustrating when you got CBO that says you can't
count tax income, you can't count new taxes, or you can't count
the fact that you are going to be paying SSDI when you are
receiving it. Makes no sense.
So you have tough jobs. I admire you for what you are
doing. But please figure this out.
Mr. NEAL. I think the metaphor you used was the correct one
in your testimony, Mr. Zelley, when you suggested the
trampoline effect. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Boustany, you are recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you all for your testimony. It has been very helpful.
I chair the Human Resources Subcommittee of this Committee,
and we have been looking at work incentives across a number of
programs, and whether they are actually working or not. And it
was kind of interesting. My colleague, Mr. Tiberi, just a
moment ago highlighted the more gradual cliff with the SSI
program versus what we see with the DI program. And it seems to
make a difference.
I mean some numbers I have, SSI recipients have worked less
experience than DI recipients, but an average of 5 percent
leave SSI rolls each year, due to income from work or other
sources, which is about 10 times higher than what we see with
the DI recipients. But even then, five percent is still a
pretty low rate.
And as we look at work incentives, there are many, many
different organizations across the spectrum that work in this
space. And so, Dr. Kregel, I want to ask you, do you think the
current work incentives and policies designed to help these
low-income individuals and individuals with disabilities, do
they successfully promote work? And are we actually measuring
outcomes with all this?
Mr. KREGEL. Congressman, I think that the work incentives
within the SSI program do help. Basically, these individuals,
many of them, have minimal employment histories, in contrast to
the DI population. And so, starting out, starting a career,
working for the first time, the offset that they receive helps
them get comfortable with work, and they can move their way
forward.
But that is just part of the picture. There are also parts
of the service system that other witnesses have referred to,
vocational rehabilitation and all of those kind of things, and
employers that are involved in the process, as well.
So, in combination with the work incentives, there needs to
be support for those individuals to put them in contact with
the employers who stand ready to do that. One of the primary
agencies for that is vocational rehabilitation, who has a
responsibility for doing that.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Is there more than we can do to help
streamline this approach, make it more effective?
Mr. KREGEL. Within the SSI program I think that there are a
couple of things that could be done readily. The first one
would be to try to do a better job of linking the SSI
beneficiaries to employment. There is the Ticket to Work
program, but there is also maybe other opportunities that you
could look at, so that people are aware of the services and the
supports that are out there.
And then, looking at the other array of benefits that the
SSI population may look at, as well, because, as they work,
they have to worry about are they jeopardizing their food
stamps, their children's health programs, and those kinds of
things. So it is also the interaction of benefits at the SSI
level.
Mr. BOUSTANY. I appreciate that. And our Subommittee has
been looking at some of these cross-jurisdictional programs to
try to understand the interactions, so that we can, hopefully,
better design programs that help people in need.
But if you could step back for a minute and start from
scratch, how would you design a system that actually provides
employment assistance? I mean if you could just kind of rewrite
things from the beginning, how would you do that?
Mr. KREGEL. Everybody has two reasons to go to work. One,
they want to work, work is meaningful in their lives. And then
the second thing that hasn't been talked about is these people
are in poverty. And some of them are making choices between
food and medications, really, on a monthly basis. They are
really living at a subsistence level. Seventy percent of the
SSI folks are working below the federal poverty level, have
income below the federal poverty level.
So those folks need the same kinds of supports that other
individuals in poverty need in order to get that done. Child
care. They are more likely to have children. Transportation.
They may have to do specialized transportation because of needs
for certain kinds of support that they effectively need. So,
looking at those kinds of things that surround the individual,
we hear stories weekly about people who are working, their
truck broke down, they went to a payday loan person, they got
their truck repaired, they can go back to work, they have been
paying $50 a month on their $600 principal, and they still have
a $600 principal. So it is all these things that surround the
individual, in addition to their own work ability.
Mr. BOUSTANY. And, ultimately, we do have to measure
results, outcomes, what is really working and what isn't, as
you know, because, as you look at all these different programs,
we need to see which programs are really effective and actually
moving people onto the work rolls versus those that aren't.
Mr. KREGEL. Yes.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Well, I appreciate that, thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Becerra, you are recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
your testimony.
And I think, actually, Mr. Zelley, I think you are right.
We can come up with a solution. And I think, especially for
someone who, like you, figured out a way to get himself/herself
back into a position where you could be gainfully employed, I
think, ultimately, that is what we want to do.
And when we--when our previous leaders had the vision to
come up with a program like Social Security, it was essentially
for that, because most people want to pick themselves back up.
So I thank you for everything you are trying to do to help us
get there.
I just want to make sure I clarify a couple of things.
Because we talk about this stuff because we know we talk SSDI--
we talk the lingo all the time, but most Americans probably
wonder what the heck we are talking about. SSDI is not SSI that
some people hear about. SSI is Supplemental Security Income,
which is an income for low-income Americans that you get, not
because you worked and paid into it, but because you are low-
income. SSDI, disability insurance, Social Security Disability
Insurance, is not welfare. Welfare you get whether you worked
or not, and it is because you are in a difficult circumstance.
SSDI goes only to Americans who, as Mr. Zelley pointed out
in his testimony, you worked. Not only did you work, but you
paid taxes into Social Security to be able to get those
benefits. So, every time you work, and you see that paycheck,
you see that deduction, it goes for Social Security. It is for
your potential retirement, or your potential, like Mr. Zelley,
to become disabled. Or, unfortunately, for some, if they die,
it is for your survivors. That is the purpose of Social
Security, that three-pronged system, right? And folks should be
very clear. We are not talking about some welfare program. No,
you paid into it, right?
At the same time, I think we have to be clear. All of us,
as Americans who have been paying into the Social Security
system, have provided the system more money than it needs right
now to pay out all benefits, to the tune of close to $3
trillion, which we have right now in the trust fund. And that
is to help Americans, whether they are getting ready to retire
or, by some misfortunate, become disabled. They can get those
benefits.
This so-called 20 percent cut, it is not a cut that is
required in law, or a fait accompli. It is only because, 20
years ago, when the formula was created by Congress on how to
distribute the Social Security dollars that we contribute to
our taxes into the pots of money for retirement, disability, or
for our survivors was off. Twenty years ago, would we have
known exactly--actually, they actually knew that they were only
providing about twenty years' worth of funding for DI out of
the pot of money that Americans are contributing.
But that doesn't mean that we should cut disability
insurance for Mr. Zelley or folks who had disability insurance,
simply because we didn't put the right amount into each pot 20
years ago. We have got the money, Americans have paid for it.
So this 20 percent cut is fictitious, if we want to be serious
about Americans who have earned this. And, again, remembering
that most Americans who are on disability, SSDI, worked for
over 20 years, paying into the system.
Having said all that, let's also make sure that we get rid
of another confusion. There are about 30 million Americans,
working Americans, who are disabled. Not all of them qualify
for SSDI. Only the most severely disabled do. That is why only
around 9 million of those close to 30 million actually receive
Social Security Disability Insurance.
So the population we are talking about is not all disabled
Americans, it is those with the severest of impairments. And
the folks that we are talking about specifically today aren't
just disability insurance beneficiaries, it is those who are
trying to go to work, because so many of them have no
opportunity to go to work. In fact, there is a study that shows
that close to one in five Social Security Disability Insurance
beneficiaries die within five years of qualifying for the
benefit. That is how disabled they are.
Okay, so now we are talking about this universe of those
who really want to work. I think there is universal agreement
here. If we could help them get to work, if we could provide
incentive, let's do it.
But I think Mr. Tiberi's chart was very illustrative. If I
looked at that chart correctly, this offset, to me, is
troubling. Because I look at this chart, and, for those who
want to work and start working, if you start doing an offset so
that you lose $1 in benefit, disability benefit, for every $2
you earn in work, just about everybody that earns less than
$1,100 is going to lose, come out a loser, at the end of the
day.
So, I ask a question to anyone who will wish to answer. Are
we in this to create an incentive program that creates winners
and losers, where the less-able to work are punished to try to
help those who can work?
Mr. JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. BECERRA. I don't know if anyone--Mr. Chairman, if I
could just try to get a quick response from anyone, and----
Mr. JOHNSON. We will give you two seconds.
[Laughter.]
Mr. BECERRA. A yes or no is----
Mr. ZELLEY. I would just--I would add that we are not--for
goodness sakes, do not penalize people, of course not. That is
not the intent. We should be incentivizing.
I would add--I know it is not going to be a popular
statement, but the Ticket to Work--and I know it is affecting
90,000 people or so--in many ways, they are taken to nowhere,
because we are incentivizing VR agencies, rather than
incentivizing the individual. If I go back to work, let me keep
the money. Why are you giving it to somebody else to help me
get back to work? Businesses want the connection, businesses
want me to work. I have skills and talent to work. Only 85
percent--or 15 percent of people are born with a disability who
have--the rest of us have education and work skills and
experience. Just incentivize us to go to work.
And so, I know this is complex with this offset. It is not
intended--and I don't think you are hearing it is intended--to
hurt people. It is all about this doing it cost neutral. If you
will let me work, believe me, you are going to be getting more
revenue and more income from me. So, Congressman, I am hopeful
that it isn't interpreted that way.
Mr. BECERRA. Okay. Others?
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. The time of the gentleman has
expired.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you all very much.
Mr. JOHNSON. Mr. Price, you are recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank you
for holding this hearing. This has been fascinating.
And, Mr. Zelley, I am struck by your passion, and I
appreciate it. And I want to pick up on what you have just said
in response to the previous question, and that is--you telling
me that some of this money gets sidelined, doesn't go to the
worker?
Mr. ZELLEY. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. PRICE. You are--what you just said is, ``Let us go to
work, but let us keep the money.'' Where is--but you mentioned
that the money is going elsewhere.
Mr. ZELLEY. What I was talking about is the Ticket to
Work----
Mr. PRICE. Yes?
Mr. ZELLEY [continuing]. Actually incentivizes a rehab
company that helps me go to work, because Social Security
rewards them. They take my Social Security benefit and give it
to them to put me to work. And I am saying stop that. Let me
keep it. I am the one that is going to work. And so, reward me,
or incentivize me for going to work.
So, again, I know that is controversial, because there are
people using the ticket, it is helping some people. I just
think we are pointing it the wrong way.
Mr. PRICE. Yes, yes. No, I appreciate that. Look, as I say,
this has been fascinating, to hear the testimony. I am a
physician. I was an orthopedic surgeon. So I have done
hundreds, if not thousands, of disability evaluations. And one
thing that I was struck with when I was in practice, in medical
practice, is that the program is static. It says that if you
have got this disease, or if you got this problem, or you got
this disability, that that is it, that you are punished to
consider going back into the program, for fear that you might
lose the disability insurance or the payment.
Mr. Smith, have you had any experience with that in the
programs that you have run? Is that a real fear? I know it is a
fear that many of my patients described.
Mr. SMITH. Absolutely. And I--and it was clear from one of
the--for example, some of the folks that we had in the benefit
offset who did, for a period of time, have a gradual ramp-down,
when the pilot ended and the ramp-down went away, we estimated
about half of those folks then reduced their earnings to--
because of their fear of being--losing eligibility for the
program. So, yes, I think it is very powerful.
I also want to point out I might mention the Ticket to Work
program. And I am chuckling, because I am one of those voc
rehab providers that gets paid under the Ticket to Work
program. But the Ticket to Work program is based on VR agencies
and employment networks paid if a person zeroes out their cash
benefit. And it presents--for me, it presents a conflict of
interest, because I am sitting in front of a beneficiary, and
under the current rules, I get paid if he or she works
themselves off of benefits. But there are definitely situations
when that is clearly not in that person's financial best
interests.
So, obviously, my staff and my program give people the
correct information to make sure that they are not harmed, and
if they do choose to go off the program, it is--that they are
fully informed. But there is a clear conflict of interest for
us in that, you know, we essentially could be paid for
something that is not in the individuals----
Mr. PRICE. Provides a disincentive, yes. I want to touch
with you, Mr. Smith, a little more, though, because I am struck
by the experience that you have with an alternative program,
this benefits offset and the real-life examples that you can
provide, and have provided, about how that incentivizes
individuals to get back to work when they want to, because the
four percent number doesn't seem like it--you have got 40
percent of the folks out there saying that they want to work,
and we got less than 1 percent of the folks who are actually
working.
So do you have statistics or a comparison of this benefits
offset program that you have--the pilot that you have
experience with?
Mr. SMITH. It wouldn't speak--our pilot was a small, short-
term pilot, so it wouldn't provide data on how many people
could potentially, on a nationwide level, participate in the
program.
What we--what I do know is that, in my state, like, 10
percent of the SSDI population is engaged in our program, which
means they have raised their hands and said, ``Yes, I want to
go to work.'' And, obviously, there are many other people who
don't need--who don't want VR services who are probably also
trying to return to work.
So, I am a bit more optimistic, perhaps, than others on the
potential that folks can return to work and work at higher
levels.
Mr. PRICE. Great. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Doggett, you are----
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I suppose
it is encouraging that this hearing began with Chairman Ryan
telling us not to worry about the prospects of a 20 percent,
across-the-board benefit cut for disability recipients next
year. I see only one major problem with that, and that is that
a partisan rule was adopted at the beginning of this Congress
to prohibit the Congress from resolving this issue, as we have
11 times before, and that is to recognize, as Mr. Becerra said,
that this fund distinction is artificial, and that one way of
solving the problem, independent of our discussion of work this
morning, is to do a fund transfer. And that rule says that you
have to solve this 20 percent cut by either raising taxes--and
we know they are committed to not raising taxes--or finding
some other way to cut the amount of money being spent on
disability payments in order to make up for the 20 percent.
So, the real--the complete statement should be there won't
be a 20 percent benefit cut, because we are planning to find
some other way to cut disability payments to make up for what
would be necessary to avoid a 20 percent payment cut. Beyond
that point, this morning's hearing begins to look, in a more
sophisticated way, like the standard Republican stump speech,
that the only thing that is wrong is that people, poor people,
don't work hard enough, and that bureaucrats get in the way
with red tape and unnecessary regulations.
Dr. Van de Water, I want to ask you about the type of
people, first, who are getting disability. As Mr. Becerra
pointed out, it is not all the disabled people in the country,
it is only someone that a judge has determined has a mental or
physical impairment which prohibits them from performing
substantial gainful activity at any job in the national
economy. Is that basically the standard that applies before
someone begins receiving a disability check?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Yes, that is the standard that----
Mr. DOGGETT. And, in fact, as far as men who receive
disability checks, some of them are in such bad condition that
I believe it is about one in five of them actually die within
five years of getting their first check.
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Yes. The death rate for disability
insurance beneficiaries is much, much higher than----
Mr. DOGGETT. I very much believe in work, and I appreciate
the testimony that has been given here this morning. I think we
need to provide incentives for people to work, and remove any
disincentives that exist. But in terms of whether we can just
have disabled poor people work their way out of this 20 percent
cut and solve the problem that way, if you actually provide
more incentives like this 2-for-1 payment instead of an
absolute cliff, doesn't it end up costing more for the system,
and not less?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. That is exactly right.
Mr. DOGGETT. And so the--you mentioned that is true of
administrative costs and otherwise.
So, I guess really, the question is do those who believe in
work--and I certainly do--are they willing to pay more out of
the disability trust fund to encourage work, to incentivize
work, rather than to pay less? And I don't see any indication
that they are willing to do that. In fact, they are talking
about cuts that would be very severe--if you offset everything
you do about incentivizing work, won't you actually reduce
benefits to many more people than you help? Won't you hurt more
people than you help?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Well, you are absolutely right, Mr.
Doggett, that providing work incentives, obviously, is what we
are all talking about here this morning. But trying to do that
and also save money at the same time is very difficult.
You have heard the problems involved if one started a
benefit offset at less than $1,090 a month substantial gainful
activity level. You heard a story one of the other witnesses
told about the problems created by the Ticket to Work and its
effort to save money in the process of encouraging
beneficiaries to return to work. And, actually, we failed when
Mr. Tiberi was asking us about work incentive simplification.
One of the things which----
Mr. DOGGETT. Let me just interrupt you as the time goes
down to say is there enough red tape, change in work rules, and
more work that people could do, if incentivized, that can--
would be enough to make up for this 20 percent cut that is
about to take place?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. No, by no means.
Mr. DOGGETT. Not even close, is it?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. No.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Doggett. Mr. Smith, you are
recognized.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you to our witnesses, for sharing your expertise and insight
today. I know I hear from constituents who find the program's
work incentives difficult to understand and, actually, who have
unexpectedly had their benefits turned off because they crossed
the earnings threshold without realizing it.
You know, just frustration in so many ways, and especially
looking at the forward timeline of the solvency concerns, we
have waited a long time. And it appears there will be no way to
actually keep DI solvent, as you know, without transferring
funds into the program, most likely from the Old-Age and
Survivor's trust fund. Without reform, we will reach the point
of insolvency again, and not just with DI, but with the old age
trust fund, and with Medicare, and many concerns across the
board there.
Ms. Houghton, in your testimony you note that, while
businesses aren't experts on DI, the obstacles individuals can
face can cause them to reduce their hours, limit their
earnings, quit their job, or not try to return to work at all.
Do you think a benefit offset would make it easier for people
to try to work more hours, increase their earnings, or take a
promotion?
Ms. HOUGHTON. Absolutely. You know, I think that, right
now, the way the rules are, you have to be a rocket scientist
to figure out how to make work pay.
Mr. SMITH OF NEBRASKA. That is very interesting. And
speaking to the complexity--and I know my colleagues have just
kind of pointed to the various channels that are pursued
because of the complexity, and, really, I would hope we could
avoid the complexity and the expenses associated with that.
So, with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Ms. Jenkins, you are recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. And I want to thank the panel for the great
discussion this morning. Special thanks to Ms. Houghton. It is
always great to see a native Kansan, a KU alum, and a former
Bob Dole intern, before us. It has been nice to find a little
common ground with our colleagues on the other side of the
aisle this morning, as well.
I have long been an advocate for mental health, and service
to help those who deal with mental illness. And I noted in Mr.
Kregel's testimony that almost half of the younger
beneficiaries--which, to me, means under 50--have mental
impairments. This is compared to roughly 30 percent of all
beneficiaries. Since these folks are facing a lifetime of
challenges, it really is important to focus on helping them
return to work.
So, Mr. Smith, it seems your pilot program had some
findings in this area. And I just am curious, working to see,
with those suffering with mental illness, what you feel their
likelihood of returning to work is, and what we can do as
policy-makers to help that happen.
Mr. SMITH. Sure. There is a very well-researched approach
to supporting folks with psychiatric disabilities return to
work called the IPS, or Individual Placement and Support model
out of the New Hampshire Psychiatric Research Center, next door
to us in Vermont. And I think Bob Drake has been--that program
has been studied in a Social Security demonstration. And while
I am not familiar with that demonstration, I did talk to Bob
Drake, who ran it for Dartmouth. And he said the IPS approach
clearly helps people, and multiple random assignment studies
have shown it can get younger folks with psychiatric
disabilities back to work.
But he found that they ran up against--once folks started
to really get their feet wet, and start moving towards
employment, they ran into the cash cliff. And so the findings
ended up not sort of saving Social Security funds, because they
were running into this--the cash cliff.
So, yes, I--and this is, again, why I am somewhat more
optimistic about the potential of folks, especially younger
folks with psychiatric disabilities, to--if they are given time
and given the right incentives to get themselves to a position
where they can earn, they can increase their earnings and have
a better life.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, great. Thanks, I yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Larson, you are recognized.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, again, I want to
thank the chair and Mr. Levin for this hearing. I especially
want to thank our witnesses for your outstanding testimony and
your passion and commitment, as well.
I find myself associating with the remarks of Mr. Zelley,
especially as it relates to our responsibility. I think your
frustration is shared by Members on both sides of the aisle
here. And I know, based on the honor that the Members of this
Committee bring to this effort, that there is a path forward,
and we just simply have to find it.
I am going to yield a portion of my time. Mr. Becerra
didn't get an answer on the question that he posed at the end
of his statement. And then, after you answer, I will just have
a suggestion. But I deeply appreciate the--both what the
Committee is doing in this respect, in trying to resolve this
issue, both in the short term and long term.
But, Mr. Becerra, I will yield to you to finish your
question that you had asked.
Mr. BECERRA. I thank Mr. Larson for yielding. And let me
just pose it again quickly, because I don't want to use up any
more time than necessary.
So, if you do the offsets, if you start to--at a lower
level, to remove some of the disability insurance benefit for
money earned--so, in the case of this example given, if you
lose $1 of your disability insurance earned benefit for every
$2 you make in wages, and you start it early, instead of at
$1,090, which is the full disability benefit, you start it
early, you've got a whole bunch of folks at that early stage,
up to $1,000 or so, who are getting cut, their benefit. Even if
they get--have a chance to earn money, many of them are not
able to earn that much, but they still get the cut.
And so, my question was, are we interested in creating
losers in this? Are we interested in punishing people as we try
to create an incentive to let those who can, as Mr. Zelley was
able to, earn more money? And so, are we looking to punish
those who don't have the ability to earn more money?
Mr. ZELLEY. I am not in favor of whacking somebody's
benefits. But I think there is a perception issue that I would
like to address, if I may, Congressman, and that is that when
you see that international symbol--and we see it when we park.
You have got it here, at Congress. We have it at businesses, we
have it in our life. We see that international symbol. I wear
one that shows somebody carrying a briefcase, meaning that
people with disabilities can work.
When we see that, that there is this stereotyping--you talk
about mental illness, specifically--when you see that, you
think, well, what is that? That is someone who needs help,
needs a parking spot, a medical problem, needs public--lacks
education, not working, is a drain on our society. There, but
for the grace of God go I. Or, do we see past that wheelchair,
past the eyeglass, and see a person who is dependable, as
businesses have found out, dependable and motivated and loyal?
And healthy. They are not sick. I don't need to be healed. I am
working. I have education, talent. See that, and see that
there, with the grace of God, go I.
So, my point is we have this tendency to think that
everybody is really poor. Well, they are poor in a system that
doesn't work well. That is the reason they are poor. The
expectation should be higher, starting early, starting very
early, with parents. And even at the low teenage years, that,
yes, there is an expectation of work, and that, yes, you will
be part of our society and community, and we have a support
system that will bring you on that journey.
Mr. BECERRA. And, Mr. Zelley, I don't--this is Mr. Larson's
time, so if I could just ask if anyone else wishes to comment
on this, I open it up to you very quickly, because I know Mr.
Larson probably has other questions.
Mr. KREGEL. Congressman Becerra, I really agree that this
is an insurance policy. And if we start the offset below the
current SGA level, we are effectively cutting the insurance
payments for a certain group of individuals.
At the same time, we have to recognize that we are talking
about people at the subsistence level, at the poverty level.
And a reduction in insurance benefits, as they make up for
that, by increasing their earnings may, for some individuals,
be a path to greater self-sufficiency. So it is a delicate
balance, but your point is well taken.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Paulsen.
Mr. PAULSEN. I just want to start by thanking the Chairman
for holding this hearing. This has been some really outstanding
testimony, based on the wealth of experience that all of you
have offered here.
And it is interesting because, you know, our constituents
back home, I mean, they expect us, as leaders in Washington, to
get some things done. And this Social Security Disability
Insurance program is the perfect opportunity for Congress to
step in, make progress, come together, and make some real
changes that are actually going to really, truly help people.
And this is about making sure that those that do rely on that
critical income safety net, they are not going to be put in
jeopardy, right, from drastic benefit cuts, but also giving
those tools and resources that are going to allow those who
wish to return to work the opportunity to do so.
And, unfortunately, as we have heard--and we have heard
other stories from back home, but also from the testimony--the
SSDI programs become so complex that even those who want to
return to work, they have difficulty in navigating that huge
web of rules and regulations. The beneficiaries become so
overwhelmed or nervous about losing their benefits due to the
overwork--due to overwork that they may actually stop looking
for a job.
And, Ms. Houghton, you mentioned actually, you know, you
have to be a rocket scientist, right, to kind of figure your
way through this. And businesses clearly want to hire and
promote the best person for the job. And, Ms. Houghton, you
have--I mean this is your area of expertise. You work with all
these different employers. And we have heard today that, for
those that are receiving DI benefits, it is not that simple,
just to say yes to a new job, yes to the next promotion, yes
for more hours. It is not that simple.
Now, what about employers? How do employers navigate these
rules? And if the program was simpler for employers also, do
you think that employers could be more effective at providing
opportunity for individuals with disabilities?
Ms. HOUGHTON. Yes. I mean absolutely, Congressman.
Employers don't know how to navigate these rules any better
than their employees know how to navigate these rules. And so,
as a result, they are either losing talent, or not having
access to talent.
If these rules--you know, I think it is clear that
everybody wants to make this program work better, and wants to
help people be able to become employed. And if we could
simplify the rules so that you didn't have to be a rocket
scientist, that would absolutely help individuals and,
ultimately, help business, who wants to hire or retain these
beneficiaries.
Mr. PAULSEN. All right. Well, clearly, I think the ground
work is laid here, based on a lot of the comments and testimony
on a bipartisan basis. So I really want to thank you again for
all the testimony we have had today.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I will just yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you for your questions.
Mrs. Black, you are recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, again, I want to
thank the panel for being here, and this most interesting
conversation today. I want to thank the Chairman for holding
this hearing.
When I first came here to Congress in 2010, I was on the
Human Resources Subcommittee, and that was my first time in
understanding about the disability trust fund going defunct in
2016. And so I have been anxious about this now for five years,
and I am glad we are finally getting a hearing.
One of the things that I did was to try to better
understand this system. Because, as this chart shows, this is
very complicated. You all know that. I think the audience and
those at home--that are home watching need to see this chart,
as well, to understand how complicated it is. And, because of
that, what I did is I said I am going to act as if I am
applying for services, and I am going to start at the beginning
and work my way all the way through. And it was very, very
enlightening.
And we have talked a lot about the cash cliff here, which
is a very important piece of this, and one of the barriers to
getting people back to work. But as I was going through the
process, one of the things I heard from the workers that I was
so impressed with, those who I met with and the workers that
were really trying to help the beneficiary get everything that
they needed, at the same time to help them get back to work,
was the whole issue of the lack of services there for those
who, as has already been said in the testimonies that we have--
let me see here, 70 percent of those that are applying are 50
years or older with a limited education and a limited amount of
work experience to translate from whatever they were doing into
something new. And there was a lot of frustration there, even
though there are voc rehab programs, in getting someone from
where they are back into the workforce, because the human
capital is a big piece of that.
And that is something that I did here, is that people who
are not able to get back to work then go into depression, and
there is a lot of things that occur as a result of them not
being able to feel like they are self-sufficient, that they are
worthy. And so, that really worried me. And that is a component
I don't think we speak enough about.
Mr. Kregel, I found it interesting in your testimony, and I
highlighted this, a lack of training and support services are
frequently cited by beneficiaries as a major obstacle to
employment, training, and education to launch a new career, or
need specialized employment services, have achieved mixed
results.
Can you help me to, from your perspective, on what can we
do better to help somebody to be able to transition, especially
those that are at the lower income with lower education, to get
them back into that workforce?
Mr. KREGEL. In addition to the individuals who say, ``An
obstacle to my employment is the work incentives,'' and those
kinds of things, they also say things like, ``There are no jobs
in my community that I can do.'' They also say, ``There is no
one to help me get a job. Employers don't think that I can do a
job for them,'' and those kinds of things.
And so, the issue is to get connections between those
individuals and the business sector, which is very
accommodating and very willing to hire these individuals. So,
for low-income individuals who have significant health
problems, it is a particularly daunting task. But the idea is
there are people out there, employers, who are not the problem,
who will accept you if we can enable folks to make that
connection with them.
So, the recruitment is just as important as the retention
work that employers do to keep people who have had injuries or
illnesses on the job retain--stay in employment.
Mrs. BLACK. And, Ms. Houghton, that is where I want to say
thank you for the work that you are doing, because I know in
your testimony you said there are challenges finding the
talent, and navigating the governmental system for these
employers is very difficult. I am very excited about what you
are doing, but can you help me in how we might be able to help
you do a better job in getting these employers to where they
need to be to get folks that are hired in the right places?
Ms. HOUGHTON. You know, I--obviously, we have got a lot of
work to do. But if ever there was a time, it is now. And we
need these systems. We need the education system, we need the
vocational rehabilitation system. We need the workforce system
to help people with disabilities focus on what they can do and
how they can do it, so that, as they interface with business,
folks aren't talking about what they can't do, but they are
talking about what they can do, and how they can get the job
done.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you. That is very helpful, and I would
really like to be able to stay in touch with you to see how we
might actually be able to do that in some form. Not necessarily
in a bill, but working with those existing forces that we have
currently, and beefing those up, and making those better.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Davis, do you care to question?
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I ask
unanimous consent to have entered into the record an article
from the Washington Post printed on January 7, 2015.
Mr. JOHNSON. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, and I want to thank you for
the hearing. I certainly want to thank all of the witnesses for
their participation in this very serious, sanguine, rational,
what I call logical discussion of a way to look at trying to be
of benefit and help some of the most vulnerable members of our
society.
And so, I relish the fact that we have talked about the
Social Security Disability Insurance, realizing that there are
no simple solutions to very complex issues and very complex
problems. But, at the end of the day, I think we have to
remember that, no matter what happens, these are individuals
who have worked for their disability insurance. It is, indeed,
insurance and not a means-tested program. These workers paid
for their benefit over decades of hard work, and they have
earned their Social Security benefits.
In Illinois alone, we have 289,730 DI recipients; 18,601 in
my district alone. The monthly average payment for a disabled
worker in Illinois covers less than half the actual amount they
earned before disability. And, if you consider the fact that
rent for a one-bedroom apartment in Chicago is $1,752 a month,
anyone on DI can hardly make a living.
I agree that we must do everything that we possibly can to
get as many of these individuals back into the workforce with
meaningful jobs. But, at the same time, we cannot neglect the
needs of the majority of recipients who have worked hard to pay
into the trust fund all their lives. Cutting the benefit amount
or altering program eligibility would take away already scarce
resources of many vulnerable Americans.
Dr. Van de Water, I would like to ask you this one
question. Considering the fact that, since 2011, Social
Security has received an average of $1 billion a year less than
it needed to administer its programs, even though the number of
Americans collecting earned Social Security benefits has grown
by 7.5 million, could SSA administer a benefit offset program
accurately within its current congressionally-provided benefit?
And how have the budget shortages affected SSA's ability to
administer the current work incentives that already exist?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Mr. Davis, as another witness has
indicated, I think that the Social Security Administration is
quite capable of administering a benefit offset, but that if
the funding is short, as you point out, that will provide a
practical impediment to doing the job well.
One of the themes I think that has emerged from this
morning's hearing is that there are a number of ways to
encourage disability insurance beneficiaries to work. But many,
if not all of them, are going to cost money, whether that is
administering a benefit offset, whether it is doing additional
continuing disability reviews, whether it is providing work
simplification of the sort that Mr. Tiberi was asking about,
all of these things require either program money or
administrative money. And the attempt to achieve these goals
and reduce program spending at the same time is an overly
constrained problem. But the shortage of funding is key.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. So the bottom line is you
can't get blood out of a turnip. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman RYAN [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. DAVIS. And again, thank you all for being here.
Chairman RYAN. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Renacci.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. I want to thank the witnesses.
I have been sitting here, listening to all the testimony.
And I realize there is no silver bullet to fix this shortfall
that we are going to have next year, and I don't think this
hearing was about finding that silver bullet to fix the
shortfall next year. I do think the hearing, though, was about
promoting opportunity for Disability Insurance beneficiaries.
And so, keeping with that theme, I think back of a couple
constituents in my district. And I always try and go back and
think of constituents in my district, and how we can change
things for those constituents. So there are some constituents
out there that I know that would like to work. They are on
Disability Insurance. They see a very difficult system to get
into, but they deserve to get into it, and they have gotten
into it, and now they are fearful they are going to lose it. In
fact, I ran into one of them the other day and said, ``If you
see the complicated form I got to report back on, I am not sure
if I make the wrong election or say the wrong thing I am going
to lose everything.''
But these are also people who would like to work, too. So--
and I agree, I am hearing some things that--you know, if you
change the payout system--in fact, Mr. Zelley, you even
mentioned let them keep all their DI payments. Well, it is an
interesting concept, because, you know, if people could do
that, and still work, there probably is an incentive. But,
again, it doesn't fix the system. But I think the goal here was
really promoting opportunities.
So--and the other thing--and when you say that--and I am
not saying that is the answer--I was sitting here thinking the
more that they are able to make, the more wages they are able
to make, the more Social Security they pay, actually, back in
on those wages. So there is some benefit to that.
But the other thing I keep hearing today is the system
doesn't work well, it is too complex, it is overwhelming. And
that is actually what I am hearing from my constituents that I
know are on the system, as well, those that want to work. Now,
again, there are some that it would be very difficult to get
back into the job market, but there are some that can.
So, what I am trying to do after all of this is figure out
what can we do differently. What can the system do differently?
Because, Mr. Kregel, I heard you say, you know, that many
people just feel there are no jobs in the community. And that
is a problem, because there are jobs in the community. I know,
when I was a business owner for 28 years before I came here, I
hired many people that were disabled, and put them to work. And
there were job opportunities for them. They weren't able to
maybe lift, or they weren't able to fix a car in the automobile
dealership, but they were able to sit at the desk and greet
people, and they did a great job.
But the question is, so now I am disabled, I get on the
system, and it is a complicated system, and I am scared I am
going to lose the dollars I am getting. So what can we do
within the system to fix the system? That is really what I am
looking for, so that that individual can have, maybe, an
opportunity for work. Mr. Kregel, you have any thoughts there?
Mr. KREGEL. I think that one of the advantages of the
offset that hasn't been mentioned is that people who are afraid
to work at that level presently--I think that there are people
who are not working, and they just hear this stuff about, ``I
am going to lose my benefits. If I work at all I am going to
lose my benefits,'' and all of the information or inaccurate
information that they receive.
So, with the offset, it will enable people who are not
working at the present time--and I would anticipate it would
increase the percentage of DI beneficiaries who would actually
attempt work and go to work, because we create this huge fear
for folks at the present time. And then we have to automate the
system. The form that you are talking about, the work activity
report, the Form 821, there is another one we haven't talked
about for self-employed individuals, all of those things just
create tremendous burden, and really, fear on the part of
individuals, ``If I say the wrong thing, I am going to lose my
check. If I lose my check, I can't take care of my basic
shelter and food.''
And so, those kinds of choices that people are forced to
make right now, those are the things that have to be changed,
if we can.
Mr. RENACCI. Could it be as simple as a follow-up from the
Social Security Administration, saying, ``Hey, have you been
looking for work,'' or, ``Is there something we can help you
with?'' That seems like a very simple change that I am not sure
if we are doing.
Mr. Zelley, do you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. ZELLEY. Well, if you are talking about encouraging
people to work, absolutely. And, you know, there is this word,
``bureaucracy,'' and we all get afraid of it. But it is in our
lives, and so let's take advantage of it. Let's absolutely
encourage people, as you are applying for disability, that
there are alternatives.
And the two-for-one ratio, I think it is--I am all in on
this, you are hearing from the panel that this is a good thing,
because you are not penalized for going to work. That is what
we want.
The other thing I will just say that--if I may,
Congressman, that when I was first injured, and I am laying in
intensive care with bolts in my head on a striker frame,
thinking, you know, we depend on our faith and family and
friends to get us through, and just--my life was over. What can
I do? I have these children I can't provide for. And my
brother-in-law, Gene Hamilton, brought in a fellow in a
wheelchair, a friend of his, the same level of injuries I had,
and he started talking about life in a wheelchair. And come to
find out he was a stockbroker, making a lot of money. And I
thought to myself--it was an epiphany.
Well, if he can do it, if he can have a career, if he can
make money, I can do it. And so that just changed everything,
that pure support. There are organizations called Center for
Independent Living, they are made up of, governed by, led by
people with disabilities who are working. And I encourage you
to support that Social Security engage with them early on,
early on, as people apply. Because when you see somebody else,
and you get that peer support, it is a bridge to work. It is a
``Yes, I can.''
So, I don't know if I have answered your question----
Mr. RENACCI. No, you did, thank you. And I want to thank
all of the--all the witnesses. And that is what I am talking
about. We got to make sure--when I go back to those
constituents, they just complain about the forms, and they
never say to me, ``Hey, it would be great if somebody would
show me how to get back to work, or give me that''--as you
said, that inspiration, that here is an opportunity----
Chairman RYAN. Thank you.
Mr. RENACCI. So thank you. I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Zelley, you just summed it up. That was the best
testimony of the day, your story right there. That is what we
are trying to do on this side of the aisle, is to promote that
work ethic, that opportunity that you sought and you achieved
and you recognized in your peer. So I applaud you in your
story. I truly and honestly do.
And before I ask my question of Mr. Kregel, I want to just
note for the record what I heard from my colleagues on the
other side--Mr. McDermott--about the fact that we are not going
to be able to solve this problem because of a rule change, and
that we should do what has been the status quo in Washington,
D.C. for 11 times and multiple times over the decade, it is
just transfer money for the retirees into the disability trust
fund, and that will solve this problem. It doesn't solve the
problem. It takes what is a $270 billion problem today that we
are facing in 2016 with the disability trust fund, kicks it
down to 2031 or 2033, and couples it with a $3.7 trillion
problem.
And so, if my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
think we can't solve a $270 billion problem within the next 18
months, how in the hell are we going to solve a $3.7 trillion
problem just 16 years down the road? That is asinine. That is
stupidity. And I came here in 2010 to change the status quo,
and I am standing here seizing this opportunity in the
disability trust fund to implement reforms that are going to
help people. And your story inspires me to continue in that
effort, Mr. Zelley, and I appreciate it.
We had a chance on the Subcommittee, the Social Security
Subcommittee, to have the Social Security Administration come
before us. And during that questioning, I pulled up the Red
Book and I gave it to the Social Security Administration who
writes it. And I said, you know, ``This book says it is written
in plain English language.'' That is the goal of the book,
right, when you read the introduction. And I just flipped open
the page. And I am looking at the smiles of the witnesses. You
have read this book, right? This is D.C.-speak like I wouldn't
believe. This is not plain English. My favorite: ``The EPE
begins the month after the TWP ends. If you are not working
that month, the first 36 months of EPE is--then you got to deal
with the SGA then. Then the EPE is different than the EPX or
the EXR.'' That is not plain English to me, ladies and
gentlemen.
So, Mr. Kregel, you are contracted by the Social Security
Administration to teach counselors how to help people with the
work incentive program. How long does that program take?
Mr. KREGEL. We would say in our training program, between
training and testing and ongoing support, it takes about a year
to get to a basic level of competence.
Mr. REED. So one year to train a professional to help a
beneficiary to figure out the Social Security work incentive
program is essentially what I heard from your testimony. Is
that accurate?
Mr. KREGEL. Yes, to help beneficiaries, right, yes.
Mr. REED. To help a beneficiary counselor who is going to
help a beneficiary.
Mr. KREGEL. Right.
Mr. REED. So it takes one year to teach them this program.
And so, our beneficiaries, who don't have the benefit of that
training, who don't have that level of professionalism when
they deal with this situation, they are expected to know what
this work incentive is on their own, because of a Red Book
given to them by the Social Security Administration. That is
generally the position of the Administration?
Mr. KREGEL. That is where the state of the art is right
now.
Mr. REED. Yes. See, that is the problem. So, when I read
your testimony I was so impressed with--and we saw common
ground. Mr. Tiberi's question led to common ground, that we
need to simplify this program, we need to simplify the work
incentive program.
So, let's take it one step further, Mr. Kregel. You are
clearly an expert in this area. What are the top three things
we can do to simplify this work incentive program, from your
perspective and your experience?
Mr. KREGEL. Well, I think that the first thing is to always
make work pay. You are never going to go wrong betting on the
willingness and the ability of individuals with disabilities
who want to pursue their work goals. They want to work, like
everybody else. They have their own personal lives, and they
really need to do it.
So, what we want to do is make sure that--people who can't
go to work, we want to help them. People who want to work, we
want to be focused on doing everything that we possibly can to
assist those individuals.
The second thing that we really need to do is reduce the
burden on the beneficiary at various points in time. If you
look at this particular chart, each one of these squares can be
expanded into another couple charts, in terms of what happens
in this instance, and what happens in this instance. What
happens that we haven't talked about, if you are self-employed,
and you run your own business. So, reducing burden of
individuals who want to go back to work, to get past this
mailing stuff, and doing it in a way that simplifies it from
their perspective, would really, really be helpful.
And then we have to get to accurate information. So the
ability of the local field offices and the service providers
and VR and other places to actually provide the right
information, or make sure they follow up and make sure the
individual understands that information, so that people aren't
making wrong decisions based on what they think is the right
information but is erroneous information, And it ends up
causing major turmoil in their life, as a result of an
overpayment.
Mr. REED. I appreciate those suggestions. And what I hear
is proactive, get into it early, educate individuals, and then
stand with those individuals as they go back to work.
Mr. KREGEL. Correct.
Mr. REED. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Chairman RYAN. Fantastic. Thank you very much. I thought
this was a very insightful hearing, and I hope that we can move
in a bipartisan way. I heard some partisan comments. Hopefully
that is not what is to come, because I think you can see that
we have a deep interest in avoiding this problem, this 20
percent cut, and making work pay, and making this law work like
we all want it to work.
So I want to thank each of you for bringing your fantastic
testimony. It was very enlightening.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:36 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Questions for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
