- NEXT STEPS FOR WELFARE REFORM: IDEAS TO IMPROVE TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES TO HELP MORE FAMILIES FIND WORK AND ESCAPE POVERTY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NEXT STEPS FOR WELFARE REFORM: IDEAS TO IMPROVE TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE
FOR NEEDY FAMILIES TO HELP MORE FAMILIES FIND WORK AND ESCAPE POVERTY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 30, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-HR03

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-283                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
DEVIN NUNES, California              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  XAVIER BECERRA, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

Joyce Myer, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota            JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of April 30, 2015 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

Eloise Anderson, Secretary, Wisconsin Department of Children and
Families, and Co-Chair, Secretaries' Innovation Group..........    23
Peter Cove, Founder, America Works of New York, Incorporated.....     6
LaDonna Pavetti, Ph.D., Vice President for Family Income Support
Policy, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.................    47
Heather Reynolds, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Fort
Worth..........................................................    30
Sherrie Smoot, Former America Works Client.......................    18
Tracy Wareing, Executive Director, American Public Human Services
Association....................................................    38

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Elizabeth Lower-Basch, Center for Law and Social Policy (CLASP)..    81
County Welfare Directors Association of California (CWDA)........    91
Peter Germanis...................................................    99
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)......................   109

NEXT STEPS FOR WELFARE REFORM: IDEAS TO IMPROVE TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE
FOR NEEDY FAMILIES TO HELP MORE FAMILIES FIND WORK AND ESCAPE POVERTY

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 30, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:17 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Charles
Boustany [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Thursday, April 23, 2015
No. HR-03

Chairman Boustany Announces Hearing on

Next Steps for Welfare Reform: Ideas to Improve

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families to Help

More Families Find Work and Escape Poverty

Today, Ways and Means Human Resources Subcommittee Chairman Charles
Boustany (R-LA) announced that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing
titled, ``Next Steps for Welfare Reform: Ideas to Improve Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families to Help More Families Find Work and
Escape Poverty.'' The hearing will take place at 3:00 p.m. on Thursday,
April 30, in room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building.

In view of the limited time available, oral testimony at this
hearing will be from invited witnesses only. Witnesses will include
experts who administer the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) program or who provide support to States operating the program.
However, any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral
appearance may submit a written statement for consideration by the
Committee for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany stated, ``Welfare
reforms in the 1990s helped millions of low-income parents leave
welfare for work. Not only did welfare caseloads drop by more than half
as a result, but the share of families with children who were living in
poverty fell significantly as well. Despite this progress, recent
evidence suggests States may not be helping as many welfare recipients
find work or prepare for work as they have in the past. In addition,
Congress hasn't undertaken a full assessment of the program since 2006.
It's time for Congress to review this program and develop ways to help
more low-income families find work and escape poverty.''

The TANF program is designed to end the dependence of needy
families on government benefits by promoting work, marriage, and
personal responsibility. Unlike its predecessor, the Aid to Families
with Dependent Children program, which was primarily a cash welfare
program for low-income families with children, the 1996 welfare reform
law created TANF to fund a variety of services to help low-income
parents get jobs and become self-sufficient. States are required to
engage 50 percent of adults in TANF families in work activities such as
employment, on-the-job training, job search, and vocational education.

As a result of these and other reforms, in the years following the
1996 law's passage, welfare caseloads declined significantly,
employment among low-income families increased, and poverty declined.
However, recent evidence suggests States are not engaging many adults
receiving TANF in services designed to help them get jobs and move up
the economic ladder. In recent years, States have reported zero hours
of work--or participation in activities leading to work--for over half
of the adults receiving TANF assistance each month. Recent reports have
highlighted ways States have used loopholes in current law to sharply
reduce the share of adults they must engage in work or work activities.

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

This hearing will focus on how States assist welfare recipients
today, ways to increase State efforts to engage more recipients in work
and activities leading to work, and how these efforts can help these
individuals become self-sufficient, escape poverty, and move up the
economic ladder.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Please click here to submit a
statement or letter for the record.'' Once you have followed the online
instructions, submit all requested information. Attach your submission
as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by May 14, 2015. Finally, please note that due to the
change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse
sealed-package deliveries to all House Office Buildings. For questions,
or if you encounter technical problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or
(202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons,
and/or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A
supplemental sheet must accompany each submission listing the name,
company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available
online at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. The Subcommittee will come to order. I
want to thank our witnesses for being here today and thank
everyone for coming to today's hearing on how we can improve
welfare and help more families and individuals find work and
escape poverty.
Before we get into the meat and potatoes of the hearing, I
want to welcome--I see he is not here yet, he is probably on
his way over--I want to welcome the newest Member of our
Subcommittee and the full Committee, Congressman Bob Dold. We
had a vacancy that arose and Bob was just placed on the full
Ways and Means Committee, and yesterday it was decided that he
will be a Member of this Subcommittee. I look forward to
working with Bob in the 114th Congress on these important
issues. I think he is going to bring a lot of talent as an
individual to this Subcommittee.
I would also like to take this time to thank Congressman
Tom Reed, a Member of the full Committee. He is leaving this
Subcommittee and his talents will be missed. He has made many
substantive contributions during his time here. Tom, I know,
will still be very active on these issues even though he is not
directly a part of the Subcommittee.
So with all that, let's move on to the business at hand. We
know that welfare reforms of the 1990s helped millions of low-
income parents go to work, move up the economic ladder. The key
was increasing work and work opportunities.
After work-based welfare reform, employment by single
mothers who head households, the most likely to go on welfare,
rose sharply. That increased work and earnings caused poverty
and dependence on welfare checks to fall substantially for key
groups. Poverty among African American households with children
reached record lows; poverty among female head of households
with children remains lower today than before 1996, despite two
recessions.
Now, while that story is positive, it is not enough. Recent
years have seen troubling trends, especially on whether State
welfare programs are doing enough to engage adults in work. For
instance, according to HHS, States recorded that in 2011 a full
55 percent of adults on welfare did zero hours of work or other
activity while collecting benefit checks. Despite welfare's
apparent work requirements, States did so through a grab bag of
accounting gimmicks, loopholes and exceptions.
Then in mid 2012, the Obama Administration released their
unprecedented guidance, suggesting States could waive work
requirements altogether. While no States sought waivers, that
move sent a clear signal that work requirements don't matter to
the Administration. Add in the fact that the last comprehensive
reauthorization of welfare was in 2006, it is clearly past time
for a full review and reauthorization of the critical program.
That is what we are here today to do, to review how we can
improve welfare to help more parents find work so their
families can escape the trap of poverty, which starts with
rejecting the Obama Administration's guidance waiving work
requirements. It certainly doesn't end there. Other more
important bipartisan policies can strengthen the work
requirements and improve the program.
For example, the President's budget would prohibit the use
of nongovernmental third-party expenditures to meet State
maintenance of effort requirements, and includes a provision to
ensure that States use these welfare funds for benefits and
services to needy families. We should be able to find agreement
on that that would strengthen welfare and focus its resources
on families who most need the help. We should also reduce
marriage penalties, simplify the program administration and
pave the way for broader reforms, improving opportunity and
upward mobility.
This is about more than abstract policies here in
Washington, D.C. And so that is why today, I think, the
Committee's going to be really benefited greatly by being
joined by Sherrie Smoot, who spent years on welfare without
getting the kind of help she really needed, how to find, get
and keep a job. For example, her example shows what can happen
when we actually really do have programs that help people solve
problems instead of just dispensing checks year after year.
That is the real goal of the hearing today, for more people to
succeed like Sherrie.
I look forward to all the testimony and working with
Members on both sides of the aisle to do just that. With that,
I will be pleased now to turn to the esteemed Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, Mr. Doggett, for the purposes of an opening
statement.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to each of
our witnesses for coming. I look forward to hearing the diverse
testimony that each of you have to offer. I think that we saw
in 1996 an opportunity to change welfare, move welfare to work.
I joined in that effort by supporting the reform that occurred
then. We had significant early promise from the program, but I
think that promise has slowed, and that we have allowed
spending to be directed away from help to people to go to work.
The TANF funds have not kept pace with inflation, they have
prevented the small amount of financial assistance that we give
to families from providing any real support. We called on the
States to do more to incentivize work, but, in some cases,
Federal TANF monies have been little more than a slush fund for
States to use for whatever social service purpose they wanted
where they were spending money and simply replacing it with
Federal dollars and shifting that to something else.
We see the share of TANF funds that are spent on promoting
work accordingly from the States has declined over time. As Dr.
Donna Pavetti says in her written testimony, the States are now
using only about 8 percent of their TANF funds for work
activity. Perhaps even more troubling, TANF's current
provisions designed to encourage work are short-sighted. The
participation requirements measure the amount of time that an
individual spends in Federally defined work activities rather
than on how many welfare recipients are able to find and
maintain a job.
There, I think, we do have a bipartisan part, that finding
and retaining a job at a livable wage is the best path out of
poverty and the objective for which we should be striving. This
troubling focus is reflected in the fact that the amount of
people on TANF who may participate in vocational education is
capped, and the amount of time a person can spend learning an
in-demand job skill is limited.
How can we expect struggling parents to find long-term work
to help them avoid needing assistance in the future when we so
severely restrict training opportunities? A recent report from
the Government Accountability Office described how the current
system ``discourages States,'' and ``lacks incentives to foster
broader adoption of promising approaches to help those on TANF
find long-term work.''
As Utah's Republican Governor Gary Herbert explained in
2012 to our Committee, TANF participation requirements do not
lead to meaningful employment outcomes. Officials in Kentucky
have even explained that some of the current limitations are
adding to the overall program cost.
In just my own State of Texas, we have seen outside of
welfare-to-work dollars how programs like Project QUEST in San
Antonio and Capital IDEA in Austin partner with community
colleges and local businesses to successfully train low-income
individuals for living wage jobs that are in high demand in our
communities. Allowing the States the use of such programs will
put more people into careers they can use to climb the economic
ladder. I was particularly interested in State Secretary Eloise
Anderson's written testimony concerning the importance of
strengthening the ability of States to use these types of
education programs and double the amount of time those on TANF
can participate in them. I look forward to hearing other
proposals from our witnesses.
We, as you know, have September 30 approaching, an
opportunity to focus on work, not on peripheral issues, not on
shaming the poor, but on work and ways to encourage that work
in these livable wage jobs.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to our work together toward
that deadline in finding meaningful changes in TANF and
renewing it at an acceptable level. I yield back, and thank
you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. I think there is
going to be a lot of common ground to actually spread this
program. I appreciate the gentleman's statement.
Without objection, each Member will have the opportunity to
submit a written statement and have it included in the record.
I want to remind our witnesses as we go forward with your oral
statements, we are going to go 5 minutes. We have your written
testimony. We have been able to review it. Try to keep your
comments to 5 minutes as is customary here so we can get
through the hearing in a timely way and leave plenty of time
for questions.
We have a very distinguished panel today. This is going to
be a very good hearing, a very informative hearing. First, we
will hear from Peter Cove, founder of America Works. Next, we
are going to hear very compelling testimony from Sherrie Smoot,
former America Works client, who is going to give us some real-
life experience in working through these programs.
Next, Eloise Anderson, no stranger to the Subcommittee, and
Co-chair of the Secretaries' Innovation Group and Secretary of
Wisconsin Department of Children and Families. Then we will
hear from Heather Reynolds, President and CEO of Catholic
Charities Fort Worth. Tracy Wareing, Executive Director,
American Public Human Services Association, and then last and
certainly not least, LaDonna Pavetti, Vice President for Family
Income Support Policy, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
I want to thank you all for being here. You bring
tremendous expertise to this hearing and we will start with Mr.
Cove. So thank you for being here and please proceed with your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF PETER COVE, FOUNDER,
AMERICA WORKS OF NEW YORK, INCORPORATED

Mr. COVE. Chairman Boustany, good afternoon. My name is
Peter Cove and I am the founder of America Works of New York.
Before I begin, I would like to thank House Ways and Means
Chairman Paul Ryan, Human Resources Subcommittee Chairman
Charles Boustany, and the rest of the Committee Members for
allowing me to speak today.
America Works was founded in 1984 to help welfare
recipients to get jobs. It was the first for-profit company
dedicated to this effort. There are four principles which we
are passionate about. First, people on welfare can and want to
go to work. Prior to welfare reform, the assumption was that
people needed to stay home or they couldn't go to work.
Second, work combined with on-the-job training curriculum
designed by employers, not training in isolation, is central to
that effort. For far too many years, welfare recipients were
sent to training programs that never led to employment.
Third, companies should be paid for performance. Only when
a person gets and keeps a job should a vendor be paid.
Fourth, getting a job is easy, but keeping the job is hard.
So we developed retention services for the first 6 months to
provide counseling, on-the-job coaching, interventions to
navigate workplace issues, and attach workers to a host of
financial incentives. In the 1980s, we ran modest-sized
programs around the country with our program design, and they
attracted the media and the interest of politicians. Newt
Gingrich was an early supporter, as was the Democratic
Leadership Council, the DLC, which was headed by Bill Clinton,
among many others.
America Works was involved in providing information to both
the House and White House during the implementation of the 1996
TANF law. Once the law passed in 1996, America Works expanded
its services in a number of States around the country. During
the first 10 years, there was a great deal of experimentation
with different service models, but always with a primary focus
on employment and not abstract training unrelated to jobs.
In 2006, when the bill was reauthorized, the focus of each
of the contracts was directed toward participation rates. This
will be part of the presentation as I go on. Since the start of
America Works 31 years ago, we have placed over 500,000 people
in jobs. We have expanded the services we provide to other
populations, including ex-offenders, veterans, the homeless,
and people with disabilities.
I would like to address seven areas in which I believe TANF
needs to be strengthened. First, although the law directs the
local governments to have 50 percent of their caseload looking
for work, most do not. States have elaborate ways of reporting
the data so that far fewer able-bodied people are actually
participating. This is accomplished by moving recipients in and
out of the denominator that determines the 50 percent rate, in
some cases into separate State programs not subject to Federal
requirements. In addition, there are reductions in
participation requirements based upon caseload reductions and
State spending on the population beyond the expected
maintenance of work level.
Second, despite the law, which directs localities to limit
welfare to 5 years, many places do not do that.
Third, very few cases are ever sanctioned. A history of
granting good cause waivers, conciliation and appeal hearings
has led to welfare departments retaining a culture of not
aggressively using the sanction process as it was intended.
Fourth, every State has a pool of people who are exempted
from participation for medical reasons. However, since all that
is required is a doctor's note, some of these cases are not
legitimate.
Fifth, in a related issue, there are many TANF recipients
whom States would like to remove from their rolls, and instead
place in SSI and SSDI. Again, this is appropriate for those who
clearly cannot work, but inappropriate for many others.
Sixth, there is an increasing number of programs at the
Federal, State and government levels which are being contracted
out only to not-for-profits. As we have seen in New York City,
the most effective jobs programs are those run by the for-
profit industry. We see no reason that for-profit companies
should be excluded from participating, there is no reason.
Seventh, and the final point, has to do with work
verification procedures that were made unduly complicated in
the 2005 reauthorization. Here I believe there is the law of
unintended consequences. The intent was to close the loophole
where States were allowing people to do these kinds of non-work
related activities. The effect on the ground is a tremendous
amount of administrative paperwork on contractors such as
America Works, and this really takes away from the program
activities.
I want to just add one other comment, and I want to
reiterate something I said before. People talk about best
practices in welfare reform. To me there is only one, and that
is government should only be paying those who are responsible
for getting people jobs, if they get people jobs. They
shouldn't be paying them for their program, they shouldn't be
paying them for their staff, they should be paying them for
getting them jobs and keeping them in jobs. We pioneered that
back about 30 years ago. I have to tell you, it still is
difficult to get governments to agree to that. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cove follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Now we will hear from Ms. Smoot. And I
want to say we are very, very happy that you are able to be
with us today to share your personal story. It always takes
quite a bit of courage to do that publicly, so we deeply
appreciate it because it will be very informative to us in this
discussion, and also in how we proceed going forward. So with
all that, Ms. Smoot, please proceed and we would love to hear
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SHERRIE SMOOT,
FORMER AMERICA WORKS CLIENT

Ms. SMOOT. Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to
testify before you today. My name is Sherrie Smoot, and I am
grateful to share my story, a story that shows what
perseverance and support can do for someone receiving public
assistance.
My mother, brothers and I had moved a bit when I was young.
I went from Washington, D.C. to New York and returned to
Washington, D.C. for good when I was around 12 years old. My
mother did not have my transcripts upon our return to
Washington, D.C., so I was sent to Woodland Job Corps Center
program. I was in Woodland Job Corps Center for 2 years and was
doing really well in my business and clerical coursework. Soon
afterward, I graduated from Woodland Job Corps Center with
certificates in the trades I had studied.
When I returned to the District, I had nowhere to go and
was staying house to house. My brother and his girlfriend took
me in. I was trying to find work, but no one would hire me. I
knew nothing about writing resumes, cover letters or thank-you
letters. I did not have enough money or enough experience to be
seen as qualified. A few months later I became pregnant with my
daughter, Danniele Lee. I tried to get public assistance but
was turned away. They said I had to be 6 months pregnant, so my
brother's girlfriend, she took care of me. After 6 months, I
started receiving public assistance. After becoming pregnant
with my second child Frank Lee, Jr., the children's father and
I separated.
After I had my son, I had to join a jobs program at a local
nonprofit. I gained computer skills and earned certificates.
Soon after, I earned a temporary position working with Douglas
Resources, Incorporated.
I was not successful in retaining positions due to health
and personal concerns. I was mandated to another program where
I was able to obtain my GED and gain additional work experience
with some temporary and contract positions. Two years later, I
went to the University of the District of Columbia after
receiving aid from the TAPIT program. I have since received my
Bachelors of Computer Information Systems science. Around a
year and a half later, I earned my first IT temporary job
working for Corestaff at the Advisory Board Company.
When that contract ended, I was sent another letter to join
a workforce program. I picked America Works of Washington,
D.C., where I learned how to write cover letters, build
resumes, and build self-confidence, and how to prepare for
interviews. I also had the opportunity to build my own resume
by participating in a work experience assignment with the
District's Department of Human Resources. While at America
Works, I was also warmly referred to the program recruiter for
the Veterans Group. Although not a veteran, I was invited to
attend the Veterans Group and took up CompTIA A+ Security+,
Network+, CCNA, CCENT, Microsoft Windows Server and MCTS
classes in which I graduated with a security administration and
network administration completion certificate, and as a
Microsoft certified technology specialist.
I now work with Teksystems at the Environmental Protection
Agency as a call center central analyst. My daughter is in
college aiming to be a United States Marshal; my oldest son is
graduating from high school this year, and going to college
aiming to be an FBI agent. And my youngest son is in junior
high school. My TANF case has been successfully closed since
2014.
Honestly speaking, America Works is a program that has the
best staff, and they make you achieve when you think you can't.
They taught me how to express myself and how to have confidence
and now the road that I am on has inspired me to shoot for the
stars. Thank you for allowing me this opportunity. I look
forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Smoot follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you very much.
Ms. SMOOT. You are welcome.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Anderson, you may proceed now.

STATEMENT OF ELOISE ANDERSON, SECRETARY, WISCONSIN DEPARTMENT
OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES, AND CO-CHAIR, SECRETARIES' INNOVATION
GROUP

Ms. ANDERSON. Chairman and Ranking Member, thank you for
the invitation. As you know by my testimony, I am Secretary of
the Department of Children and Families for the State of
Wisconsin, and I am also the Chairperson for the Secretaries'
Innovation Group.
I want to talk about TANF, Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families. I believe TANF was intended to engage parents in work
and job preparation activities to promote family self-
sufficiency and reduce long-term dependence on welfare.
The WPR, which is the Workforce Participation Rate, was
established as a performance measure to ensure States' programs
reflected full engagement in helping parents enter the
workforce. We support the accountability message surrounding
the WPR, and believe that the focus on work must be maintained
to encourage family stability through employment. Participation
requirements, as currently structured, must be revised to
ensure that the standards align with the ultimate goal of TANF
programs moving recipients from welfare to work.
The issues are that, in its current state, the work
participation rate is entirely process-driven in that its rate
measures the number of families in the State TANF caseload
participating in assigned work and work-related activities for
a required number of hours. There is currently no outcome-based
performance measure. I want to go back over that. There is
currently no outcome-based performance measure established to
evaluate success in increasing the employment of low-income
families.
Rule changes surrounding TANF in the Deficit Reduction Act
of 2005 greatly restricted the autonomy necessary for operating
TANF programs to fit individual needs of States. I think it is
very difficult for a centralized government to understand how
all the States need to perform.
Recommendations that we are putting on the table is to
revise the work participation rate to support employment
outcomes. Our recommendations are for revising and enhancing
the work participation rate where we derive from our experience
with pay-for-performance contracts. In Wisconsin, we have all
our operators who we contract with on a pay-for-performance
system. I think that is the way the TANF program needs to go
overall.
We believe that we should be funding job attainment, job
retention and wages. We believe that the system should reward
employment outcomes and allow for our programs to help
participants achieve long-term financial independence, and also
provide information about which services and opportunities are
most effective in achieving those goals.
So, if you really support job attainment, job retention,
and job wages and allow States to be able to freely figure out
how to do that, we will learn a lot more than you guys
directing all the traffic.
Three general categories that I want you to think about
are, restore the enhanced areas of the State flexibility that
were generally undermining the DRA; maintain a focus on work
and balance, the individual activities and that there needs to
be that balance for able-bodied employment, and to support
long-term job retention; and three, enhance the Workforce
Participation Rate by developing additional performance
measures, all focused on work, retaining work, and keeping work
for the long term, with particular emphasis to those related to
employment outcomes.
We believe that if we take our focus from the process focus
to really look at the outcomes of who is getting a job and how
long they are staying on a job, for long-term people we will
have a better outcome across the Nation. My conclusion is,
implementing changes to increase the focus on employment, job
retention and higher wages through continued skill development
is consistent with the overarching goal of TANF. We believe it
is vital that the provisions surrounding the Workforce
Participation Rate are enhanced to expand performance measures
to employment outcomes and allow States greater flexibility in
creating program approaches that best fit the individual States
needs as well as the individual participants' need, and
provides an opportunity to demonstrate what approaches are most
effective. Consider using the contingency fund the way you use
title 4(d) as an incentive for outcomes. We believe that what
we do in 4(d), which is the child support program, that what we
do in there really forces States to want to compete with each
other in outcomes, but it also creates--it rewards the
outcomes. So I would like you to look at the 4(d) model as a
way to use a contingency fund if we go forward with that.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Anderson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank you. Ms. Reynolds, you may
proceed.

STATEMENT OF HEATHER REYNOLDS, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CATHOLIC
CHARITIES FORT WORTH

Ms. REYNOLDS. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Doggett,
and Members of the Subcommittee on Human Resources, thank you
for the opportunity to speak with you today. My name is Heather
Reynolds, and I am CEO of Catholic Charities Diocese of Fort
Worth. Over 100,000 people come to our organization every year
for help. Three hundred eighty-four employees are back at
Catholic Charities Fort Worth right now working to move clients
out of poverty.
Our team knows that individualized, holistic case
management is the critical element in moving someone from a
place of dependence on government or charity to a place of
self-sufficiency. Many government programs intended to help
people out of poverty only meet basic needs, but never give
what is truly needed to be self-sufficient. Simply put, it is
my belief that pouring more money into TANF just doesn't make
sense. Using existing funds in a smarter, better way does.
As a businesswoman running a $30 million agency, I would
never simply add more resources to an already well-funded, yet
failing system or service. More money is not the answer. In the
case of TANF, overhaul is. I have three suggestions for
reforming this program. First, allowing funding at both the
Federal and State levels to be flexible enough to allow us to
pair assistance with intensive case management and other
services.
If TANF was structured more like some of our refugee
programs, would it also mirror their success? The Federal
voluntary agency matching grant program for refugees, which we
participate in, in Fort Worth is a successful, federally-
funded, anti-poverty program in the United States. More than 80
percent of our refugee clients are completely self-sufficient
after 6 months. It is extremely rare for any of our refugee
clients to even access TANF because they usually don't qualify
since they entered the workforce.
Second, we need individualization. State TANF laws and
policies need to be more flexible so this benefit can be used
in a way that will help individual families the most. For
example, TANF clients enrolled in our workforce program receive
vouchers that they can use for child care while they attend
employment-related classes or apply for jobs, but these
vouchers can only be used at certain child care centers. The
centers often have wait lists, are over an hour away, or are
not near a bus stop. The inflexibility of this benefit makes it
extremely difficult for clients to actually access the help
that these vouchers are supposed to provide.
The current Texas TANF structure requires them to follow a
prescribed program that may not meet their needs or help them
make any progress along the path of self-sufficiency. By
failing to customize benefits to individual needs, something
that is intended to help can actually become a barrier to
getting families out of poverty.
Third, rather than abruptly ending once a client starts
working, TANF's benefits should be gradually reduced to offer
continued support until a person can reach a living wage. By
actually raising the income limit for applicants, TANF can
supply supplemental support while the client is working,
helping them get completely out of poverty, and eliminating the
need for them to access government benefits again in the
future.
The end goal of TANF and other welfare programs should be
supporting people to secure living wage work so they can live
healthy, self-sufficient, fulfilling lives. Simply helping them
survive is not enough.
Gallup recently released study findings related to managing
human capital in the workforce. Gallup found that developing
the already innate strengths of individual employees leads to
an exponentially more employee potential. Gallup found that
when employees know and use their strengths, they are far more
productive and their performance is spectacular.
If government assistance can be structured in a similar
way, shifting from a complicated set of criterion processes in
order to attempt to fix people, to allow for case management
systems that would support them using their own strengths, what
is right with them, what would be the result? I think it would
be more people successfully employed, leaving behind reliance
on government, welfare, or charitable assistance forever.
We often say in Fort Worth that we hope to put ourselves
out of business. Making TANF more flexible, individualized, and
responsive would be a step in the right direction.
It is not okay for the greatest Nation on Earth to allow 46
million men, women and children to struggle in poverty day
after day and year after year. It is an affront to the values
that Americans everywhere hold dear. As children reciting the
Pledge of Allegiance, we learn of the ideal America, ``One
Nation under God, with liberty and justice for all.'' We must
do better. To accept the status quo would be to turn our backs
on millions of Americans seeking self-sufficiency and the
pursuit of happiness. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Reynolds follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you very much, Ms. Reynolds. Ms.
Wareing, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF TRACY WAREING, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICAN PUBLIC
HUMAN SERVICES ASSOCIATION

Ms. WAREING. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Members of
the Subcommittee. I am Tracy Wareing Evans, Executive Director
of the American Public Human Services Association. We
appreciate the opportunity to share insight from governor-
appointed service leaders, like Eloise, as well as many local
agency directors that we represent at APHSA, and how we can
more effectively connect Americans to the workforce and to a
sustainable career path.
Mr. Chairman, your description for today's hearing
expresses this Subcommittee's intention to examine ways to make
the Federal welfare program more efficiently and effectively a
hand-up from poverty, not a handout. We, too, are interested in
what evidence tells us actually works and how public
investments can return real and lasting value.
We urge the Subcommittee to look beyond TANF. As laid out
in our member's pathway agenda, success in the marketplace is a
function of not just TANF and other human service programs, but
a wide segment of the broader community, including education
and training, employers, nonprofit groups and other government
agencies.
My remarks about TANF today are provided within this
broader context. While our members do recommend some changes in
TANF's details, and we have noted those in my written
statement, and I think you have heard them from the panelists
today, our overarching concerns are with the full workforce
engagement system, and how its components must work better
together to make real progress. We must support changes in that
human services system that more effectively deliver what we
call engagement that matters, ultimately getting parents into
sustainable jobs with wage progression and advances in
opportunities.
At its core, TANF was designed to help low-income parents
build a pathway out of poverty and toward economic security for
their family, while assuring the safety and well-being of their
children. Our members believe that TANF participants who can
move directly into jobs should have the opportunity to do so.
But our members also know that most TANF participants are
families in crisis and face various obstacles that require
targeted and appropriate support to become work-ready, get a
job with a family-supporting wage, and stay in the workforce
over time.
Indeed, their very presence on the TANF caseload typically
means that faster and more direct routes to sustain employment
haven't worked for them. States such as Utah are using a
variety of strategies to better engage families through
intergenerational approaches, as well as alliances with a
business and education community that trains students in high
demand skills. A compelling example of what we mean by
engagement that matters is occurring in Washington State. There
they began with a focus on stabilizing families in crisis by
identifying what is causing the instability.
Employment counselors look at what is happening with the
family, and they ask questions about their strengths and their
challenges. They ask how are your kids doing in school? Are you
caring for an elderly parent? Do you have a child with special
needs? Is there a substance abuse or mental health condition in
the home? Once stabilized and the family dynamic is understood,
the assessment evaluates work-readiness through educational
levels and work history.
This extended look at what is happening with a family
allows for engagement that matters, leading to better-informed
interventions and early attention to barriers that might
otherwise result in parents failing to secure a job or to
achieve the economic security that we desire for them.
Let me be clear, engagement is not about ignoring sanctions
or extending time limits, these remain important motivators, it
is about getting to the core issues sooner and eliminating the
barriers, helping to assure long-term success and preventing
families from recycling on and off the rolls.
I think it is fair to say that our members are disappointed
that TANF has now, for a decade, been subjected to an
accountability scheme that tracks participation metrics, that
doesn't use actual paid employment or independence from
government support as its outcome measures.
The work participation rate is extremely complicated. As a
result, the system directs energy to process and paperwork, but
tells us little about whether participants are truly moving
toward greater self sufficiency. States are hamstrung by
arbitrary limits to prevent many in the caseload who come with
a wide variety of existing skill levels from receiving the
tailored service that you just heard about from Heather that
are aimed at getting them into long-term employment.
So exactly how should we move forward? States are
encouraged by the opportunities that the Workforce Investment
and Opportunity Act is offering them and urge a more aggressive
approach. We should give States the ability to opt into
performance measurements based on actual employment, retention,
and advancements, as well as the measures of the child's well-
being, rather than the current process-focused activities of
the WPR.
We should examine additional ways to blend and brave
funding from multiple sources in the workforce system, and you
might want to look at the disconnect youth partnership pilots
that were recently enacted that work across existing resources,
not new resources, across HHS, education, and labor.
In conclusion, we really believe that we have to spend more
time talking about what is actually going to work as a career
pathway to serve individuals with those more complex needs and
we look forward to working with you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wareing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you very much, Ms. Wareing. Ms.
Pavetti, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF LADONNA PAVETTI, VICE PRESIDENT FOR FAMILY INCOME
SUPPORT POLICY, CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES

Ms. PAVETTI. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I am LaDonna Pavetti. I am Vice President for Family
Income Support at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. I
have spent most of my career studying TANF programs and working
in States to help improve them. In my testimony today, I am
going to first provide five key facts that demonstrate how
little TANF does to help families find work and escape poverty,
then I will suggest policy changes to improve the program.
First the facts. Number one, TANF provides cash assistance
to very few needy families. When TANF was enacted, 68 families
received assistance for every 100 families in poverty. That
number has since fallen to just 26 families for every 100
families. And in 10 States, fewer than 10 families receive cash
assistance for every 100 families in poverty.
Fact number two: TANF lifts many fewer children out of deep
poverty than AFDC did. The share of children living in deep
poverty has increased since welfare reform was implemented and
research suggests that the loss of TANF benefits has
contributed to that growth.
Fact number three: States spend little of their TANF funds
to help improve recipient's employability. One of the key ideas
behind block granting TANF was that if States had more
flexibility, they could use the funds previously used for cash
grants to help recipients find jobs, and to cover the cost of
work supports like child care. However, this is not what States
did. In 2013 States spent only 8 percent of their TANF funds on
work activities, and only 16 percent on child care.
Number four: Most of TANF's early employment gains have
since been lost. Employment among never-married mothers with
limited education peaked in 2000, 14 years ago and has fallen
considerably since then. Since 2000, never-married mothers have
been just as likely to work as comparable single women without
kids.
Fact number five: The successive work program is vastly
overstated. Studies completed in welfare reform's early years
are often used to tout the success of programs that encourage
recipients to get a job quickly rather than taking the time to
increase their skills so they can get a better job. The problem
is that the studies are decades old and they did not lead to
steady employment for most participants. In one of the programs
deemed most successful, only 38 percent of the participants
were employed steadily. More recent rigorous studies
demonstrate the training is effective. Evaluations of at least
three different training programs show that earnings increased
by 27 to 32 percent in the second year after participants
commenced.
Now I would like to turn to a discussion of how to make
TANF a better program. In developing my recommendations, I
considered two questions: First, what do we want States to do
that they are not doing now? And second, what changes would
encourage them to move in that direction? My answer to the
first question is that we want States to provide assistance to
families in need and we want them to support multiple pathways
to work that take into account individual strengths and
limitations, and not just focus on meeting work rate.
So what changes could Congress make that would help move
States in this direction? I will focus on four recommendations
here and have additional recommendations that echo many of the
recommendations of my colleagues on the panel in my written
testimony.
First, require greater investments in work activities. If
States don't spend more on work activities, it is hard to see
how we will improve TANF work programs. All States could be
required to spend a specified portion of their TANF dollars on
work activities. And rather than paying penalties, States that
do not meet performance measures could be required to invest
additional funds from work activities.
Second, establish a demonstration project that encourages
State experimentation. This demonstration could build on the
bipartisan demonstration project that Congress created to
encourage States to do the same thing with SNAP recipients.
Third, redesign the TANF contingency fund to focus on
subsidized employment and training. The recent recession
exposed serious flaws in the design of the contingency fund,
which is unnecessarily complicated and poorly targeted to
achieve its purpose. It is one of the funds we could use to
actually do something better.
And fourth, identify ways to integrate TANF work programs
into the broader workforce system. Last year Congress passed
bipartisan workforce legislation that emphasized coordination,
training participants for today's labor market, and serving
those in need. Those same principles should be applied to TANF
so that the two systems are in sync with one another.
Finally, I think it is important to keep in mind that TANF
is part of a larger safety net that plays a critical role in
supporting families when they go to work. Success in TANF will
require that those supports are in place. We have learned a lot
over the last 18 years about what does and doesn't work in
TANF. We should use that knowledge to create a more effective
system that will build parents' capabilities and will provide a
brighter future for our children with a future of kids that are
served by TANF and hopefully for those who are not served by
TANF now, but should be. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pavetti follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you very much, Ms. Pavetti. We
will now move to questions. I will begin here.
Ms. Smoot, first I want to start with an apology to you.
You should not have had to wait all those years to get the kind
of help that you really needed. We have to do a better job of
aligning these programs, holding them responsible for actually
helping people like yourself and others who are caught in this
trap. And you deserve that, your kids deserve it, the taxpayers
deserve to get value for what they are providing to help needy
individuals. This is about individual lives trapped in a cycle
of poverty. And we are just moving along at the same pace.
I think all of you in your testimony have put this out
there about very important things that we could consider to
reform the program. My background, I was a physician, so I
dealt with individuals. And I like the idea of casework and
individual approaches, the flexibility, take advantage of the
potential, what each individual brings to the table, help them
find their path, but put them on a path to growth. I think this
is critical.
So Ms. Smoot, you spent 2 years in Job Corps, got a GED,
and finally obtained a college degree all without being able to
successfully land a stable job. During much of that time you
were able to collect the benefits. Is that correct?
Ms. SMOOT. Yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. So what do you think about the TANF
program, as well as the other programs that you dealt with?
What could we do to get more help, substantive help quickly to
you and others who are in similar situations to get you back to
working and supporting your family and achieving your dreams?
Ms. SMOOT. Well, going to America Works, that really helped
me. Going to the Veterans' Group, that really helped me. It is
all about getting either certifications for something you want
to do or getting the education for something you want to do. I
mean, I have seen girls go--well, some people go to programs
and they go out there and they get jobs working at the Safeway,
or Payless, or something making less than $9 or $10 an hour.
Now, personally, getting off of public assistance, it is going
to take you maybe $15, $16 an hour. The money--if you sit with
$10 an hour on PA, you are not going to get off that way, not
unless you are working two or three jobs.
So I would say if somebody wanted to get off, they would
have to find a position making that type of money or more. And
I mean that is just right for me, because the position I have
now is paying just about that much or more and I am hoping not
to ever leave that position, but I like what I am doing. And I
am hoping that whoever tries to get off likes what they are
doing, because if you don't love your job, it is not a job to
you. And what I am doing now, it is not only my job, the people
I am around are my family, you can say. So I mean that--it is--
it is nice.
Chairman BOUSTANY. So when you first got started and you
were told, okay, you have to find work and--tell me a little
bit more about the people trying to help you. Did they actually
say, well, what do you want to do? What do you picture yourself
doing? How can we help you get there? Did they give you
options, you know, on a way to grow into a career rather than
simply take a job at a convenience store or something like that
to get minimum wage or slightly above minimum wage?
Ms. SMOOT. No, the only ones that really helped me was
America Works, and that is why today I am where I want to be.
Back then, I mean, I got my certificates, but I didn't have the
training. I mean, I walked into an interview and she looked at
my resume and said, you have never had a job. No, I had
training, I had education, but I didn't have experience.
So the minute I got home I got the phone call saying I
wasn't qualified. And that really hurt me to my heart not
having the experience and then no one wanted to train me. And
now, look. I got the experience, I had the certifications, and
I have my position that I really want doing something I love.
Chairman BOUSTANY. It is a testament to your spirit that
you just kept going through all that.
Ms. SMOOT. Yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Anderson, do you want to comment on
what you just heard? This is quite a remarkable story.
Ms. ANDERSON. Well, I have been in this business too long.
One of the things I learned early is that we tend not to line
our programs up with people's interests, and we tend not to
line our programs up with people's aptitudes. And we put people
in jobs that they have no interest in, that they cannot see a
future in, and they collapse and they don't stay.
One of the things I think that I learned early and we are
trying to put in our programs is that people need to be in a
job that they enjoy and that they can see a future in. If they
don't see a future, they are not staying in that job, they are
not giving everything they have. Now, I am an employer, and I
tell my employees all the time, I want you to love what you are
doing, because if you love what you are doing, you will give me
everything you have. Why would I think different for people we
have in our programs? And so the disconnect for me is that we
say, I am going to put you in any job, and I believe that is
the wrong move to make.
The other thing that we try to do is that if we look at the
requirement on 12 months of training in Wisconsin, I can't get
a person a good job with that simply because our jobs are
manufacturing and high skills, and it takes 2 years.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Two years, yeah.
Ms. ANDERSON. So in 2 years I can get you an associate
degree. You can become a machinist, you can become a carpenter.
There are all kinds of skilled jobs that I can get you in 2
years that are high-paying jobs. In 12 months, I can hardly get
you anything. And we have jobs in Wisconsin that are going open
because we can't get skills to fill them. So what she said is
what we are experiencing in our programs.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Yeah, we don't want a program that takes
somebody trapped in a hopeless situation and moves them into a
trap of just despair. You can either put them--you know,
hopefully have programs that help them achieve some growth and
a career track, something they can embrace as their own, be
proud of, and to advance their own----
Ms. ANDERSON. I think what she also said is something that
is subtle, her children are following her.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I know. I was getting ready to make that
point. That is a very important point----
Ms. ANDERSON. Successful.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Because we have seen too many families
now where you have multiple generations who get caught in the
same trap. And so you have now, Sherrie, allowed your children
to see a path and you have a tremendous hope of achieving the
American Dream.
Thank you. I now yield to Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman, I think you made some good
points, and it doesn't help to get someone out of one dead end
and into another. Secretary Anderson, I think you just made
that point as well.
Ms. Smoot, you were saying that really, to get by, you have
to get up to the $15-, $16-, $17-an-hour level, depending on
where you are in the country to get what is considered to be
not just a wage, but a liveable wage, right?
Ms. SMOOT. Yes.
Mr. DOGGETT. And there is no way you could get by on a
minimum wage job, is there?
Ms. SMOOT. No.
Mr. DOGGETT. It won't keep food on the table and won't pay
the rent. So often these programs seemed aimed at just getting
somebody--just the numbers, just getting somebody into a
temporary position. One of those jobs that you said might be at
Payless or might be at Safeway sacking groceries, nothing
dishonorable about that, but usually not a way that you can
afford to keep paying the Safeway bill and the rent bill.
I was impressed by, though you came at it in different ways
and I know there is not total consensus on this, but that each
member of our panel from the different perspectives you bring
all seem to be saying that our current TANF work participation
rules, our requirement is flawed. I guess I would just begin
with Dr. Pavetti and go across to each of you and ask you if
you do agree that we need to modify the TANF work requirement
to make it more focused on results and not just on a process?
And should the bottom line performance measure be the number of
TANF recipients who find and maintain a good job and how might
that requirement be more adequately stated?
Ms. PAVETTI. I definitely think we should be focusing on--
--
Chairman BOUSTANY. Turn on your mike.
Ms. PAVETTI. I definitely think we should be focusing more
on results than on process. I think that what we need to think
about is, one of the things that I think is important is there
is a difference between work requirements and imposing work
requirements on individuals, and the work participation rate.
And I have been in enough States that I don't think any State
would move away from actually expecting people to either be in
work or to be in training or to do something. I think that is
very much a part of our culture. But I think what we measure
needs to be what happens when people participate in that.
I think we really need to look at the workforce system so
that we have a blending across and we are not treating TANF
recipients differently than we are treating everybody else. And
so I think there is a need on the work requirements themselves,
the activities, to make those simpler and also to look at
exactly the measures that you indicated to come up with a
better system.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you. Ms. Wareing.
Ms. WAREING. Yeah, I would echo what LaDonna has said. I
think that there--you have to talk about have you been
employed, have you had an opportunity--are you retained in that
employment? There has to be some period of time where you
continue to stay with a family, and what does your wage
progression look like? I think it is interesting, I heard from
one State that is looking at SNAP employment in training
dollars, one of the States that was awarded those extra dollars
from last year. They are looking at whether or not they can
take families who actually transition off of cash assistance
because they are employed, but following them because
oftentimes they remain for a period of time receiving SNAP
assistance.
So they are employed, receiving SNAP assistance and can
they receive that continued case management that is so
important to progressing through the job career pathway, could
we tie that in? I think that is a fascinating idea, and one we
have to watch closely as Washington is doing that.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Reynolds.
Ms. REYNOLDS. Great. Thank you for your question. I think
accountability is key, and I agree with my colleagues that the
end result needs to be focused on not the process. You know, so
many programs that are aimed at combating social issues, infant
mortality, financial success for families, they really measure
indicators, you know. Instead of measuring how much we are
reducing infant mortality, we just measure if somebody has a
medical home and stop there, we say we want to get someone to a
financially successful place and then we just measure if they
have reduced their debt by 10 percent, which, if you have
$10,000 worth of debt and you reduce it to $9,000, that is
good, but you still have a long way to go so----
What I would encourage is outcome measures, really. What
the impact is we want to have would be four things: First,
getting people into jobs. I think it is really important to get
people working. The second would be retention, keeping those
jobs because it is one thing, like one of our colleagues,
Sherrie, to get a job, it is a different thing to keep a job.
The third though, and this is where case management can come
in, is to build skills. We know those with more education, I am
not talking 4-year degrees even, I am talking certificate
programs, vocation programs, we know they are less likely to be
in poverty. So help people build skills and then eventually
getting people to a living wage job. And I believe that those
accountability metrics as good case management supporting
families during those steps would be great.
Mr. DOGGETT. Great. And I want to say as well I worked with
Catholic Charities in San Antonio. They provided such important
leadership on the needs of our immigrants, and the concern that
many immigrant families, of course, we have many immigrant
families that have American citizen children and other family
members, and the work that I am sure you are doing in Tarrant
County as well with our immigrant families is really important.
Ms. REYNOLDS. Thank you.
Mr. DOGGETT. Secretary Anderson.
Ms. ANDERSON. Well, I am going to take a slightly different
turn. I think we should quit treating two-parent families
differently than we treat single-parent families, and we do
that a lot in this program. We have done that for at least 40
years. And I think the outcome of that is that we have more
single-parent families than we do two-parent families. And a
way in which we do that is around our work participation rating
for single-parent families. So we should do all families the
same, and eliminate the difference between the two-parent
families. I think that would help.
I think the other thing that would be important is at least
within our caseload, we have people who are ready to work, they
just need skills. We also have people who have barriers, and
those barriers are real important. And I think for those we
need to figure out a way for our system to be incentivized to
move people with long-term issues into the workplace, and that
will be structurally different than people who we can send to a
vocational education program. I think we have to come to grips,
we have some families that the low-skill jobs are where they
are going to be for the long term.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Mr. Cove.
Mr. COVE. I just want to caution against us moving back
toward the human capital approach for getting people jobs.
Obviously, it differs from individual to individual what they
are going to need to move them into a job and up in the job.
But I used to argue with Senator Moynihan about this until he
finally said to me, you are right, work first works better,
then education and training and classrooms. And yes, education
and training is terribly important and it should be there,
because, as I mentioned in my testimony, it goes along with the
employer and moving that person up in that job.
But we have to be very careful if we are going to say that
everybody has to go into the best job possible. We have the
earned income tax credit, we have many other supports that are
there for individuals who are going into $9- and $10-an-hour
jobs or even minimum wage jobs. I just want to caution, we
don't want to go back there, and there is a tendency right now
in this country to do that.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. No problem. Mr. Young.
Mr. YOUNG. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I open again by--
I want to tell Ms. Smoot how much her testimony affected me, it
was gripping, it was touching. The level of motivation required
to navigate this complex system that you had to deal with, it
is very impressive that you persevered. Your level of
motivation ought not be necessary in order to end up as one of
the success stories.
In that sense, and because of the amount of time it took
you to finally find a job that you saw offered a path forward,
offered you a wage that made sense for you and your family,
offered you opportunity and hope, in that sense, we have failed
you, and so allow me to apologize as well and dedicate myself
here today to trying to improve things however I can.
You did everything right. You listened to the experts. You
took responsibility for actions, by your testimony and all
accounts, and you played by the rules. So, clearly, we need to
change some of those rules. And so, just thank you for being
here very much. Impressive.
Ms. SMOOT. You are welcome.
Mr. YOUNG. Ms. Anderson, I would like to go back to the GAO
report that our Ranking Member referenced in his opening
remarks, highlighting the fact that the TANF program lacks
incentives for large numbers of State and local TANF agencies
to adopt and test promising approaches to help TANF cash
assistance recipients gain employment. So it is a lack of
incentives for these State and local agencies; that is the
heart of the problem.
What might policymakers do to encourage more innovation
within the TANF program and evaluation at the State and local
levels to help more of these recipients attain jobs, attain
employment, retain those jobs, develop more skills, and
ultimately move themselves and their family out of poverty?
Ms. ANDERSON. Well, for me, we have a focus on work and
skill development. They are not separate; they are together.
You work.
So the way you are structured now is that the incentives
are not to get people out of the program and into a job. You
don't get any credit for that. You are getting credit for if I
hold onto you in some way and support that.
We went to a pay-for-performance system, and we did two
things. We looked at our food stamp population and said who
were the people in there who were not in our program, and we
went after them, so everybody thought we lost our minds. But we
dropped our caseload because we have pay-for-performance
systems and we pay our contractors to perform. You don't do the
same thing for us.
In fact, if you look at the work participation rate failure
across the country, the reason why people are failing for those
States who are trying to get people jobs, they don't get credit
for it. So if you just back up and start giving us incentives
for putting people in jobs, I think you would have a complete
turnaround.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you. Thank you. So the focus on work and
making sure that we have the outcomes right and we are
rewarding the outcomes.
Ms. ANDERSON. Yeah. And there are a couple of things. You
know, a lot of people go to work, but they still need a little
help.
Mr. YOUNG. Right.
Ms. ANDERSON. But if we put them in a job where they don't
need a subsidy and we still help them, the States get no
incentive for that. And we view that when we put a person in a
job and they come back to the agency like America Works and
America Works is helping them to retain the job and then go up
in the job, there is no credit for the State for that.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you.
So, with roughly 1 minute left, I am going to give Ms.
Reynolds an opportunity to take a crack at how we incentivize
States, localities to be a bit more creative, to try new
things, and then to evaluate those outcomes so that we all
might learn from their best practices.
Ms. REYNOLDS. Yeah. I agree with a lot of what my colleague
said. I feel like the Federal Government should hold the States
accountable for outcomes, and those outcomes need to tie to job
retention and then ultimately a career ladder where they are
able to move from minimum wage to a little higher wage to
ultimately living-wage employment based on geography as well as
family composition.
Mr. YOUNG. Okay. Thanks.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mrs. Noem, you are recognized.
Mrs. NOEM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Pavetti, I was very interested in your testimony
because it was news to me that a lot of States aren't utilizing
a lot of their TANF dollars for workforce development. And I
tend to be a person who usually sides on the side of the
argument to give the States flexibility. So you give them block
grants, you give them dollars to meet the needs that they have,
because not every State is the same and not every population is
the same; therefore, they can be more flexible and meet the
needs of their people.
But if the States are making decisions that aren't
investing in making sure that people can provide for their
families and have a better future, then I think we have a real
problem. And so I guess I would like to have you weigh in a
little bit.
I come from South Dakota, so we have a very unique
situation in that we have a very low unemployment rate. In
fact, there are towns that have 15,000 to 25,000 people in them
that have 1,500 to 2,000 open jobs. They are begging for people
to move there and to work these jobs, and they will pay to
train them to do that.
So if anybody wants to move to South Dakota, it is cold,
but we will take you.
But we also have some Native American tribes that are the
poorest in the Nation that have 90 percent unemployment. They
are very isolated. They are in parts of the country that
finding them a job would be extremely difficult. So we want
programs to work for them and to give them skills and create
economic development where it is needed, as well.
I guess I would like you to speak a little bit to, do you
believe that the Congress should place some requirements on the
States to invest in increasing workforce participation? And how
do you see that coming down? What would be the best way to do
that, while still maintaining some flexibility for the States
to meet the needs of their people?
Ms. PAVETTI. I think if you don't mandate it States won't
do it.
Mrs. NOEM. Why do you think that is? That seems to me----
Ms. PAVETTI. I think there are two reasons why States spend
as little as they do on work and related programs.
One is because they serve very few people in TANF to start
with. And the incentives are they get a caseload reduction
credit, so if their caseload goes down, they have to put fewer
people in work. So they don't need to spend it if they don't
serve people. So there is that incentive.
And then the other incentive is that they can use the money
to fill other budget holes. And we see States increasingly, and
particularly when they have constraints, they are shortening
time limits, they are even serving fewer people, so they can
move those resources to fill other things that the State would
have paid for otherwise.
So there are lots of, sort of, incentives for States not to
serve.
Mrs. NOEM. So you are saying they could move those dollars
to----
Ms. PAVETTI. They can move them to pretty much----
Mrs. NOEM [continuing]. Early childhood development, things
like that----
Ms. PAVETTI. Exactly.
Mrs. NOEM [continuing]. And that that is happening.
Is there a State out there that you can think of that is
making the correct decisions?
Ms. PAVETTI. Well, I think States are--well, I will just
tell you, I have the data for South Dakota.
Mrs. NOEM. Oh, that is great.
Ms. PAVETTI. Even though South Dakota, actually--South
Dakota spends twice the share of dollars on work than the
national average. So, even though they are a small State, they
are actually investing.
I think there are States that are--the States are all over
the map.
Mrs. NOEM. Yeah.
Ms. PAVETTI. So I don't think there is one State that
points--some States are spending a lot on childcare; some
States are spending none on childcare. But I think there isn't
a message that says that work is what we want these dollars to
go to.
So I think the way to actually make it happen is to have
States be required to increase over time so they get to some
point, so that you begin to, sort of, have those investments,
to incentivize States that actually spend it, that they may be
the ones that get the incentives.
And then the other piece, I think, is I really do think, if
we maintain penalties, that is a problem, because what you do
is you have States that don't meet the work requirement and
then you take money out so they have even less requirement. So
one thing could be to have States be required to spend more on
work so that they begin to meet those metrics.
So I think that I wouldn't want to keep the work
participation requirement, whatever that metric is. I think
there are lots of different ways in which you could begin to
incentivize States to have them move in that direction and
spend more on work. And I think part of it has to be serving
people who are in need----
Mrs. NOEM. Yeah.
Ms. PAVETTI [continuing]. So that you can't, sort of, just
have States not serving anyone.
Mrs. NOEM. Ms. Anderson, could you weigh in on this a
little bit? You spoke about incentivizing States to make the
correct decisions. When they get more people in the workforce,
in a long-term job situation, is there a way you think we can
incentivize States to do that, as well?
Ms. ANDERSON. Well, I think you have to reward work. I
mean, to me, it is pretty simple. We reward States' efforts in
getting people jobs. People go where the incentives are. A
human animal is a pretty simple animal, you know. This is where
the fruit is, that is where we are going to go.
Mrs. NOEM. Uh-huh.
Ms. ANDERSON. And so the way in which TANF is structured
now, that is not where the fruit is. The fruit is someplace
else.
Mrs. NOEM. Is there another program that does that that we
could use as an example?
Ms. ANDERSON. I think the child support program actually
does that. I mean, it is kind of strange that that would be the
program, but the incentive system is around what the Federal
Government says it wants, and that is where the incentives are,
and that is what they pay for. And over in the collections
part, where everybody is struggling, is where the most
incentives are.
And so I think it is a good model for you to decide what
your goals are, and then that is what you pay for. But paying
for process, you need to stop that.
Mrs. NOEM. Okay.
Ms. ANDERSON. And the work participation rate is paying for
process.
Mrs. NOEM. Appreciate it.
I am out of time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Davis, you are recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank all of the witnesses for their testimonies and
for being here.
Mr. Cove, you have put a lot of emphasis on getting a job
and that that is what agencies are supposed to be able to do.
And you also emphasized that your agency has been quite
successful in terms of the numbers of jobs that you have been
able to direct or acquire for people.
What percentage of those would you say were livable jobs,
jobs that approach where Ms. Smoot might be?
Mr. COVE. The average wage at America Works, across the
board, has been over $10 an hour. That includes, obviously, as
I mentioned before, other supports that the government
provides.
Obviously, depending on what city you are in or what State,
that may or may not be fully a livable wage. But it may well
move you quickly, if things are organized properly, into what
you would consider a living wage.
But I do consider work, any work, better than sitting home.
And it is more money than sitting home.
Mr. DAVIS. I certainly agree that it is more money than no
money.
Mr. COVE. Or than welfare.
Mr. DAVIS. And better than welfare.
So you are saying that, if the person is earning, say, $10
an hour and there are some other supplements that they might be
able to require, that they can feel better about themselves in
terms of what they are contributing to self-sufficiency and
well-being and moving on.
Mr. COVE. Well, without question. And I think we heard that
testimony a few minutes ago. The children of the parents that
go out and start working are really affected by this, as is the
person themselves in terms of their self-esteem.
I really do believe any job is better than no job. And I
understand there are problems in various communities with,
quote, ``a living wage,'' but we can't solve everything. And
the first thing I think we have to solve--and we have been
talking about this in this panel--is how do you get the States
incentivized in a way so that they get people working.
There are other issues, as well, but I am not sure I can
take care of that.
Mr. DAVIS. Ms. Smoot, I think all of us are indeed
impressed with your success and what you have been able to do.
What would you say exactly that TANF did for you?
Ms. SMOOT. Basically, TANF just provided something, as far
as me doing for my kids and for things for me to buy in the
household. I couldn't afford a home, could hardly afford food
until I got SNAP. That is about it. That is all I could really
afford--get personal things, as far as the house, as far as
taking care of the kids, as far as healthwise or any conditions
in the home.
Mr. DAVIS. During the process, did that give you some of
the energy that you needed, some of the hope that you needed,
some of what you needed to keep moving?
Ms. SMOOT. Well, it provided me transportation to go look
for jobs. That, and for my kids to maybe eat at school when
they couldn't afford the food, as far as--I mean, sometimes
they had the programs where you can get free food at school,
but--it was mainly nothing, as far as trying to survive in the
home.
I mean, look at the houses that they--condos are going up.
They are running in the 200s, 300s for sale. And then other
homes you rent, they are $1,500, $1,600 a month. I mean, no one
on TANF can afford that. Not even if you are making $10 an
hour, you still can't afford that. The money I am making right
now, I can't afford that.
So, money-wise, if you really want to be stable or
comfortable, you have to be making at least $50,000 a year. If
you want to be stable, about $30,000 a year. But that still is
not going to get you off TANF.
If you want to get off TANF and stay off TANF to do on your
own or for your kids or see your kids see you thriving and they
want to do it, too, instead of them falling back on TANF--
because my mom, she was on it. And I didn't see much of any
good job where it was as though she could take care of me and
my brothers. And it was just her. She couldn't afford it.
And I am looking--my kids look at me, and they see that I
couldn't do it, and they are going to try to do for themselves
before they can even try to think about TANF.
So, to get off of it, I say $15, $16 an hour, but if you
want to be comfortable, it is $50,000. I mean, these
companies--I am thinking the companies today, some of them,
they are not hiring permanently. They are hiring temporary.
And, as you see, just about my whole life was temporary
positions. That is the only way I could get experience. There
were no stable positions, no permanent ones, because they
weren't hiring for us. And basically they are still not. I am
on a contract. I am not on a permanent roll.
And I am still trying to strive for it today. I am not
looking back on TANF, no. I am not looking back. I am looking
forward. I am trying to move up to own my own home, where my
kids can do the same thing.
And my kids are now about to be successful because I picked
myself up. I didn't want them to see me keep struggling along
with them on my back, just keep it moving and keep it moving
with them on my back. No, I wanted to keep it moving so they
can go ahead, go before me, run for the stars. You shoot, you
go ahead. I want you up there.
So I got up. America Works helped. Veterans Group helped.
And I still say, if you want to get off TANF, that is the only
way to go.
Mr. DAVIS. And I think you make a great case for job
creation as being one of the great needs of our country. Thank
you very much.
Secretary Anderson, when we talk about flexibility and
providing more flexibility for States, what are we talking
about?
Ms. ANDERSON. Well, I guess the first thing I can say is
that, for Wisconsin, I don't think we are like Ms. Pavetti's
States that she is looking at, because we don't want children
in poverty, and so we do everything we can to make sure that
parents have opportunities for work.
For us, what we need from you--and I have to now speak for
Wisconsin--what we need from you is the ability for you to put
some incentives in front of us so that when we put a person to
work--and we do that a lot--that that is what we get credit
for.
And the way we have tried to structure our programs is to
do--we try to reward work, and, because these are family
programs, we try to supplement childcare, because these are
people with children. So we do that.
But there is another piece that we keep continually not
wanting to look at that we need flexibility around, and that is
that we want the fathers to be able to be incentivized to work,
as well. Because when we get a dad paying child support and a
mom working, we are putting income in that family that will
help that family. So it is a two-parent thing; both of them
need to be working.
And when you give us flexibility around that two-parent
family, all family issues, we can start putting more and more
fathers to work even if they are not in the home. And that is
important. We cannot forget fathers are important to the well-
being of their children. And we need more flexibility around
allowing fathers to participate in the work programs and have
the same kind of services that the mothers have.
Mr. DAVIS. And I am so delighted to hear you say that,
because it seems to me that when we strengthen and enable the
father, even though he may not be physically in the home, that
you are actually strengthening the family and you are dealing
with it as a family unit.
And I really appreciate that perspective, because we try to
work a great deal with fatherhood. And we have something called
a fatherhood initiative, where some focus is put on those
individuals and the roles that they play.
Ms. Reynolds, if I could just----
Chairman BOUSTANY. Well, the gentleman's time has expired.
I want to get to the others----
Mr. DAVIS. Okay.
Chairman BOUSTANY [continuing]. Because we are going to
have votes coming up, too.
Mr. DAVIS. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. DAVIS. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Holding.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cove, if you could take a minute and sketch out for me
how it would have been different had Ms. Smoot met you on day
one of entering into, you know, this maze. How would it have
been different under your program?
Mr. COVE. Well, let me tell you why it would have been
different first. The reason it would have been different is
that we are--and I am going to sound like a broken record, but
we are only paid if we get her a job and she stays in that job.
Otherwise, I go out of business. And we do quite well as a
company, and we do quite well because we quickly move people
into the jobs and give them the help that they need to stay in
the jobs, which is a terribly important thing. That point has
been made by others here, as well.
We focus hard on moving the person quickly and attaching
them quickly to the labor market----
Mr. HOLDING. Give me some specifics, just, you know, how
your program works.
Mr. COVE. Sure.
Mr. HOLDING. I mean, just tick through it.
Mr. COVE. First, the person gets assessed, and we get a
sense of what their strengths are.
Second, during that period of time, we have a very hard-
nosed, hard-hitting sales force. Think of us as, like,
Manpower, Inc., or Kelly or whatever. We have salespeople--we
don't have job developers--we have salespeople who go out into
the community, and they sell to companies and say, ``We are
going to get you someone who you are going to want to keep, and
we are going to reduce your turnover. You are not going to do
us any favors or the person any favors. You are going to do
yourself a favor by hiring a person who we get to you.'' And
that makes a significant difference.
We then have what we call corporate representatives who are
available to the individual if they get into any issues that
are in the way of work. I call it the static in their lives----
Mr. HOLDING. So transportation issues or childcare.
Mr. COVE. Exactly. All of those things. So, if the person
is a good worker, we try to put a protective cocoon around them
so that they are prepared to stay in the job and handle the
things that maybe they wouldn't have been able to handle
without us.
So you have this assessment of a person's strengths--and,
by the way, you will hear a lot about barriers to employment. I
just don't believe in it. I mean, of course there are people
that have certain things that will keep them from certain jobs
and certain things that might ultimately keep them from going
to work. But, if you start with the issue that people have
barriers, let's see what the barriers are and let's get rid of
those barriers, you don't get people into work.
About 20 percent of this country are working alcoholics. If
a person came in to me and I knew that they were an alcoholic
and I didn't place them and I said, ``You have to go into an
alcoholic treatment program,'' we would lose 10 to 20 percent
of our working population here.
We have to be very careful. You don't know what barrier is
going to get in the way. And that is why we have these
corporate representatives, so when something does pop up, we
are there to help.
And I don't mean to sound naive. Of course, someone comes
in with a drug issue, we make sure that person goes into a drug
treatment program. But it is a drug treatment program where
they can work. And then we make sure that they continue in that
drug treatment program.
Mr. HOLDING. So if a person comes to you and they have very
few skills and you are not able to get them a job, I mean, what
happens then?
Mr. COVE. They have very few skills?
Mr. HOLDING. Very few skills, and it just doesn't--you are
not able to find them a job.
Mr. COVE. Well, let me give you something that might seem
counterintuitive.
We place thousands of ex-offenders in jobs. Many or most of
them don't have high school degrees, don't have hard skills.
You know where we place a lot of them? Customer service,
because they are very good at BS. And you put them behind a
phone, and they can sell someone in South Dakota a
refrigerator. They are amazing. It is backroom, so they don't
have to interact with other people; you know, we are not
worried about them getting in trouble. And they are highly
successful doing that.
That is only one example. I could give you others, but that
is an example.
Mr. HOLDING. Good. Thank you very much.
Mr. COVE. You are welcome.
Mr. HOLDING. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank each and every one of you for your
testimony.
Ms. Smoot, I have to tell you, I very much appreciate your
testimony and listening to your questions and your responses.
You have been a blessing--a blessing to this Committee and a
blessing for me to sit here and hear your story.
And all that I can keep thinking over and over when you say
that you want your kids to do better and that you are going to
do better, you are the American Dream. You are what everyone
strives for. And they will do better, and you will continue to
do better. And I think that is a lot of hope and inspiration
for myself and for so many people.
If you would talk to my grandparents, who none are alive
today, they would tell you that they were all in poverty and
now their grandson is a Member of Congress. They never had the
opportunity to live and see that.
But I have to tell you, they will do better. Who knows--you
know, the U.S. Marshal or whatever job--they could be a Member
of Congress. And you have made a big step today. And I just
want to say thank you for that, for myself.
Mr. Cove, I have a couple questions from the perspective,
looking at the State of Missouri, where I am from. The general
assembly just passed a piece of legislation that would change
the TANF benefits because the scorecards have shown that they
have rated F's in managing the programs and not really having a
work requirement in receiving TANF benefits. And this would
require a work benefit. It also would shorten the length of
time from, I think, 60 months to 30 months.
The Governor vetoed it today, so now it has been sent back
to the general assembly to either override it or to change it.
What are your thoughts on the work activity? I mean, do you
think it is extremely important to have work activity tied to
TANF, or--I would assume it is, but do you see a great
advantage?
Mr. COVE. I think what has been mentioned is there is, as
my wife calls it--she is the CEO; she just had to leave--
``administrivia.'' There is an awful lot of work that has to be
done to show that people are there and that they are
participating. I think that needs to be simplified.
I think, again, the effort has to be to look at whether the
person is going into a job and getting a job. That, to me, is
what is important. And, as Eloise said, incentivizing States to
do that is, to me, so terribly important. And, again,
incentivizing the delivery of these services through pay-for-
performance is terribly important, as well.
So I think you are going to have to look carefully at that.
The participation rate issue is a serious issue.
Mr. SMITH. Ms. Anderson, what are your thoughts?
Ms. ANDERSON. Well, I am just going to be repeating.
Incentivize work. Treat us the way we in our State treat our
contractors. We pay for performance, and they deliver. Pay us
for performance, and we will deliver.
When you set out the performance criteria, it is hard to do
something else, because it is--this is what you want, either we
do it or we don't, and if we don't, we don't get paid for it,
and if we do, we get paid for it. I think that is simple. And I
think it is simple for you; it is simple for us. We spend a lot
less work and time on administrative stuff, and we spend much
more of our time on actually getting people jobs.
And what will happen is that--when I look at this system,
in some places I don't see much change from the old AFDC
program. Because a lot of the pieces in it, a lot of the
structure in it are carryovers. And I want to get rid of the
carryovers.
Make this a pay-for-performance system, and I think you
will see the States deliver.
Mr. SMITH. Is there anything else any of you would like
to--
Ms. Reynolds.
Ms. REYNOLDS. We just cannot stop at getting a job, though.
We have to work to move people to get skills, while they are
working and respect the dignity of work, but we have to move
them across the finish line. Because we have seen it time and
time again in our community, throughout the Nation, you get
people employed, you support them a little, then you back off
because you have your next client coming through the door, and
then they cycle back into crisis. And so we need to make sure
we move people across the finish line into that living-wage
job.
In addition, if you just look at the economics of this,
often what you will find is that people on TANF aren't just
getting TANF. They are getting food stamps, they are getting
public housing, they are getting a multitude of other benefits.
And sometimes working a minimum-wage job or a $9-an-hour job,
depending on family composition, it is cheaper for them to--it
is more economically sensible for them to live on all kinds of
welfare programs.
And so what we have to do is support people across that
finish line. Otherwise, we are disincentivizing people to ever
get out of poverty.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The gentleman yields back.
Next, we will go to Mr. Dold.
Mr. DOLD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I also want to echo my thanks to all of you for your
testimony, for taking your time to come and help us understand
what is going on.
And, Ms. Smoot, I particularly want to thank you for
sharing your story.
And I would like to start with you, if I may, because you
have an interesting perspective that I think most don't have,
in terms of actually understanding, going through these
different programs, many of which didn't work.
Can you tell us from that perspective, kind of, what didn't
work and what would you have liked to have seen differently? We
know that, obviously, when you came to see Mr. Cove that things
started to work, but before then?
Ms. SMOOT. Well, before, I didn't have the education. My
obtaining my bachelor's degree, that was one. Having
certifications and experience in what I have now, that is
number two. And no other programs provided that. When I was in
America Works, they enrolled me in Veterans Group, where I
received my certifications.
And now I am doing everything I love, as far as all the
education I have. I mean, the bachelor's degree was in computer
information systems, which is IT, the certifications are IT----
Mr. DOLD. Right.
Ms. SMOOT [continuing]. And now I am in the IT field. So I
am feeling, if anybody wants to do something they like doing,
they have to get those skills and those certifications to do
it.
Mr. DOLD. Well, and you are a testament to being--you know,
your perseverance, as well. But I think your point also goes to
what Ms. Pavetti said earlier in terms of just the percentage
of what people are putting--or what some organizations are
putting toward work.
And I think you had mentioned it was 8 percent?
Ms. PAVETTI. It is 8 percent nationally.
Mr. DOLD. What do you think that the number should be, in
terms of the emphasis for organizations?
Ms. PAVETTI. That is a hard one. I mean, I think that there
is such a, sort of, wide range, that I think what we want to do
is to figure out a way to gradually increase it so that people
are spending more. But, again, I agree with Eloise that you
have to incentivize States to focus on getting people jobs and
paying for those results. So I don't think just spending the
money is what you want.
Although I do think that one thing that is important is
that there is no real correlation between how much a State
spends and their work participation rates. So some States don't
spend much because they don't have anybody on TANF.
Mr. DOLD. And I also think one of the big problems that we
see is that a one-size-fits-all mentality----
Ms. PAVETTI. Exactly.
Mr. DOLD [continuing]. From the government is oftentimes
the response coming from Washington, and that really doesn't
work.
Ms. PAVETTI. Right. And I think that paying for results,
though--then you allow States to use the strategies that work
in their communities. If it is a Native American community,
that is going to be different than an urban area.
And so, if you are paying for the end result, you want to
take into account the employment situation and the differences
there. But, again, if you are paying for results, you allow
States that flexibility, that they can do things differently if
that is what they choose to do.
Mr. DOLD. What would you say--because there are those that
would say, listen, there are those who just need help and they
are not going to be able to find a job and we need to make sure
they do it, we just need to make sure we help them.
What are your claims--Ms. Reynolds, what would you say to
someone that says, listen, we just can't do that?
Ms. REYNOLDS. Yeah. I think you have to look at poverty in
several different ways. You have to look at it from a
situational poverty situation. Somebody comes through your
doors, you know, has run on hard times, and you just have to
give them a little bit of intervention and support to get them
back on their feet.
You have folks in generational poverty, you know, families
who have not seen anything different, not seen mom or dad go to
work in the morning, who have been on welfare for generations.
And so those folks, again, work, same as with situational
folks.
But then there is a group who will always be in chronic
poverty and, because of mental abilities, disabilities, several
things like that, may not have the ability to work.
I think the most important thing is we figure out in all
groups how they can contribute to society, depending on what
level of contribution folks can make based on their individual
circumstances.
Mr. DOLD. Well, and I think in your opening statement you
were talking about individualization, so----
Ms. REYNOLDS. Absolutely.
Mr. DOLD [continuing]. How do we target programs for the
individual as opposed to, ``This is what you might fit into''?
Ms. REYNOLDS. Right. Right.
Mr. DOLD. Can you talk to me a little bit more about that
and what you are doing to----
Ms. REYNOLDS. Absolutely.
So, like, for example, in our organization, we will have a
focus on pulling families out of poverty. And what we mean by
``out of poverty'' is a living wage, 3 months of living-wage
savings, so if they fall on hard times they still have some
savings in order, no government or charity assistance needed,
as well as appropriate levels of debt. So that is the end goal.
That is what we are trying to accomplish. That is the result we
intend to have.
But then what we do is we sit down, we thoroughly assess
what is going on in that family's life. We understand what
their strengths are so we can build on those strengths that the
family has. And then we will work on a customizable plan for
that family.
And we are aggressive about it. You know, in one of our
services, we are saying--you know, every 7 days we are having
contact with our family, and every 21 days they are making
progress on their individual goals. And we are sticking with
them for a long period of time. People do not often move out of
poverty in 6 to 12 months. People move out of poverty in
usually about 18 to 36 months because they need to get a skill
to get to a wage where they can support their family.
Mr. DOLD. Well, I certainly hope that we can focus on what
unites us. And I know that we can all agree that we want to get
people out of poverty into work, where they can support
themselves and have better opportunities for their children.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
But, again, I want to just thank you all for your testimony
and for what you are doing out in the workforce. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
We will go now to Mr. Meehan.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to each and every one of you for the work that
you are putting into this very, very important area and making
the difference in so many families' lives.
But it is a complex situation, including--we are often
dealing with families, and you sort of identified it, in a
particular context. There are a lot of other factors that play
in. I saw a lot of transients when I was a prosecutor dealing
with families' movement, other kinds of factors.
How do you deal--you have a flexible program, but you have
these other elements that are part of the family circumstance.
Some may be of their control, some beyond their control.
Ms. Reynolds, you have impressed me not just with your
enthusiasm but this idea of working through to a point, staying
with them. So how do you accommodate these various stages in
which a lot of curve balls can be thrown in the process?
Ms. REYNOLDS. It is not easy, and it is complex; there is
no doubt about it. But there are a variety of interventions.
Number one, it is about engagement. It is about, from the
moment you meet a family that you are serving, starting to meet
their basic need, because if someone does not have a roof over
their head or wonders where their next meal is coming from,
they are not thinking about self-sufficiency. And so, first of
all, it is meeting a client where they are at.
But, second of all, it is instilling hope in them, giving a
picture of a tomorrow and what life could look like----
Mr. MEEHAN. I don't want to interrupt your----
Ms. REYNOLDS. Yes?
Mr. MEEHAN [continuing]. Answer, but let me ask: Are you
getting--because one of the things that Ms. Pavetti and I think
Ms. Wareing and some others have said, we want to reward
success and progress. But are there abilities to be able to
measure those things? Are we giving you the capacity to be able
to measure that as a success? Or are some people going to say,
well, it has been 9 months and, you know, you are still dealing
with hope, we still haven't gotten them to work?
Ms. REYNOLDS. I don't think the Federal Government needs to
measure if we are creating hope or if they are engaged. I think
that gets into the very problem of all these indicators and no
end result. I think the end result needs to say what folks are
saying: jobs, and I would argue living-wage jobs, as the ending
point.
But I would say, we know on the ground that if you do not
have engagement, if you don't create hope, if you don't take a
client where they are at and move them step by step by step and
help support them, bring out their individual strengths and
what is going on in their family--they are survivors--how you
move them forward, I don't think you all need to be involved in
those metrics and measuring. I think the end result needs to
remain on jobs. It is our work to make sure we get clients
across that finish line.
Mr. MEEHAN. Can any of the panel say their followup on that
thinking?
Or, as well, sometimes we often hear--and there was
testimony already that there is a variety of other programs out
there, competing programs, and the families often qualify for
multiple things simultaneously. How do you deal with the
variety of programs being out there together?
Ms. Wareing, you are raising your hand.
And is there a way for us to get to a point in which none
of the programs are so completely needed?
Ms. WAREING. Yeah, I think we have a huge opportunity, Mr.
Meehan, to align our programs. And it is not that those other
programs are always out of line. They can be very important and
supportive. I think the notion about how much we spend on work
in the States has to also look at what that spending on work
supports, like childcare. So someone can't go to a job if they
have a young child and don't have support, knowing what
childcare costs, to have some subsidy supports for that.
But the biggest opportunity I see right now is one that
Congress put before us last year, which is we reauthorized the
Workforce Investment and Opportunities Act. And one of the
things you all did was say TANF should be a mandatory partner.
Now, States can opt out, but TANF can be a mandatory partner.
And that means looking at the entire workforce engagement
system, how all those supports work together, and thinking
about how other supports--TANF should be short-term, TANF
subsidy and cash assistance should be short-term--help someone
so that their kids have food on the table and they can pay
their bills, and get to the place where then we have moved
someone into a job, into a job that has progression, into a job
with a living wage, and then we have to have a mechanism by
which those other supports slowly scale down.
And our end game is someone is employed with a living wage
and not on government support. And I think all of us agree that
has to be what we are aiming for.
Mr. MEEHAN. Ms. Pavetti.
Ms. PAVETTI. I just would like to make one comment, that I
think it is important to recognize that there is this huge
diversity of people who are receiving TANF as well as other
public benefits, and their ability to move into work is varied.
And I think what Heather said about really thinking about what
contribution can people make--it is not always going to be
work. It is not always going to be work at 40 hours, 20 hours.
So I think we have to recognize there are families who have
extreme limitations and that we need to think about what is the
support we provide for them so that their kids always have some
basic level of support, a roof over their head, and food. They
need to be able to provide for them.
So I think we need to be thinking of the diversity and
moving people as far as they can go. But I think that if we
assume everybody can go to work, we are fooling ourselves.
There aren't enough jobs in every place, and there are also
some people who have just very significant issues.
Mr. MEEHAN. Can you quantify success, though, in that
category? Because you were saying, ``Pay us for success.''
Ms. PAVETTI. Right. And I think you are not going to have
success with everybody, but I think success will be different
for different people. So, again, I think what you want is to
aim for work and get as close as you can, but recognize that
for some people they may not be able to sustain work all the
time.
There was a program in Chicago called Project Match. What
they did was they created jobs that were 10 hours a week, where
they paid people stipends to be part of their communities so
that they were making a contribution. I think we have to be
thinking about what can we do to create opportunities for
people to be part of their communities, where they feel like
they are making a contribution, if they can't sustain, sort of,
being in the regular labor market.
That is going to be a small group of people, but we can't
leave them behind. We have to make sure that we have a safety
net and a way to help that group of people, as well.
Mr. MEEHAN. Well, thanks, each and every one of you, for
your insights.
Well, Mr. Chairman, my time is up, but there is a--one of
the panelists wants to----
Chairman BOUSTANY. Yeah, that is fine.
Mr. MEEHAN [continuing]. Have testimony.
Ms. ANDERSON. Yeah, I just have to step in on this one.
The mentally ill and people with physical disabilities need
to be not looked at as people who can't work. They can work.
Every morning, I see people come into our garage at our work
going to work who have some serious disabilities.
We may need to think about having both rehab and TANF do
more collaborative work. Goodwill has done an excellent job at
putting people to work. So I don't like hearing people can't go
to work.
One of the things that got me started in this work was a
person walking in--wheelchairing himself into my office, with
no ability to use his hands, he had to use a pencil in his
mouth, saying, ``I want a job.'' That did it for me. If
somebody can come in my office with nothing going for him in
terms of physical capability saying, ``I want a job, and I want
to work,'' we need to throw this notion out of our heads that
people with mental disabilities and physical disabilities
cannot work.
There are jobs out there for them, and we have a lot of
agencies that prove that. So I don't--I don't like hearing
that. I get very upset----
Ms. PAVETTI. Can----
Ms. ANDERSON [continuing]. Because, when you are in the
workforce, however you are in it, you are part of the
community. And we have to quit isolating people and making them
less than human. And, in our society, the first thing we ask
people when we go to parties or whatever we do is, what do you
do? We don't even ask you what your name is. So let's not
isolate people.
Ms. PAVETTI. Can I just----
Ms. ANDERSON. I am sorry, but that is my soapbox for today.
Ms. PAVETTI. Can I just make one quick clarification?
I think that we need to just sort of--I don't disagree that
people can work, but I think the evidence of what we can do is
quite limited, and we need to accept that there are alternative
pathways.
New York City did an experiment, at one point, where they
took the group of people with the most significant barriers to
employment and put them in a special program where they
provided very significant resources and really tried to move
them on a path to work. And they did have an increase in the
number of people who went to work, but, in the end, they got
about a third of that group of people into jobs. So we have a
long way to go to learn how do we get people into jobs who have
those barriers.
So I agree that we should believe that everybody can work,
but I think the reality of what we have been able to accomplish
is different than getting everyone in. So I think that we
can't, sort of, assume that we have the answers, because we
don't.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Cove.
Mr. COVE. I want you to understand that what you are
hearing here are two very different ways of approaching the
world.
Part of what you are hearing is what we had before TANF,
which was, there are lots of people who are broken, there are
lots of people who need a lot of services. And you know what
happened with that? No one went to work.
What you want now is you want to recognize that that may
exist but not start from the position that the barriers are
there. You have to start from the position that everyone can go
to work and then deal with those who turn out they cannot work.
But if you start with the other position, you are going to end
up where we were before TANF.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. That is a very great closing
argument on all of this.
I want to thank all of you. This was really compelling
testimony, very helpful to us, as we are trying to shed light
on this fundamental issue on how can we improve the TANF
program and get individuals and families back into the work
world and escape poverty. And I think your testimony was very
important in shedding light on that and helping us to
understand what steps we need to take. I think you all did a
terrific job, so I want to say thank you.
And, with that, we will conclude the hearing. This hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:03 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
