- PROTECTING THE FREE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING THE FREE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS
ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 2, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-OS10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-161                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
DEVIN NUNES, California              CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            XAVIER BECERRA, California
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               MIKE THOMPSON, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
JIM RENACCI, Ohio
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROBERT J. DOLD, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina

David Stewart, Staff Director

Nick Gwyn, Minority Chief of Staff

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois, Chairman

PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
JASON SMITH, Missouri                CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
TOM REED, New York                   DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM RICE, South Carolina
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of March 2, 2016 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Alexander Atkins, Law Student, Georgetown University.............    10
Robert P. George, McCormick Professor of Jurisprudence, Princeton
University, and Visiting Professor of Law at Harvard University    87
Frances R. Hill, Professor of Law and Dean's Distinguished
Scholar for the Profession, University of Miami School of Law..   116
Catherine Sevcenko, Director of Litigation, Foundation for
Individual Rights in Education.................................    40
Joshua Zuckerman, Student, Princeton University, and Founding
Member of the Princeton Open Campus Coalition..................    67

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF).................................   172
Christian Legal Society (CLS)....................................   176
Charles Michelsen................................................   186
Cru..............................................................   188
Doug Weber.......................................................   197
Justin P. Gunter.................................................   199
Michael Berry....................................................   204
Mitchell Steffen.................................................   213
ReJOYce In Jesus Campus Fellowship (RJCF)........................   216
Young America's Foundation (YAF).................................   226

PROTECTING THE FREE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS

ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 2, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Peter Roskam
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Wednesday, February 24, 2016
No. OS-10

Chairman Roskam Announces Hearing on

Protecting the Free Exchange of Ideas

on College Campuses

* NEW LOCATION *

All other details remain unchanged

House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Chairman Peter Roskam
(R-IL), today announced that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on
``Protecting the Free Exchange of Ideas on College Campuses'' on
Wednesday, March 2, 2016, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office
Building, beginning at 10:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time to hear witnesses, oral testimony at
this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However, any
individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to make a submission, and click on the link
entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once
you have followed the online instructions, submit all requested
information. ATTACH your submission as a Word document, in compliance
with the formatting requirements listed below, by the close of business
on Wednesday, March 16, 2016. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-9263.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record,
and any written comments in response to a request for written comments
must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in
compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be
maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in
a single document via email, provided in Word format and must not
exceed a total of 10 pages. Witnesses and submitters are advised that
the Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record.

2. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name,
company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be
included in the body of the email. Please exclude any personal
identifiable information in the attached submission.

3. Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the
exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available
online at
http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman ROSKAM. The Subcommittee will come to order.
Welcome to the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Oversight, our
hearing on protecting the free exchange of ideas on college
campuses.
Today we are going to examine how tax-exempt colleges and
universities are suppressing the free exchange of ideas on
campus. And specifically, we are going to focus on prohibitions
on student use of campus resources for political activity, the
adoption of restrictive speech codes, and incidents when
administrators or students have silenced other students for
seeking to exchange--engage in the exchange of opposing ideas.
Every single year American taxpayers give colleges and
universities billions of dollars worth of tax breaks. And, as a
Nation, we believe education is an extremely valuable public
good. But is this bargain truly benefitting the American
taxpayers or the students, when colleges suppress speech on
campus?
Most colleges and universities, both public and private,
are either tax-exempt organizations themselves under 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code, or they have separate endowments
that are (c)(3)s. And under these provisions of tax law, the
taxpayers give financial benefits to schools based on the
educational value that they offer to our society.
When colleges and universities suppress speech, however, we
have to question whether that educational mission is really
being fulfilled. Almost all institutions of higher education
explicitly pledge their support for unfettered academic
exploration and freedom of expression in their advertising and
school policies. But every day we learn of new ways that these
schools are shutting down the marketplace of ideas on campus.
Schools enact speech codes to stop teasing, and require the
reporting of micro-aggressions. Students shout down speakers
because they disagree with the ideas they are hearing
presented. Colleges force students who want to advocate for a
particular position to do so only while standing in a tiny,
designated free-speech zone, often the campus boondocks, and
only if they have made an advance reservation days or weeks
prior.
One situation that has caught this Subcommittee's attention
was the case of one of our witnesses. When Alexander Atkins
wanted to pass out political campaign flyers on his campus at
Georgetown Law, the administration shut him down, arguing that
his political speech could affect the school's 501(c)(3)
status. But Mr. Atkins' persistence has paid off; Georgetown is
currently working to revise its policies.
And by unanimous consent I will enter into the record the
letter that Georgetown sent to Ranking Member Lewis and me,
acknowledging the faults of their previous free speech
policies, and outlining steps they are taking to reform them so
students like Alex, regardless of their points of view, can
discuss issues important to them, debate the views they
disagree with, and fully participate in the learning process we
expect at our colleges and universities, not only allowing, but
encouraging students to compare, reason, discuss, and debate
ideas in the search for truth.
[The submission of The Honorable Peter Roskam follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Along the way, we hope this educational
environment will help students build character, hone their
values, and strengthen virtues like compassion, maturity, and
understanding. And in a word, we hope that colleges shape our
young adults into the kind of positively contributing members
of society who are equipped with the skills they will need to
achieve their potential.
Unfortunately, many other schools continue to use their
501(c)(3) status to stifle political speech on campus,
especially during election years. Let's get something straight:
Section 501(c)(3) does not require schools to prohibit student
political activity on campus.
In 2010 the late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia gave
the commencement address at his granddaughter's high school,
and he told the graduates that, ``More important than your
obligation to follow your conscience, or at least prior to it,
is your obligation to form your conscience correctly.'' For
students to form their consciences correctly, they have to be
exposed to a wide variety of competing ideas. And some of these
ideas might be uncomfortable, unpopular, or offensive.
But education requires that students learn both to
challenge others' ideas, and how to form and defend their own.
Even here, in today's hearing, I am sure we will hear testimony
that challenges the status quo and may even make us
uncomfortable. But in the same way that challenging
conversations are not a threat to education, they are not a
threat to democracy. And, in fact, our willingness to engage in
challenging conversations is the very foundation of both.
Personally, I have an interest in these issues over the
years because today I have heard from conservative students and
faculty who were prohibited, shut down, or even fired for
trying to express their support for the sanctity of life, their
concerns about immigration or Planned Parenthood or defense of
Israel, or their view that the government needs to stick more
closely to the guidance of the Constitution.
I suspect that some colleagues on the other side of the
dais are concerned about situations where students and staff
have had their speech stifled on a different set of views. But
my hope is that we can all agree that whatever one's particular
views are, the American ideal supports and is founded upon the
principle that we may each express our opinions freely. There
is perhaps no institution where this is more valuable than the
American college campus, where young minds are learning,
growing, and maturing.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Lewis for his
opening statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
Welcome.
Mr. Chairman, I do not understand why we are here. The Ways
and Means Oversight Subcommittee does not have jurisdiction
over future legislation, over freedom of speech, or college
curriculum or school resources.
On Monday the Chair and I both received a letter from
Georgetown University. In the letter Georgetown explained that
it will revise its policy so that students like Mr. Atkins may
engage in certain campaign activity on campus without
jeopardizing the tax-exempt status of Georgetown. This hearing
focuses on a soon-to-be resolved issue, and the Oversight
Subcommittee does not have jurisdiction over the decade-long
argument that certain colleges, their faculties, or their
students are biased toward either conservative or liberal
thought.
Some of today's witness testimony is better suited for the
Education and Workforce Committee or the House Judiciary
Committee, which held nearly an identical hearing on the same
issue--subject last June.
What are we doing here? What is the purpose of this
hearing? I will tell you what this hearing is not. It is not in
the tradition of the Subcommittee. The witnesses should
remember that our Subcommittee jurisdiction does not extend to
proposed changes to the Tax Code. This is a matter for the Full
Committee or the Tax Policy Subcommittee. Consequently, I am
requesting each and every witness directly address how their
testimony relates to a requirement of the current Internal
Revenue Code.
I look forward to hearing the testimony from the democratic
witness, Professor Frances Hill. She is a nationally-recognized
expert in tax-exempt law from the University of Miami. Dr. Hill
will explain the political campaign activity rules that apply
to section 501(c)(3) organizations, and she will detail why
getting those rules right is a key concern for colleges and
universities.
Finally, let me state what falls currently squarely within
our Subcommittee power: Taxpayers' rights. Last July the
Oversight Subcommittee Majority called on the IRS to put
taxpayers first. But to date there has been no Subcommittee
action, no hearing, and no progress.
Yesterday morning, Nina Olson, the national taxpayer
advocate, was on CSPAN. She took call after call from Americans
who are frustrated with taxpayer services. We could have held
our first hearing on the purpose of the current tax filing--I
should say on the progress of the current tax filing season, or
the impact of several years of significant budget cuts on IRS
services, or on the rising threat by fraud and cyber attacks on
our tax system.
Instead, we are here for an issue that is not in this
Subcommittee's power or jurisdiction, and blatantly ignoring
the needs, the rights, and concerns of American taxpayers. The
Subcommittee Democrats are ready to roll up our sleeves and do
the people's work without politics and partisanship.
Let me be clear. We have plenty of work to do, and this is
not it. So, Mr. Chairman, on that note, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Lewis. In quick answer to
your question, we are here because of the fact that, look,
American colleges are using 501(c)(3) as an excuse to stifle
speech. That is the first reason. The second reason is we have
jurisdiction here because of all activities under the Ways and
Means Committee. The American taxpayer, through tax-exempt
status, subsidizes this activity, and it is a reasonable thing
that we follow up on it. And finally, we will be doing many
inquiries as it relates to the Internal Revenue Service.
So, today's witness panel includes five individuals who
will offer us insight about their own experiences advocating
for free expression on campus in this area.
Alexander Atkins, who I mentioned in my opening statement,
is a law student at Georgetown University Law Center, and an
advocate for Senator Bernie Sanders' Presidential campaign.
Catherine Sevcenko is Director of Litigation at the
Foundation for Individual Rights in Education.
Joshua Zuckerman is a senior at Princeton University and a
founding member of the Princeton Open Campus Coalition.
Robert George is the McCormick Professor of Jurisprudence
at Princeton University, a Visiting Professor of Law at Harvard
University, and an advisor to the Princeton Open Campus
Coalition. He is also Chairman of the U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom, although he will not be
testifying in that capacity today.
And Frances Hill is a Professor of Law and Dean's
Distinguished Scholar for the Profession at the University of
Miami School of Law.
The Subcommittee has already received your written
testimony. You will each be recognized for 5 minutes. The
lights are green, yellow, and red. And if you could stick
closely to that, we would appreciate it.
Mr. Atkins, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALEXANDER ATKINS,
LAW STUDENT, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY

Mr. ATKINS. Good morning, Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member
Lewis, and honorable Members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Alex Atkins, and I am a second-year student at Georgetown
University Law Center. I am also a member of a group of law
center students that supports Senator Bernie Sanders' campaign
for President.
As you are likely aware, a law student's free time is a
rare commodity, so our group's goals are fairly modest. We want
to share our enthusiasm for Sanders' campaign, and encourage
our peers to participate in the election. But rather than
achieving these objectives, our group has spent nearly 6 months
struggling to engage in basic civic expression.
In September 2015, at the start of the school year, our
group's goal was simply to establish our presence on the
campus. So we decided to reserve a table where other student
groups commonly reserve space to engage in outreach. But
Georgetown's office of student life denied our group's
reservation on the grounds that we were requesting the table in
support of a specific candidate. That same week I received a
campuswide email that recognized increased political engagement
surrounding the 2016 election, and explained that Georgetown
Law is a tax-exempt organization and was subject to limitations
on the use of its resources for partisan political campaign
activities.
But rather than explaining what these limitations were, the
email advised students to consult with the university's Office
of Federal Relations. I emailed the office that day, but I
never received a response.
Many of us chose Georgetown Law for its presence in the
Nation's capital, and the presumption of heightened
opportunities for political engagement. But with no apparent
channel for our intended outreach, our group resorted to
unofficially tabling in the school's cafeteria. Despite the
less-than-ideal location, students were excited to connect with
fellow Sanders supporters, and appreciated receiving
information on voting in their home States.
October 13th was the first democratic debate, an ideal
opportunity to amplify our message. It was a beautiful day, so
we decided to table outside, and we enjoyed friendly
interactions with our fellow students, while encouraging them
to attend a debate-watching event. But within an hour, an
Office of Student Life representative came and told us that we
were violating the school's policy, and were required to stop.
We were disappointed, but we were mostly frustrated that the
representative was unable to clarify precisely what the policy
was, or how we could permissibly engage in this valuable
expression.
When I sought additional clarity in early November, I was
directed to Georgetown's student organization policy on
partisan political activities. The policy begins
optimistically, explaining that students are free to express
their individual and collective political views. However, the
policy sharply qualifies that statement by mandating that
students may not use university-supported resources to do so,
including space on campus. The only explanation for the
policy's contradictory approach is its reference to the
Internal Revenue Code. Citing section 501(c)(3), the policy
states that Georgetown must restrict the use of university
resources.
Our group was shocked by the policy's implications for
student political expression, and we questioned the legitimacy
of its rationale. Other students I spoke with reacted with
nearly unanimous confusion. ``Why would the school not want you
to do that,'' they asked. ``Isn't that what college campuses
are for?''
When I explained that Georgetown's policy seemed to be
rooted in concerns about losing its tax exemption, many
students seemed to share my own growing skepticism. Would the
IRS really penalize Georgetown for allowing its students to
engage in free expression? The budding lawyer in me wanted an
answer.
My efforts to determine what 501(c)(3) actually required
led me to contact FIRE. A conversation with one of FIRE's
attorneys confirmed that Georgetown's policy was far stricter
than necessary, and FIRE offered to write a letter on our
group's behalf.
We were relieved to finally have an ally, but we wanted to
resolve the conflict ourselves. In early December we wrote to
the dean of the law center and the dean of students. We
explained our predicament, and sought an arrangement that could
accommodate both the university's interests and our own. But
after waiting more than a month without a response, our group
decided to accept FIRE's offer.
The letter FIRE wrote, and the media attention that it
created, has motivated Georgetown to begin revising its
policies to permit certain partisan activities. This is an
undeniably positive step, and I am thankful to be included in
the process. However, these changes cannot undo the nearly 6
months that we have lost, 6 months when all we wanted to do was
engage in the type of basic civic expression long considered
emblematic of America's educational campuses.
Colleges and universities across the country need to be
reminded of their obligation not just to permit but to protect
the vital free exchange of ideas. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Atkins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Atkins.
Ms. Sevcenko.

STATEMENT OF CATHERINE SEVCENKO, DIRECTOR OF LITIGATION,
FOUNDATION FOR INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS IN EDUCATION

Ms. SEVCENKO. Good morning, Chairman Roskam, Ranking Member
Lewis, Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Catherine
Sevcenko. I am the Director of Litigation at the Foundation for
Individual Rights in Education. FIRE is a nonprofit,
nonpartisan organization devoted to protecting the rights of
students and faculty on American college campuses.
I think we all remember our first involvement with a
political campaign, the camaraderie with the other supporters,
the policy discussions, the strategy debates, and the euphoria
when the candidate did well, and the bewilderment when he or
she lost. Having that experience while you are in college can
spark an engagement in politics that will last a lifetime.
But as you have just heard, the political engagement can be
shut down at any moment on too many college campuses. As
outlined in my written testimony, FIRE has intervened with 13
schools since 2008 that claimed that they could not allow
political activity because it would jeopardize their tax-exempt
status. These 13 cases did not include numerous informal
interactions we have had with students to explain their rights
to them, nor the students who have downloaded information from
our website. And the number is going up. In fact, we received
another request for help just a few days ago.
And this is a bipartisan problem. As you just heard, the
law school of Georgetown stopped students from campaigning for
Bernie Sanders. Right at about the same time, American
University stopped students for campaigning for Rand Paul. And
the prize, as it were, goes to St. Catherine University in
Minnesota that, in 2008, refused to allow Hillary Clinton, Bay
Buchanan, and Senator Al Franken to speak on campus.
Confusion over IRS guidelines is the likely cause of this
censorship. General counsels are not going to allow political
activity that they fear would endanger the school's tax-exempt
status. As long as the IRS guidance is ambiguous, censorship
will win out every time.
This Subcommittee could be instrumental in solving this
problem. Were the IRS to clarify that viewpoint-neutral
allocation of resources for political speech does not endanger
an institution's tax-exempt status, it would be a huge step
forward in preserving free speech on campus.
Justifying silencing speech by invoking tax-exempt status
is just one tool of censorship. Another is a so-called free
speech zone. To be clear, free speech zones have nothing to do
with free speech. They are tiny areas of campus where students
are quarantined when they want to express themselves on the
issues of the day.
Merritt Burch and Anthony Vizzone, two students at the
University of Hawaii Hilo were told they would have to stand
``here'' if they wanted to protest NSA surveillance, because it
wasn't the 1960s, and they really couldn't protest like that
any more. To vindicate their rights, they sued and the case was
settled after the free speech zones in the entire University of
Hawaii system were abolished.
Student Robert Van Tuinen, a veteran, was prevented by
campus security from handing out copies of the Constitution on
Constitution Day. Although he literally had the First Amendment
in his hand, a Modesto junior college administrator said he
could only distribute the Constitution in this free speech
zone, a tiny, out-of-the-way concrete stage.
At Blinn College in Texas, Nicole Sanders decided to
attract new members to the campus chapter of Young Americans
for Liberty by talking about gun rights. An administrator told
her she would have to stand in this free speech zone, literally
the size of a parking space, and she was also told she would
need special permission to talk about guns. Her lawsuit is
ongoing.
And finally, at Western Michigan University, a student
group, the Kalamazoo Peace Center, was told it would have to
pay for security to have Boots Riley, a rapper and social
activist, speak at its Peace Week celebration. By taxing
Riley's speech with a fee that the students couldn't afford,
WMU effectively banned him from campus. Thanks to the students'
lawsuit, WMU can no longer censor speech in the name of
security.
FIRE supported the lawsuits of these students, but legal
action is time-consuming and expensive. Clear guidance on
political activity from the IRS would signal to colleges and
universities this Subcommittee's view that expressive rights
must be respected. As the primary congressional committee with
oversight authority over the IRS, you are in a unique position
to communicate to the agency the urgent need for guidance.
Yesterday was Super Tuesday. Now is the time to clarify
that political activity restrictions do not apply to students
or faculty, but just to the colleges and universities
themselves. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sevcenko follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Zuckerman.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA ZUCKERMAN, STUDENT, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY,
AND FOUNDING MEMBER OF THE PRINCETON OPEN CAMPUS COALITION

Mr. ZUCKERMAN. Thank you. I would like to begin by thanking
Chairman Roskam and Ranking Member Lewis and the Members of
this Subcommittee for holding this hearing and inviting me to
testify. It is an honor to have the opportunity to help raise
congressional awareness of threats to open dialogue and to free
speech on our college campuses.
I am a cofounder of the Princeton Open Campus Coalition--
that is POCC for short. We are a nonpartisan group of
conservative and liberal undergraduates dedicated to protecting
the diversity of thought and the right of all students and
professors to advance their academic and personal convictions
in a manner free from intimidation. We believe that the
protection of free speech is vital to the academic flourishing
of the university.
Student protestors at Princeton have recently demanded
cultural competency training for the faculty, mandatory classes
on so-called marginalized peoples, and affinity housing for
students interested in black culture. As I explained in my
written testimony, POCC opposes each of these ideas, due to
their destructive effects on the free flow of speech and
thought. These ideas, if implemented, would create university-
sanctioned orthodoxies. Those who defy these orthodoxies will
be publicly slandered and labeled as racists. This is not mere
speculation; it is already happening.
Members of POCC, since formally opposing these demands,
have been subjected to senseless ad hominem attacks that would
effectively silence many members of the campus community. In a
Facebook post a black POCC cofounder criticized the demands for
advocating, in his words, ``self-segregation and censorship.''
He was then effectively labeled a race traitor. Someone asked
him, ``Why don't you post something supporting your people,
instead of trying to bring down those trying to uplift
blacks?''
Similarly, a white POCC cofounder wrote an op ed in the
campus newspaper in which she pointed out the hypocrisy of
anti-racism protesters making these race-based judgments. In
response to this article, a groups of protestors screamed
obscenities at her, while demanding that she not be allowed to
participate in a public open forum due to her allegedly racist
beliefs. They sought to prevent her from espousing her ideas.
Numerous other students have privately confided to POCC
that they also oppose the demands, but are afraid to speak out
for fear of being publicly subjected to these vicious ad
hominem attacks.
Now, these attacks go far beyond personal insults. For
instance, a student who wrote an article in defense of free
speech in the campus conservative magazine woke up to find a
shredded copy of the magazine taped to her door. Someone went
out of their way to find out where she lived, and to try to
intimidate her.
This is what we are seeing at Princeton today, and these
demands haven't even been implemented. Imagine what would
happen if the university itself were to vindicate the
protestors' world view, thereby reinforcing this notion that
those who disagree need to be re-educated.
The student protestors are attempting to portray POCC's
concern with free speech as misguided. This could not be
further from the truth. Consider this excerpt from an op ed
written by a protest leader in the student newspaper. She
wrote, ``If your freedom of thought means that I, a black
student, do not have the luxury of feeling safe on a campus
that I have worked my entire life to get to, it should have no
place in universities or any other beloved institution.''
As this excerpt demonstrates, protestors seek to purge the
university of ideas that make them feel unsafe. But no one at
Princeton is unsafe. There has not been a single instance of
violence, and no one has called for the subjugation of
minorities. Anyone who did would be unanimously and instantly
condemned, and everyone knows that. These attempts to bully
students into silence--and, when that fails, to demand the
creation of policies that will have similar effects--are
utterly intolerable.
Speech at Princeton currently enjoys robust protection. The
status quo, as far as things go nationwide, is pretty good.
Protestors seek to change that.
As I mentioned, POCC opposes each demand, and respects the
right of all students to advance their personal convictions.
Naturally, this does include advocacy for the aforementioned
demands. POCC has helped lead the fight against these proposed
policies. We have met with the president of Princeton and
members of the board of trustees. We have written several op
eds in campus and national newspapers, participated in public
debates, and appeared on national news.
Today, POCC would like to call on our political leaders to
reaffirm the importance of free speech on college campuses.
President Obama rightly condemned students who feel a need, as
he said, ``to be coddled and protected from different points of
view.'' You shouldn't silence speakers by saying, ``You can't
come because I am too sensitive to hear what you have to say.''
We hope Congress and all of our elected officials will
follow President Obama's example and unite in condemnation of
students and administrators who seek to restrain or to prevent
those who advance controversial views from exercising their
fundamental right to free speech. The importance of this issue
transcends partisan and ideological divisions, and should unite
all Americans in defense of our universities, our principles,
and our future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zuckerman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Zuckerman.
Professor George.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT P. GEORGE, MCCORMICK PROFESSOR OF
JURISPRUDENCE, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY, AND VISITING PROFESSOR OF
LAW AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY

Mr. GEORGE. Thank you, Chairman Roskam. Ranking Member
Lewis, honorable Members of the Committee, I am delighted to be
here, and glad that you are holding this hearing.
In my written testimony I go into some detail, based on my
31 years of experience teaching at Princeton and at Harvard,
about what I believe the causes of campus illiberalism are. In
my testimony this morning I want to focus more on what I regard
as the solutions. How do we solve the problems?
In the written testimony I identify the ways in which a
lack of viewpoint diversity among faculty on college campuses
abets the problem of campus illiberalism, and I think viewpoint
diversity is actually the solution. And I want to give a couple
of examples this morning of the value of viewpoint or
intellectual diversity on campuses.
One is the James Madison program at Princeton, which I have
the honor to direct. The program was founded 15 years ago, and
its impact on the intellectual culture of Princeton by helping
to bring viewpoint diversity to our community has really been
remarkable. It gives me enormous satisfaction that this opinion
of mine is shared by many of my liberal colleagues who share
none of my other opinions. They praise the Madison program for
turn-
ing what might have been campus monologues into true dialogues,
benefiting everybody in the process. The presence on campuses
of initiatives like the Madison program ensure that students
will
hear a wide range of opinions from thoughtful and accomplished
scholars.
Diversity of opinion confers a great benefit on an
intellectual community. It ensures that people cannot simply
suppose that everybody in the room shares the same assumptions
or holds
the same views. People know that they have to defend their
premises because those premises will be challenged. That makes
for a deeper, more serious kind of intellectual engagement, a
kind that profoundly enriches the intellectual life of the
entire community.
Now, the second example is the experience I have had of
teaching with my friend and colleague, Professor Cornel West.
Professor West is a man of the left. I am on the conservative
side of the political spectrum. But we regularly teach together
at Princeton.
Our most recent seminar included readings from Sophocles,
Plato, St. Augustine, Marx, Mill, Newman, Kierkegaard, Hayek,
Solzhenitsyn, John Dewey, C.S. Lewis, Reinhold Neibuhr, and
Gabriel Marcel. What happens in our seminars is magical, and
the impact on our students is amazing.
What you have here is a genuine collaboration. Professor
West and I cooperate across the lines of ideological division
and political difference in the common project of seeking
truth, seeking knowledge, seeking wisdom, engaging with each
other and with our students in a serious, respectful, civil
manner, striving to understand each other and to learn from
each other, treating each other not as enemies, despite our
differences, but as partners in the common project of seeking
truth, seeking knowledge, seeking wisdom.
Whether the readings for the next meeting of our seminar
are Machiavelli's Prince, Tocqueville's Democracy in America,
Du Bois' Souls of Black Folks, Gramsci's Prison Notebooks, or
Strauss' Natural Right and History, we can't wait to be in the
classroom every week with our students, and our approach is the
opposite of antiquarian; we look for the timeless meaning, but
also the contemporary significance of the text we assign. We
consider existential, moral, religious, and political
questions, including contemporary political questions that are
important to us and to our students in the context of the
readings.
And here is what really matters. The students learn. And
they learn how to learn. They learn to approach the
intellectual and moral matters that we are considering
critically, engaging the most compelling points to be adduced
in favor of the positions on both sides of the question. They
learn the value and importance of mutual respect and civility.
They learn from two guys with some very strong opinions,
neither of whom is shy about stating those opinions, that the
spirit of truth-seeking, like the spirit of liberty, in the
famous words of the great jurist, Learned Hand, ``is a spirit
open to the possibility that one may, in fact, be wrong.''
Let me be a little more specific, because what Professor
West and I do really is, I believe, part of the cure for campus
illiberalism. I have prided myself for my entire career on
being a teacher who can represent the views of the other side
very, very well, so that I am not indoctrinating my students.
And Professor West feels the same way. He feels he can present
the views of the other side very well, and he does a great job.
But what we have learned in the seminar is neither of us
can do it as well as we can do it when we are together. And
what that teaches me, whether two professors are together in a
classroom, or whether they are just in separate courses around
the campus, is that students can't really learn and appreciate
the process of learning and the need to hear diverse viewpoints
unless they have diversity of viewpoint among the faculty on
campuses.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. George follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Professor Hill.

STATEMENT OF FRANCES R. HILL, PROFESSOR OF LAW AND DEAN'S
DISTINGUISHED SCHOLAR FOR THE PROFESSION, UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI
SCHOOL OF LAW

Ms. HILL. Thank you, Chairman Roskam. Good morning, Mr.
Lewis. And to the Members of the Committee, thank you for
inviting me to testify today regarding the tax issues
implicated in the question before the Committee.
The issue, as I see it as a matter of tax law, is whether
speech or action of particular officials or employees or
students or other persons affiliated with the university are
properly treated as speech or action by the university as a
tax-exempt entity. Because, as we all should fully understand,
section 501(c)(3) does not apply to the students, the faculty,
or the administrators. It applies to the university as a tax-
exempt entity. So the question before us is whether our various
affiliations with the university mean that our various actions
taken in various capacities of our lives will be attributed to
the university as a tax-exempt entity.
This, of course, to a tax lawyer, immediately raises the
need to discuss the tax concept of attribution. You must have
looked at this testimony and thought, ``Oh, my goodness, I am
back in law school again.'' And this is part one of the
testimony that takes you through a range of Supreme Court cases
that establish two important points, I think, for the Members
of this Committee today.
One is there is in tax law a presumption that entities are
separate. It is called the separate identity principle. So if a
corporation has a subsidiary and it owns 100 percent of the
stock, never mind. The subsidiary is separate. The same is true
at a university. If it operates through many entities, all the
actions of each entity will not be attributed to the core
university.
The second principle is that the separate identity
principle can be overcome when there is evidence of agency,
where one entity is the agent of another. And I have listed, in
professorly, tax-lawyerly fashion, a variety of authorities and
Supreme Court determinations relating to this issue.
But the heart of our matter today is part two of the
testimony. When is there attribution of the actions of those of
us affiliated with universities to our university? Now, there
may be no actual instance at all where one or another
administrator at a university wants to even acknowledge that we
are part of his university. But they, of course, have little
choice to do that.
A university is a group of broadly affiliated people
filling broadly different roles. So the university acts only
through the speech and activity through each of us. The
question then before us is whether our various positions in the
university support the separate identity principle or lead to a
presumption of agency, meaning that we could bind the
university and be taken as speaking for the university.
The IRS has made it abundantly clear that only in the
rarest of circumstances would a student be considered the agent
of a university, and they have issued revenue rulings dealing
with a political science course that involved going out and
working in campaigns. And as long as the students could choose
which campaign they wanted to work in and fulfill the other
requirements of the course, like writing a paper--which doesn't
seem so onerous--this is not attributed to the university.
Even more interesting is the student newspaper. Student
newspapers endorse--are free to endorse, under this guidance
from 1972, candidates for public office, and that is not
attributed to the university.
So, the testimony goes through other instances where the
IRS has written quite clear guidance. It is interesting to me
that the guidance that the IRS indicates that suggests the
greatest danger of attribution is where senior administrators
take positions and do not clearly state that they are acting in
a personal capacity, but try to maybe act for the university.
And these are the references to a president of a university
who wrote a ``My View'' column in a university presentation,
and endorsed a candidate for elective office. That is a
problem, because when a president of a university is speaking,
everything that president does in an official publication of
the university will be attributed to the university, unless
there is a broadly public disavowal, as public as that
statement.
So, I would urge the Committee today to look carefully at
all the guidance that is already out there--some of it is
nonprecedential, but all of it is widely used in the tax
profession--and consider what can be achieved by having
organizations make sure they are informed of what is already
there, and take steps to educate their own lower-level
administrators or their president about what they can and
cannot do. Students can do almost anything. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hill follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Professor. For the benefit of
those who are watching and participating today, we have an
email address that we have set up that--we are interested in
hearing about cases. So the Committee wants some input. And the
email address is
[email protected]
. I will repeat
that: The email address is
[email protected]
. So if
you are a student or a faculty member or an administrator, and
you have the sense that your free speech has been suppressed on
campus, this Subcommittee would appreciate you getting that
information to us.
Thank you to the witnesses. You did a great job, in terms
of timing, and you were clear and insightful. And now we have
an opportunity to inquire of you. And I will recognize Mr.
Meehan for 5 minutes.
Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks, our
distinguished panel, for your various perspectives. I am
struggling to get my arms around this issue, so I am--you know,
I--Ms. Hill closed her testimony with a statement that students
can do almost anything.
And, you know, I am struggling to understand that concept,
because it is not so much the ability for students to
articulate a political position necessarily on campuses, but it
is the sense that the schools themselves--and I recognize there
are 650 civil rights attorneys in the Department of Education
alone that are holding colleges accountable, to some extent, if
for some reason a particular student perceives that another
student's speech offends them in some manner. And I am seeing
this more and more frequently, and that is the part that I am
trying to understand, quite honestly.
This is an interesting month, if you happen to be Irish.
And you begin to see things done on college campuses in which
they will say, ``Saint Patrick's Day, celebrate with a beer.''
And at what point in time does the student that begins to
promote some kind of activity on campus that says, you know,
``Come to a Saint Patrick's Day event'' that has beer all over
it begin to create the image that all Irishmen are drunkards?
And I find that offensive. And at what point in time can I step
forward and say on this campus, under the speech code, because
I find it offensive that your articulation of something that
would depict an Irishman as a potential drunk is wrong, and it
must be stopped on this campus?
Ms. Sevcenko, am I missing something in that particular
position on college campuses? And under the law, does somebody
on a college campus have any different standard of protection
than they would if they were walking down a street, to be
protected from speech that would be considered to be
harassment?
Ms. SEVCENKO. Thank you, Congressman. Let me address a
couple of things. One is the difference between public
universities and private universities.
Mr. MEEHAN. Let's go with private universities. I am more
interested in those that are creating these special codes in
addition to----
Ms. SEVCENKO. Well, unfortunately, public universities
create them, as well. But, in terms of private universities,
they are not directly bound by the First Amendment, but they
are bound by the promises that they make. And it is a very rare
university that has up on its website disclaimer, ``Come here,
check your free speech rights at the door.'' They all proclaim,
``Come here, experience,'' you know, ``diversity of ideas,
intellectual, rigorous debate,'' so on and so forth.
So, to answer your question, in terms of you being able to
object to a poster depicting a drunken Irishman, you can do
that the minute you see it. You can write a letter to the
editor, you can address the group that has put it up. That is
what the university is for.
Mr. MEEHAN. But should the university at that point in time
require that all students who have participated in the creation
of that poster be disciplined for violating my sensitivities?
Ms. SEVCENKO. There is no constitutional right not to be
offended. And if the school has promised free speech, then no,
the university should not, because then they would be in
violation of the promises they have made, and their moral
obligation to keep that. There is no bait and switch.
Now, there are a few colleges who have said that,
``Community is more important to us than free speech. So when
you come here, you need to be very careful about what you say,
and you will be disciplined if you say something that offends
others.''
Mr. MEEHAN. Would it be any different if I said it was a
tequila party, and I was going to wear a sombrero, bring a
sombrero?
Ms. SEVCENKO. I mean it doesn't--the principle remains the
same.
Mr. MEEHAN. So speech--and I looked at this, and I tried
to--speech, in order to be unprotected, it has to be so severe,
pervasive, and objectively offensive and undermining, it
detracts from the victim's educational experience, that the
victims, students, are effectively denied equal access to an
institution's resources and opportunities.
I would suggest to you that it is just not any speech that
I find offensive which is protected----
Ms. SEVCENKO. Yes. What--yes. What you have just cited is a
Supreme Court case.
Mr. MEEHAN. Yes, I did.
Ms. SEVCENKO. David v Monroe. So that is the standard that
the Supreme Court has set for harassment.
Mr. MEEHAN. And is it any students, or is it a reasonable
student--what is a reasonable student's expectation in that----
Ms. SEVCENKO. It is, yes, an objective standard, so a
reasonable person standard. And it has to be pervasive. That
is, if somebody says something egregious once, then that
probably doesn't meet the standard. If it happens over and over
again, then yes, the university under that standard should step
in.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
take a moment to thank each one of you for being here, and
thank you for your testimony.
I am trying to get a sense of whether the stakes for
colleges are big, or if this is a minor issue. Professor Hill,
what are the stakes for a college or university if it engages
in banned campaign activity? What sanction does the Tax Code
impose for this type of violation by a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt
entity?
Ms. HILL. In this case, Congressman Lewis, the Internal
Revenue Code, which prohibits in 501(c)(3) participation or
intervention in political campaigns, including the publishing
or distributing of statements--any political campaign on behalf
of or in opposition to any candidate for public office. But as
I have said, one has to run this through whether--the question
of whether the university is speaking.
Now, the sanctions in this area are severe. They are an--
not just for universities, but all 501(c)(3) public charities,
which means they are publicly supported under section 509 of
the Internal Revenue Code. And, in that case, what happens if
an organization has been engaged in political campaigning is
they are in jeopardy of losing their tax-exempt status.
Now, why does that matter so much? It matters for two
reasons. If they are not tax-exempt, they lose the subsidy
represented by the entities not having to pay taxes. Number
two, their contributors lose their section 170 charitable
contribution deduction made for contributions to the
university.
And so--and that contribution, I will just remark, is
deductible on the mere basis of the university or other
organization being a 501(c)(3) organization in good standing.
So if somebody would want to give a university $3 million for
an endowed chair for a professorship in organic chemistry, they
can still give the money, but the organization can only, in a
sense, validate the section 170 charitable contribution
deduction if the university itself is tax-exempt.
And I will just add that many public universities also seek
501(c)(3) tax-exempt status precisely because their
contributors want to see a determination letter from the
Internal Revenue Service assuring them, as contributors, that
their contribution to the university will be deductible. So it
is, on the tax side, a little more complex than just a public-
private divide.
So universities care about their exempt status. They care
about preserving it. They care about reconciling it with an
atmosphere in which students can learn and professors can teach
and write, and administrators can do whatever it is that
administrators do--we on the faculty often are not quite sure.
[Laughter.]
But nobody, nobody, could do more harm to a university than
an ill-informed senior administrator or a willful senior
administrator, because of the difficulty of disavowing those
acts of political participation.
That is why I said, Congressman Meehan--just to sort of in
a sense, address your comment--that students can do almost
anything with respect to political advocacy in a nonviolent
way, which is certainly what we are talking about today. And
the chances of that jeopardizing the exempt status of a
university are very low, as the existing guidance so amply and
clearly understands.
Mr. LEWIS. Professor Hill, before we run out of time, are
you aware of any university losing its tax-exempt status
because of campaign activity?
Ms. HILL. Mr. Lewis, I am not. I have not undertaken
empirical research on my own on this question. But I think I
might have heard about instances of it, although maybe I
haven't. But I have not heard of an instance.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Holding.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you
holding this hearing. You know, the institutions that we are
looking at today, these issues, you know, the institutions and
their endowments under 501(c)(3), under the Tax Code, they get
enormous taxpayer support. And I think it is clear that we have
jurisdiction to look at these issues.
But, Ms. Sevcenko, I want to get you to clarify a few
things. Most private schools are tax-exempt under 501(c)(3),
correct?
Ms. SEVCENKO. I believe so, yes.
Mr. HOLDING. The--are there any public colleges that are
exempt under 501(c)(3)?
Ms. SEVCENKO. Yes, I believe so. But Professor Hill would
be better able to address that.
Mr. HOLDING. But most of them are public institutions. They
don't have to use 501(c)(3), correct?
Ms. SEVCENKO. Yes, they are exempt under section 115.
Mr. HOLDING. So, when you are talking about the First
Amendment and applying it to public colleges, how does the
First Amendment apply?
Ms. SEVCENKO. The First Amendment applies to public
colleges because they are government instrumentalities. So the
First Amendment applies to the States through the Fourteenth
Amendment incorporation. And then, because the schools are
State government entities, the First Amendment applies to
campus.
Mr. HOLDING. Now, when we are talking about the First
Amendment, how does it apply to private colleges, as opposed to
public colleges?
Ms. SEVCENKO. The First Amendment does not directly apply.
That is where we look to the--what the college has said about
its own intentions. And there are, in fact, some State courts
that have said that if a college promises free expression and
then censors a student, that could be considered breach of
contract.
Mr. HOLDING. But it is not a First Amendment right, it is a
breach of contract.
Ms. SEVCENKO. Yes, because there is a First Amendment right
of association, as well, so that if I want to have a college
that is the, you know, don't say anything that will offend
anyone college, I am able to do that.
Mr. HOLDING. So, are private colleges and universities
allowed to restrict speech and political activity on campus?
Just to be clear on that.
Ms. SEVCENKO. Yes, yes. I mean, I think Alex here is a
perfect example of that.
Mr. HOLDING. So why should tax-exempt private colleges and
universities not restrict political activity on campus? That
would be toward, you know, their marketing and so forth, as you
mentioned.
Ms. SEVCENKO. So why should they not? I mean----
Mr. HOLDING. Why should they not? I mean what would be the
reason that they not do that?
Ms. SEVCENKO. Because they were granted tax-exempt status
because they have an educational mission. And I think it is
deeply ironic that the universities, in an attempt to preserve
their 501(c)(3) status, are in fact censoring people, censoring
students, which is undermining the very purpose that they are
there for.
And this is not a minor problem. We survey every year 450
universities. We look through all of their speech codes. And in
our latest spotlight report--a copy here--50 percent of the
colleges and universities that we look at have openly
unconstitutional speech codes.
Mr. HOLDING. So why do you think they do that? What do you
think the impetus is behind the people making those decisions
to restrict free speech in a tax-exempt institution?
Ms. SEVCENKO. I think there are various reasons that they
do it. Administrators do not like confrontation. They want
things to stay, you know, on an even keel. They like to have
control, they like to know what is going on. That is why we see
the free speech zones--oh, we will just send, you know,
troublemakers like Alex here over to that corner, so that they,
you know, won't attract attention.
There are government regulations. The Office for Civil
Rights at the Department of Education, as you know, has been
very active in issuing title IX Dear Colleague letters. They
issued a blueprint a couple of years ago, what they called the
blueprint, with what we consider to be a blatantly
unconstitutional definition of sexual harassment as unwelcome
conduct, including verbal conduct of a sexual nature. That can
encompass just about anything.
So there are various things going on. But mainly, the
administrators, they want to avoid trouble. That is why the
general counsels will say, ``No, let's just be on the safe side
and tell the students not to have political activity, not to
campaign for Bernie Sanders, because''----
Mr. HOLDING. Right.
Ms. SEVCENKO [continuing]. ``The election will be over
soon, they will graduate, but we have to be''----
Mr. HOLDING. Well, thank you very much, and I appreciate
the examples that you showed us. And I hope, Mr. Chairman, that
we get some participation from folks who have experienced this,
and they email into us. Thank you.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Crowley.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, and
welcome to each of you this morning.
Professor Hill, while the First Amendment prohibits
colleges and universities from restricting speech, the First
Amendment generally does not apply at private colleges and
universities, because the First Amendment regulates only
government conduct. Is that correct?
Ms. HILL. Yes.
Mr. CROWLEY. It is kind of similar to the give-and-take
most recently by my colleague, Mr. Holding, and with Ms.
Sevcenko, is that correct?
Ms. HILL. Well, it is broadly correct. I mean that would--
if we go beyond that we are going to fall into the swamp of the
State Action Doctrine under the Fourteenth Amendment, which
is----
Mr. CROWLEY. But you do agree with Ms. Sevcenko, in terms
of her----
Ms. HILL. Yes, I agree with----
Mr. CROWLEY. And Georgetown University is a private
university, is that correct?
Ms. HILL. As far as I know.
Mr. CROWLEY. It is a private university.
Ms. HILL. Yes.
Mr. CROWLEY. Georgetown University also has been working
with the aggrieved parties in this particular case being
discussed today in an attempt to resolve their differences. I
am not asking for your comment, I am making a statement of
fact.
In fact, Georgetown University--that letter has been
entered into the record--to this Subcommittee, informing us
that, based on those discussions and a review of their internal
policies, the university, Georgetown University, is adjusting
their policies to make very clear that all of the members of
the community will be able to make reasonable use of the
university, the private university and its resources, to
express their political opinions.
Additionally, I would like to submit for the record--I
don't believe it has yet been submitted--a list of the
political speakers and events at Georgetown, a private Catholic
college that is not bound, again, by the First Amendment. And
you will see a wide variety--diversity of opinions and
believes, from Mike Huckabee to Bernie Sanders. And I have that
here, Mr. Chairman. I would like to submit that for the record.
Chairman ROSKAM. Without objection, so ordered.
[The submission of The Honorable Joseph Crowley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you. What we are seeing today, in my
opinion, is this Subcommittee is really searching for a problem
where no problem exists.
Georgetown University isn't bound by the First Amendment,
but they are, on their own initiative, revising their policies
to ensure full inclusivity for all of their students. They are
doing that for academic diversity, and not because they are
being compelled by the government or by this Subcommittee's
hearing today. I want to make it clear, Georgetown University
is one of the preeminent universities in our country because of
this type of policy.
Essentially, they are showing the true spirit of a liberal
arts school: Being open to debate and adopting policies that
best reflect their students and the needs of that student body.
This Subcommittee should be praising Georgetown University for
their actions, and not bashing the Nation's preeminent Catholic
institution of higher learning.
We are also seeing this Subcommittee walk into this issue
at the last minute, providing no value added, in my opinion,
when there are a number of other issues we should be examining
in our role on oversight. I would suggest our time be better
spent on a hearing discussing the impact of the budget cuts on
customers and consumers and the services at the IRS. Or a
hearing on the ongoing and escalating threat of taxpayer
identity theft, where criminals are literally stealing
someone's identity to file an income tax return and claim
someone else's refund. It is going on right now, while this
Committee is discussing this issue. This real impact on lives
of Americans is going on while we dither on this issue.
I think Congress should get back to focusing on the needs
of the people back home, and not the special interests here in
Washington, D.C. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate this hearing. I am pretty amazed with the testimony
that we have not heard of any comment of the University of
Missouri. That is the university that I graduated from. It is
from our State.
And one point of concern where I think it really hits home,
especially where Mr. Atkins and Mr. Zuckerman kind of hit some
points on free speech, is that it was publicized quite a lot of
a professor at the university that tried to halt a reporter
from taking photos and being assembled in the area where there
was some protesting going on back in November. And,
unfortunately, a week ago today she was fired. But it took
several months before that firing took place, and it was
actually a four-to-two vote by the board of curators to even
fire her.
And I was just looking through, during this discussion, a
Washington Post article that showed some statements made during
that whole process of basically muzzling freedom of speech. And
we are talking about a public institution, not a private one,
like Georgetown. The University of Missouri is a public
institution. And in the Washington Post it was said that this
professor approached this reporter, who was just wanting to
take photos, and it was there the professor said, ``I can't
hear you, hey, hey, ho, ho, the reporter has got to go,'' and
just kept chanting, and then also asked for ``some muscle to
come over.'' That was their statement which was in the video
that--a lot of people said.
And so, when we are talking about freedom of speech, it
needs to be freedom of speech. And I think that this is a very
important hearing, because no one's freedom of speech should be
muzzled, regardless of what your speech is going to be,
especially at a public institution.
So, I applaud the Chairman for holding this hearing----
Mr. CROWLEY. Will the gentleman yield just for a moment?
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. Yes, I will.
Mr. CROWLEY. You said ``especially at a public
institution.'' We understand that at a private college that
does not--that doesn't apply.
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. I am talking about a public college.
Mr. CROWLEY. For the record. Thank you, sir.
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. I understand there are different
mechanisms between a private university and a public one, but I
am talking about a real problem that has faced a public
university. So--and this is quite a big issue.
So, I would also like--I may not say your name right--you
know exactly who I am talking to, thank you.
[Laughter.]
Could you give me a--I noticed in your testimony, I
believe, that there was mentioned a university that prevented
some folks from releasing--you know, handing out the
Constitution. Could you go into more detail on that?
Ms. SEVCENKO. I believe you are referring to Modesto Junior
College at which an Army veteran, Robert Van Tuinen, wanted to
hand out copies of the Constitution to celebrate Constitution
Day. He had been doing that for approximately 10 minutes when a
security guard came up to him and told him that he needed to
stop doing that. If he was going to be engaging in any public
expression, he needed to be in the free speech zone. And, in
order to get to the free speech zone, you have to sign up for
it.
So he then went to the administrator, who took out a book,
which is an appointment book like you would see at the
dentist's office, you know, where they sort of rifle through
and see when an appointment might be available. He was told
that the free speech zone, which holds two people, was booked
until the beginning of October.
So if he wanted to come back at the beginning of October,
he could stand in the corner and try to hand out his
Constitutions. And he said, ``But today is Constitution Day,''
and that didn't matter.
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. Quite interesting. In your
experiences, have you seen that some types of views are more
likely to be censored than others?
Ms. SEVCENKO. As I said in my statement, this is a
bipartisan problem. We see all sorts of speech being censored.
It can be from the right, it can be from the left. Nicole
wanted to talk about gun rights in Texas. The administrators
wouldn't let her. We are engaged in litigation on behalf of the
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws at Iowa
State University. They wanted to put a pot leaf on a tee shirt;
they were told----
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. And I think we saw that with the
gentleman to your right, as well.
Ms. SEVCENKO. Yes.
Mr. SMITH OF MISSOURI. So it is different spectrums,
politically. So I agree.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I too want to thank the witnesses for coming.
Mr. Chairman, given the focus of the hearing, I wish to
raise a serious concern about the possible misuse of 501(c)(3)
status by certain for-profit colleges that converted to non-
profit status, while still operating to the for-profit benefit
of the former owners. And so I ask to submit for the record a
report by the Sentry Foundation on this issue that documents
questionable activities by some former for-profit colleges that
appear to violate the legal requirements of 501(c)(3).
Chairman ROSKAM. Without objection, so ordered.
[The submission of The Honorable Danny Davis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Misuse of tax-exempt
status for profit is very troublesome. A conversion allows
hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars from the Departments
of Education, Defense, and Veteran Affairs to enhance the
profit of a few at the taxpayers' expense. We must protect
students who are trying to get a high-quality, affordable
education from this regulatory blind spot.
Ms. Hill, let me ask you. There are two issues that I am
familiar with that have recently arisen. One is the fact that
Wheaton College in Illinois attempted to fire a Muslim
professor after she posted on Facebook her belief that
Christians and Muslims worshiped the same god. The other is at
Valdosta State University, bound by free speech laws as a
public school. They kicked out 30 black students who silently
attended a political event on campus. Where would you see these
two incidents fitting into the discussion that we are having?
Ms. HILL. I think these incidents----
Chairman ROSKAM. Will the gentleman yield just for the
point of clarification? Just on one quick point?
Mr. DAVIS. Mm-hmm.
Chairman ROSKAM. In the Wheaton College case, it wasn't a
Muslim professor, it is a Christian professor who is making
doctrinal statements. Just for the record.
Ms. HILL. Yes, Mr. Davis. Your two examples, neither of
which involve partisan campaigning, we agree, but there are
other things that go on at universities which may be
questionable and potentially not consistent with the operation
of them as exempt entities. And the question in both of these
cases, I think, is can either a faculty member or a whole group
of students be severely sanctioned for exercising their own
First Amendment rights? We do not lose our First Amendment
rights because we attend private universities. We do not lose
our First Amendment rights about whether we go to a political
meeting.
The question in both cases, in a tax sense, is is the
university operating for an educational purpose? And when it
seems that actions taken in retaliation are disproportionate--
certainly in the case of the 30 black students or, I believe it
was, a professor of religion who, yes, I believe was Christian,
but was expressing solidarity with people of other faiths, says
she believes that Muslims and Christians worship the same god.
That sounds to me like something that a professor of religion
will spend her professional time addressing, and you would
expect it to be.
So, in those cases, what we have here may be a
misunderstanding of the core educational mission of the
university, and expressing that misunderstanding through
punishment of people who are not responsible and have no way of
impacting the university.
So what I think is going on here is the question are
universities operating for an educational purpose, and there
are many ways to be operating for something other than an
educational purpose. Universities whose presidents are making
$7 million when they have 300 students, or examples not far
from that, may have a private benefit and an inurement problem
that has nothing to do with the political activity topic of
today's hearings. But inurement I bring up because that, too,
is punishable by revocation of exempt status.
So, universities are big and complicated, and there are
many, many important issues where completely innocent people
are punished for innocent behavior.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ROSKAM. Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Crowley, my fellow New Yorker, a true good friend of
mine, asked the question as to--trying to distinguish
Georgetown University's public-private distinction, and I
understand that. But the facts are the facts. Georgetown
University gets a special designation by us, here in Congress,
to get income, to accumulate income, on a tax-free basis. And
the people that are donating to that institution under that
basis get a tax deduction for doing that. So we do have a
government role, even in those private institutions, in the
sense that we have designated this special preference to those
institutions, going forward.
I would also note for the record that it took over 6 months
for Georgetown University to take action here, and yet still
has not updated its policy. And it actually took a formal
letter from your organization, ma'am, I believe, to move the
ball.
So, to say that we don't have a role here, I think, is
disingenuous. I think we do have an appropriate role to ask
these questions, and I encourage the Chairman to continue down
this path.
Now, we have heard a lot from the administrators, we have
heard a lot from the academics on this panel. I want to focus
on the students, because that is who I really care about in
this exchange, the students and the impact that these
administrators, these universities who may be abusing this
authority they have on campus, have on the students.
So, Mr. Atkins, you are a Bernie Sanders supporter. You
feel the Bern.
Mr. ATKINS. Yes, sir.
Mr. REED. I am on the other side of the aisle. I don't feel
the Bern, but I respect your position, and I respect your right
to have that position.
So, as a student, I want to understand from your
perspective. Take me back in time. As you were experiencing
this from your institution, from Georgetown University, what
was your impact? How did you feel? What did it make you do?
Tell me. What impact did it have on you?
Mr. ATKINS. So, like I said, for me, personally,
Georgetown's presence in the Nation's capital was a big draw
for me to come to law school at Georgetown. I have always been
interested in politics, and I thought what better than to be
able to study law in the political center of our country, and
have as much exposure to politics while I am studying law as
possible.
So, this year, when classmates of mine and I decided that
we wanted to support Senator Sanders' campaign with the bit of
extra-curricular time that we had, we assumed that this would
be activity that the school would appreciate, that its----
Mr. REED. Why did you assume that?
Mr. ATKINS. Well, because the school makes clear in most of
its promotional materials and in speeches given by
administrators that Georgetown's presence in Washington, D.C.
should be a draw to its students----
Mr. REED. To encourage free speech, to encourage the
debate. That was your expectation in going to that college
campus, correct?
Mr. ATKINS. Precisely.
Mr. REED. And when the university acted differently than
that, that changed your interpretation, or your impression of
that institution. Did it not?
Mr. ATKINS. It did. And----
Mr. REED. And let me ask you--I don't mean to cut you off,
Mr. Atkins, but let me ask you another thing. As a student, did
you have equal footing with the administrators, the president
of the university?
Did you think you could walk into the president's office
and say, ``Hey, you know what? I am an equal partner here, you
are going to change your policy because I am a student and I
have a right to be heard,'' or did you feel any oppression from
the administration, from the university, that, ``You know what?
I am taking on a pretty large, powerful group here that
controls my future, controls my destiny,'' because your grades
are dependent on a lot of the people that are coming out of
this program, right?
Did that ever cross your mind as a concern that you may
have, as a student?
Mr. ATKINS. I don't know if I would characterize it as
feeling oppressed by the administration. I certainly felt an
obligation to defer to the administration, and my group----
Mr. REED. Why? Why did you feel an obligation to defer to
the administration?
Mr. ATKINS. I mean, for the reasons you expressed, that,
you know, I am reliant on the university's good will, to a
certain degree, for my professional goals. But also because I
assumed that if they had policies in place that would limit our
activities in this way, that there must be a well-thought-out
and justifiable rationale behind them.
So we did everything we could to kind of respectfully
inquire as to what that rationale was so that if we----
Mr. REED. Did you find a rationale from them, in your
opinion?
Mr. ATKINS. I still don't think we have found out exactly
what the school's motivation----
Mr. REED. And when is the Presidential election over for
you? When is Mr. Sanders potentially coming to an end?
Mr. ATKINS. When will he come to an end?
[Laughter.]
Mr. REED. In this Presidential election.
Mr. ATKINS. I don't think we will know that for some time.
Certainly not until the Democratic Convention in----
Mr. REED. Well, all the pundits--my point is what happened
to all that time you lost. Are you going to get that back? Are
you going to be able to advocate for Mr. Sanders, to go back in
time? Is the Georgetown administration going to be able to do
that for you?
Mr. ATKINS. So we can't go back in time, and I think there
is definite evidence of the negative effect that this has had.
Just the other day I was speaking to one of my classmates,
telling him about this testimony that I would be delivering
today and what it was about, and he expressed grave concern
because he said, ``You know, I know tons of students that are
curious about Bernie Sanders, but just don't know a lot about
him or his policies, and I think that if they did know they
would be more interested and more open to accepting him and
supporting his candidacy.'' And so, he was expressing, you
know, regret that us, as students who wanted to kind of fulfill
that service on the campus, were unable to do so.
Mr. REED. And you will never get that back. And with that I
yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Rice.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Atkins and Mr. Zuckerman, I just want to say
thank you for standing up for your rights. The First Amendment
is fundamental to the freedom of the United States. Nothing
more fundamental than that. And thank you for standing up for
your rights and protecting all of our freedom, and protecting
our Constitution.
Ms. Sevcenko, thank you so much for your fierce advocacy on
behalf of the First Amendment.
Mr. George, I want to turn to you. And you mentioned that
you and your counterpart professor--I can't recall his name--
co-host classes.
Mr. GEORGE. I am sorry, I am having difficulty hearing you.
I wonder if you could move closer--thank you.
Mr. RICE. You mentioned that you and your co-host
professor--I can't remember his name----
Mr. GEORGE. Cornel West, yes.
Mr. RICE. Yes, Professor West co-hosts a class presenting
alternate viewpoints and civility in doing that. And I think it
would be great if you and Professor West could come here to
Congress and teach a couple of those classes, and maybe we
could figure out a way to get things done on problems that we
mutually agree are problems, and work toward finding more
solutions for that.
But can you tell me what the danger is? What are the
effects on society if we prevent free expression in
universities?
Mr. GEORGE. Well, Congressman, I go into this in some
detail in my written testimony. Universities have a certain
mission. It really has three parts. It is the discovery of
knowledge, or the creation of knowledge; the preservation of
knowledge once it has been securely obtained; and then the
transmission of knowledge. That is what we do with our
students, we try to transmit knowledge to our students.
We believe that is a sacred mission, because it is so
important to the well-being of human beings and to the
communities that human beings form, including nations. If you
want to be a great Nation, you are going to have to have a
well-educated people. James Madison said, ``Only a well-
educated people can permanently be a free people,'' and he is
absolutely right about that.
The trouble with stifling speech on campuses is not only
that it is unfair, not only that it is a violation of our
precious First Amendment in some cases, where the First
Amendment does directly apply. It is also that it completely
undermines the mission of the university. It makes learning
impossible. It transforms education into indoctrination. And
then we all lose. Not only our students, who are deprived of a
true education, but also the entire community, the entire
Nation, because we do not get the benefit of a truly educated
citizenry.
Mr. RICE. I appreciate that very educated and informed
answer, and you have just convinced me that you all need to
have a class here for congressmen.
Ms. Hill, you know, clearly, we have to do whatever we can
to protect the First Amendment on university campuses. The flip
side of that coin is I can understand how administrators may be
confused, because, as you said, there are limits on free
speech. Right? It can't go to the point of harassment, correct?
And certainly you can't yell fire in a crowded theater, and
those other examples.
And then the consequence of losing your tax-exempt status
is terrible. So how do we correct this problem? How do we clear
up the confusion and correct this problem, so we don't face
this anymore? What would you suggest?
Ms. HILL. Congressman Rice, I share your concern about the
ongoing and difficult problems posed by reconciling compliance
with reasonable laws and the search for greater liberty. That
is really what we are talking about. That is what the First
Amendment is there to do.
And I have been much struck and often assign to my classes
Justice Souter's remarks at a recent Harvard graduation
available in the Harvard Law Review on trying to reconcile the
competing demands and competing promises of the Preamble to the
Constitution, ``We the people of the United States, in order to
form a more perfect union, secure the national defense, secure
liberty, provide for the general welfare,'' et cetera, ``do
ordain and establish this Constitution.'' Justice Souter points
out there are inherent conflicts among the values, and that is
what democracy is there for.
Now, in universities, I do believe that a commitment to
open expression is absolutely fundamental. But I do not believe
that we have to open our universities up to have its resources
co-opted by people with private agendas. And I believe, with
all due respect, that campaigning for public office should not
just be a reason to use university resources willy nilly,
especially by the people who can make it seem as though the
university is complicit in this.
Now, my husband has run for office. I have been a political
wife. I understand about campaigning and about the feeling that
America would have been a better place, surely, if my husband
had won that election. But I also understand that that campaign
should have been, as it was, funded by its own contributors,
and not by the resources of the universities in that particular
district.
And so, I am convinced that a rational interpretation of
the prohibition on political activity and the direct and
indirect private benefit that can go with this to candidates
and political parties is a rational policy, but I am not
convinced that it has anything to do with students handing out
leaflets for candidates.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you for allowing
me to participate today. I really am concerned with Mr. Atkins
and Mr. Zuckerman.
And Professor, when you were talking you referenced Judge
Learned Hand. And I am going to read something, because I think
this goes to the very essence of what the meeting is about
today. And I know you know what I am talking about. It goes to
a speech that was given in 1944 by the judge, and it is called,
``I Am an American Day.'' This is what the judge said: ``What
do we mean when we say that, first of all, we seek liberty? I
often wonder whether we do not rest our hopes too much upon
constitutions, upon laws, and upon courts. These are false
hopes. Believe me, these are false hopes. Liberty lies in the
hearts of men and women. When it dies there, no constitution,
no law, no court can save it. No constitution, no law, no court
can even do much to help it. While it lies there, it needs no
constitution, no law, no court to save it.''
Isn't it stunning that you have to come, Mr. Zuckerman and
Mr. Atkins, to Congress? Your right to free speech, whether I
agree with what you say or whether I don't agree with what you
say, that is the beauty of who we are, as Americans. That goes
to the very fabric of what this country was founded on. And
especially in our universities. But we can censor you when it
comes to funding. And by tax laws and by codes we can make it
impossible for you to have that free discourse, to have that
disagreement, to have that argument out in the open.
So I think it is really important that the people that are
sitting here today understand that we listen to the people. We
represent the people. In my district, 705,687 Americans sent me
here--or at least a portion of them--to represent them.
Mr. Zuckerman, how did this affect you? Because when we do
attack you at the very base of who you are and what you believe
and what we believe in as Americans, how does that leave you
feeling at the end of the day?
Mr. ZUCKERMAN. Well, frankly, I just think it is completely
unacceptable for any university--especially public, legally.
But from a moral perspective, it is unacceptable that any
university would attempt to either censor its students--that is
why we are there, to discuss, to learn, to listen to others'
ideas, scrutinize our own--and for any university to shut that
down or to try to impose orthodoxies that would pressure us
into remaining silent is just not a good use of the--it is not
a good use of the university's trust. It is betraying our trust
in them.
Mr. KELLY. Yes. So I--my real point is you should never be
limited. You should never, ever feel that you don't have the
ability to do this, and to speak out, especially on a
university campus, especially in the United States of America.
So, Mr. Atkins, you're feeling--at Georgetown University,
when you--when they play this run-out-the-clock on you, what is
your feeling now, as an American citizen? How were you treated?
Was this really the America that you believed in? Is this
really the America that you want to defend? Is this really the
America that you want to live in and raise your children in?
And is this really the America that at one point four million
people in uniform died to preserve?
Mr. ATKINS. I think there is an unfortunate kind of
American cliche that has arisen that, you know, there is only
two things you don't talk about: religion and politics. And I
think that many of these policies are perhaps related to that
sort of cultural norm, which I think is incredibly unfortunate,
and goes against what the country was founded on.
So in the case of my experience, you know, what was most
troubling to me is I can certainly understand confusion as to
what 501(c)(3) would obligate Georgetown to do. I can
understand being risk adverse, and being concerned about
retaining that tax exemption so that they could fulfill the
entirety of their mission.
But what was concerning to me is I didn't get a sense from
the administration that they were concerned about how this
affected our rights to engage in very valuable political
expression. And it was that that kind of struck me and made me
concerned about why wouldn't the university want to help us to
engage in this type of activity.
Mr. KELLY. Well, I want to congratulate both of you for
standing up. And I think it is absolutely chilling that we have
to have this kind of a hearing to expose what is going on.
And I think, when I look back on my college days, that if
we ever were suppressed, or not able to express the way we
felt, you would have to go to the very depths of who it is we
are, as a people. Because we can, through government, suppress.
We can censor. We can do almost anything to you we want, and
yet hold these high, high things that we--these are great
things about America.
We know that, enshrined in the very Bill of Rights--the
very first amendment to the Bill of Rights allows us to have
free speech. What you had to go through is absolutely
ridiculous. And I don't care what college it is, private or
public. All of these folks are influenced in some way or
another by the Tax Code. So I don't want anybody ever to be
confused about why we would hold this today. If not us, who?
Who would hear you? Who would stand up for you? Who would
defend you in the public place?
You both do great work. And while we may not share the same
opinions, I will tell you what. We share the same love of
country, and the same commitment that if it is not us, if it is
not our generation right now, who is it that is going to defend
it in the future? So I thank you so much.
And Chairman, thank you so much for allowing me to be here
today. This is absolutely the most timely thing we can do
because we are being chopped off at the knees, and so many
opportunities we have to express ourselves in free speech.
So, all of you on the panel, thanks so much.
Professor George, it is good to see you. But I--when you
said that about Judge Hand, that sparked in my memory what I
had heard one time, and I read it, and I said, ``My gosh, this
comes to it.'' When it dies in our hearts, when it dies in who
we are, when it is no longer the fabric of who America is, then
we are no longer America. So you can forget the red, white, and
the blue, and all the things that we talk about all the time.
If we can't defend who we are, if we can't protect the freedom
of speech, then we have no business serving in this House.
So I thank you so much and----
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. KELLY. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Kelly. Thank you to the
witnesses. I just have a couple of points and a couple of
questions, actually.
One point is it is interesting. The House of
Representatives has rules to protect itself from being
marginalized. In other words, when we go to the House floor and
we debate, I am able, under the House rules, if time is
allotted to me, to make my points. I am protected from someone
impugning bad motives to me when I make my points, regardless
of the points that I make. House rules prohibit someone from
questioning my motives. And if they do question my motives, I
have the right to ``have their words taken down.'' That is a
very compelling thing.
So we have, in the House of Representatives--it is rough
and tumble and sharp-elbowed and all that sort of stuff, but we
have in the House of Representatives, by rules, those sorts of
things, Mr. Zuckerman, that you are trying to create, that you
have been successful in creating on Princeton campus. That is
the capacity to go back and forth.
Mr. Atkins, I am just impressed by your capacity to spot an
issue and to spot an issue early and not be intimidated and not
be put off. And I was reading your email exchange back and
forth with Georgetown Law, and you did it twice. You were like
a dog with a bone. You saw it and you stuck with it. You said,
``It seems that the rules and guidance pertain almost entirely
to the institution itself and its faculty and staff.'' That is
your reply back to Georgetown Law when they were stiff-arming
you. And then you did it--some time later you said, ``We are
interested in exploring reasonable ways that we, as students,
can permissibly engage in conduct which the institution itself
is proscribed from.'' Great insight.
Now, here is the point. This is Georgetown Law School. This
is what Mr. Crowley has described, and I think everybody would,
this preeminent institution. And if they are blind to it, and
it takes a law student to say, ``I don't know, this sure
doesn't seem right,'' we have a problem.
I mean, Professor Hill, you made the point that this is
pretty clear. You know, there has been a lot of either private
letter rulings or other things, and a lot of guidance.
But for some reason this is not penetrating down. And there
is a lot of reasons for it, probably. Some of them--
institutions tend to be risk-adverse. They think Mr. Atkins is
going to go away. They think Mr. Zuckerman is going to run out
of steam and graduate and so forth. But that is the
responsibility of this Committee, to make sure that we are
doing the things that we do, number one, to educate, number
two, to make sure we are holding these schools to a high
standard, and number three, trying to create an environment
where people can discuss.
Now, Professor George, I have a question for you. What
happens, or what is university life like, or what can it be
like if it dissolves into--if it devolves into political
correctness, the type of political correctness where faculty is
intimidated, students are intimidated, and it is not an
environment where you are free to think? Can you just give me a
sense--and you mentioned it a minute ago--when political
correctness one way or the other becomes--moves from--moves
into indoctrination?
In other words, ``You don't think the right way and you are
not welcome here. And if you choose to think that way, you can
keep your thoughts to yourself.'' What is that, if that becomes
sort of the norm on college campuses today? What does that look
like for us?
Mr. GEORGE. Well, what happens is that education just
ceases to take place. And instead, you get indoctrination. So
the new students coming in are taught that there is a party
line. They are taught not only formally, by--but informally.
The culture that has been created communicates to them the idea
that there is a party line, it is your job to believe it, it is
not your job to question it, get on board with the program. It
is absolutely inconsistent with education.
For some of the reasons that Mr. Kelly articulated when he
quoted from that wonderful speech by Learned Hand, what Hand is
getting at there is the idea that the culture matters, the
underlying culture really is determinative of the health of an
institution. And that applies to an academic institution, as
much as it does to other institutions.
To educate a student you need to challenge that student's
ideas, challenge the ideas of students who are on the other
side, encourage the student to challenge your ideas and
beliefs, and create what philosophers call a dialectic, an
argument that goes back and forth, not with one side
necessarily trying to defeat the other and win, but with both
sides trying to understand more deeply what the truth of the
matter is. Knowledge-seeking, wisdom-seeking, that is what it
is all about.
And, as Hand pointed out, you cannot engage in that if you
are so convinced that there is no possibility that you could
ever be wrong that you are not listening.
Chairman ROSKAM. So I think it is important for us to make
a connection. And it didn't occur to me until I was listening
to all of you discuss your experiences and your insights.
I think it is important for us to understand the
relationship between Mr. Atkins' experience--that is, you know,
they basically patted him on the head and said, ``How nice for
you, but you are not going to distribute your candidate's
literature here,'' make that connection, which is sort of
condescending and an attempt to marginalize within the culture,
all the way over to political correctness that becomes
indoctrination. Some would say, oh, that is too big of a leap,
you are overstating. I don't think we are overstating. I don't
think we are making it too big of a leap.
Mr. Zuckerman, one of the things that it seems to me you
are an example of, whether you are articulating it this way or
not, is you see the danger of the flashpoint of political
correctness that becomes overwhelming and destructive to campus
life. Can you just highlight a little bit?
Am I getting this right? Do you see a relationship? Or am I
overstating this, or----
Mr. ZUCKERMAN. No, I would say you are absolutely getting
it right. Some of the demands that have been made at Princeton
would basically institutionalize this political correctness. We
will take the example of a demand for a mandatory class in the
studies of marginalized people. So that brings up the first
question of who counts as marginalized. Presumably, the
protesters, they have said the example of marginalized people
would be either African Americans or the LGBT community.
Now, are they actually marginalized? Many of my African
American friends say, ``No, we are not marginalized.'' Many of
my LGBT friends also don't think they are marginalized. But the
university would be taking this notion of marginalization,
forcing it on students who disagree with it, and those
students, presumably, when they would voice their disagreement
in class, are going to be mocked for countering the official
university narrative, or probably going to be graded down by
their professors, simply because they are rebutting the central
premise of the class, which is this is marginalization. When
you say no you are going to suffer the consequences, and that
is very destructive to the flow of ideas.
Chairman ROSKAM. You know, it seems--I am sitting here with
Ranking Member Lewis. And you, who are students, you may not
know his journey, but it is a fascinating one. And he has an
autobiography that I commend to you.
But it seems to me that his background of taking on a
politically-correct situation decades ago was transformational
for all of us. And we have to make sure that that capacity, in
that sense, taking on a racist system, was absolutely
transformational, and he had the capacity to do that, and to
break boundaries and to make America better for everybody. We
have to protect that, because you can imagine how this can
become so debilitating.
Let me give you an example. It is known to me that a
student was in a university setting recently, and had a
discussion. And the question was, ``Who is privileged?'' You
can imagine this today, in this general milieu. ``Who is
privileged?'' And after listening to the discussion, the
student made this point. ``Hey, we are American college kids.
We are all privileged.'' It was a scandal, basically, that this
student asserted this in the classroom.
And the student was made--you know, pointed out, ``Look, I
am aware of orphanages overseas where kids aren't eating on the
weekends. That is the standard. We need to operate on a global
standard. By definition, we are all privileged. We are American
college kids.'' And the student was marginalized, and the
professor didn't protect the student, and so forth. And it
became this absurd sort of thing where to make that sort of
argument the student was accused of being insensitive and,
``You don't understand,'' and so forth. And I think that if we
have a situation where our college life devolves into that,
that is just not helpful. And it is something that we need to
inquire about, it is something that we need to highlight.
And this notion of academic freedom, and freedom of speech
on college campuses is really something to celebrate. It is
something to defend, because there is something in it for all
of us. There really is something in it for all of us.
So, on behalf of our whole Subcommittee, I just want to
thank each one of you for your willingness to come forward and
to share your perspectives with us. For those that are
listening or watching and have a story that they want the
Committee to know about, you can just send us an email at,

[email protected]
.
And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:42 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
