- [H.A.S.C. No. 112-71]UPDATE ON ARLINGTON CEMETERY REFORMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 112-71]

UPDATE ON ARLINGTON CEMETERY REFORMS

__________

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

meeting jointly with

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

SEPTEMBER 23, 2011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] CONGRESS.#13

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-787                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

JOE WILSON, South Carolina, Chairman
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
TOM ROONEY, Florida                  MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
JOE HECK, Nevada                     DAVE LOEBSACK, Iowa
ALLEN B. WEST, Florida               NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
John Chapla, Professional Staff Member
Debra Wada, Professional Staff Member
Jim Weiss, Staff Assistant

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

ROB WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   ROBERT ANDREWS, New Jersey
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
TOM ROONEY, Florida                  COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
Michele Pearce, Professional Staff Member
Paul Lewis, Professional Staff Member
Arthur Milikh, Staff Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------

CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF HEARINGS
2011

Page

Hearing:

Friday, September 23, 2011, Update on Arlington Cemetery Reforms.     1

Appendix:

Friday, September 23, 2011.......................................    25
----------

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2011
UPDATE ON ARLINGTON CEMETERY REFORMS
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Mr. Cooper, O&I RM,
said he had no statement deg.

Davis, Hon. Susan A., a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.....................     2
Wilson, Hon. Joe, a Representative from South Carolina, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel.............................     1
Wittman, Hon. Rob, a Representative from Virginia, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...................     2

WITNESSES

Condon, Kathryn A., Executive Director, Arlington National
Cemetery; accompanied by Patrick Hallinan, Superintendent of
Arlington National Cemetery....................................     8
McCoy, MG William H., USA, Deputy Inspector General, U.S. Army...     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Condon, Kathryn A............................................    56
Davis, Hon. Susan A..........................................    31
McCoy, MG William H..........................................    35
Wilson, Hon. Joe.............................................    29
Wittman, Hon. Rob............................................    33

Documents Submitted for the Record:

American Legion Statement for the Record.....................    71

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Runyan...................................................    77

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. West.....................................................    81
UPDATE ON ARLINGTON CEMETERY REFORMS

----------

House of Representatives, Committee on Armed
Services, Subcommittee on Military Personnel,
Meeting Jointly with the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations, Washington, DC,
Friday, September 23, 2011.

title on transcriptUPDATE ON ARLINGTON CEMETERY
REFORMS deg.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Wilson
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Military Personnel) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE WILSON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
SOUTH CAROLINA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Mr. Wilson. Good morning. Thank you for attending this
morning. And I apologize. I am 4 minutes late. But I was with
the Gold Star Mothers and, in particular, Ann Hampton, the very
grateful mother of Captain Kimberly Hampton, who sadly was
killed in a helicopter incident in Iraq.
And so as we begin today, today, the Military Personnel
Subcommittee and the Oversight and Investigation Subcommittee
are jointly hosting a hearing on the recent report to Congress
by the Secretary of the Army. That report details the progress
that has been made since June 2010 to address the numerous
serious shortcomings found in the previous oversight,
administration, and management of the Arlington National
Cemetery which is under the supervision of the Department of
the Army.
The Secretary's report is based on the findings of an
inspection conducted by the Department of the Army Inspector
General [IG]. Overall, there is clear evidence that substantial
improvements have taken place at Arlington. That progress
reflects not only in the personal commitment of Secretary John
McHugh, but also the professionalism and commitment of Ms.
Kathryn Condon, the Executive Director of the Army National
Cemeteries Program, and Patrick Hallinan, the Superintendent of
Arlington Cemetery.
While great strides have been made, much still remains to
be done. My focus in the hearing will be where we go from here.
I am especially concerned about the Inspector General's
findings that the wait time for burials is substantially longer
than previously reported. We need to find an appropriate way
soon to reduce that waiting time.
Before I introduce our witnesses, let me recognize in turn
Ranking Member Susan Davis of the Military Personnel
Subcommittee; Rob Wittman, who is chairman of the Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee; and Jim Cooper, who is the ranking
member of the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, for
any opening remarks they may wish.
Today we will hear--so I now recognize Mrs. Davis.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN A. DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Mrs. Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Condon and Mr. Hallinan, it is good to see you. I know
you have been here before. Thank you. Welcome.
General McCoy, thank you for being here, and we look
forward to hearing your assessment of Arlington and how it
compares to last year's review.
Today our hearing is being held jointly with the Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee. So I certainly want to welcome
our colleagues from the Oversight Subcommittee as well.
The Arlington National Cemetery is a final resting place
for those who made the ultimate sacrifice in service to their
nation. It is a place where we expect and we should demand the
highest standard of conduct and performance of its employees,
from management to the lowest levels of the workforce.
Sadly, the actions of a few individuals have tarnished the
renowned reputation of this hallowed ground, so we are here to
ensure that such actions never occur again and to begin to
restore the trust that has been eroded by recent revelations.
General McCoy, your report seems to suggest that the Army
has made significant improvements at Arlington, and I have been
impressed by the ongoing reports that we have had. But more can
be done.
Ms. Condon and Mr. Hallinan, it seems you have turned
things around and that, again, has been impressive, and in a
relatively short period of time. But the question that I have
is, can this focus be maintained and what impact, if any, will
potential budget concerns have on the operations of the
Cemetery? I look forward to hearing from you on what has been
accomplished for today and what the long-term strategic vision
is for the Cemetery and ultimately how those plans may or may
not be affected by the current budget environment.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Davis can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mrs. Davis.
Chairman Rob Wittman.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROB WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM VIRGINIA,
CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Ms. Condon, Mr. Hallinan, General McCoy,
thank you so much for taking the time to be here with us today.
And I am especially pleased that you brought along Captain
Nate Peterson, who played such a critical role in the
accountability task force.
Captain Peterson, thank you so much for your efforts.
I want to thank not only Captain Peterson but other members
of your team, such as Sergeant John McDermott, for your
efforts. Because of you, we now have an accurate count of
gravesites and markers at Arlington, which will ensure that
future plans are based on real facts and data, not supposition.
You should be proud of the service you provided to the task
force and more importantly to your Nation. You have
accomplished your duty with remarkable precision and diligence
and have represented The Old Guard well. Great job.
Arlington Cemetery is a special place for many reasons. But
for me, it is special because it is where generations of heroes
have been laid to rest. It is a place where we can go and pay
appropriate tribute to heroes who dedicated their lives to
others in answer to our Nation's call to duty despite the
sacrifices associated with doing so.
It is why I feel so passionately about accountability and
oversight of Arlington and why I was happy to read about the
recent progress that has been made on a number of issues. In
particular, I was happy to learn that the IG didn't identify
any deficiencies during the most recent inspection. And I am
happy to know that the Army has dedicated the manpower and
resources to hopefully sustain this progress moving forward.
That said, I note a number of issues that continue to cause
concern, such as employee training, acquisition and contracting
procedures and oversight, and also long-term organizational
plans and oversight regimes. I hope today that you will address
these issues. And I look forward to hearing your views on how
they will be addressed moving forward.
Again, I thank all of you for being here today and thank
you for your service to our Nation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Wittman.
We now proceed to Ranking Member Jim Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
welcome the witnesses. I have no opening statement.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
Today we will be hearing from Major General William McCoy,
Deputy Inspector General of the U.S. Army, to be followed by
Ms. Kathryn Condon, Executive Director of the Army's National
Cemeteries Program. Ms. Condon is accompanied by Mr. Patrick
Hallinan, who is the Superintendent of Arlington National
Cemetery.
Before I recognize our witnesses, I ask unanimous consent
that a statement from the American Legion be entered into the
record. Members will find the statement in the material before
them. Hearing no objection, it shall be admitted.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Wilson. At this time, we will begin right away with
General McCoy.

STATEMENT OF MG WILLIAM H. MCCOY, USA, DEPUTY INSPECTOR
GENERAL, U.S. ARMY

General McCoy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and distinguished Members, thank you for the
invitation and opportunity to speak to you today about
Arlington National Cemetery.
I became the Deputy Inspector General in October of 2008
and have also been serving as the Acting Inspector General
since 13 August 2010, when Lieutenant General Whitcomb retired.
During my time as Deputy and now the Acting Inspector General,
I have been intimately involved in all efforts concerning
Arlington National Cemetery almost continuously since July of
2009.
Since then, the Inspector General Agency has conducted two
full inspections and an interim review this past January, and
we have conducted 6 investigations involving 21 matters of
alleged misconduct.
On 10 June 2010, after reviewing both the IG inspection and
the investigation report, Secretary McHugh issued Army
Directive 2010-04, entitled ``Enhancing the Operation and
Oversight of Army National Cemeteries.'' The directive
established the Army National Cemeteries Program Executive
Director position and tasked her to establish an accountability
baseline for all gravesites and inurnment niches at the
Cemetery. It further tasked agencies and organizations across
the Army to accomplish numerous actions in support of the
improvement of cemetery processes and procedures.
The recent 2011 IG inspection had three objectives: First,
to assess action on deficiencies identified in the 2010 report;
second, to access implementation of Army directive 2010-04; and
third, to assess the Cemetery's efforts to provide outreach
information and support to family members who inquire about
possible burial discrepancies at Arlington National Cemetery.
I will describe the inspection team's findings during the
remainder of this statement. Up front, I believe our report and
what you will hear today will show that the changes that have
taken place in the last year are a good news story. As much as
the Army regretted having to report the many deficiencies found
in Arlington a year ago, I am proud to report that the
deficiencies have been substantially corrected this year.
I attribute these improvements to three things: First, the
direct supervision and direction of the Secretary of the Army,
Mr. McHugh; second, the strong focused leadership of Ms. Condon
and Mr. Hallinan; and finally, the application of the full
force of Army resources to correcting deficiencies at Arlington
National Cemetery [ANC].
Bottom line, in my opinion, the immense management and
deficiencies found and reported last year no longer exist.
Some of the key findings I will discuss next. Since the
Secretary assigned Army Directive 2010-04, the Executive
Director has led her staff and other Army stakeholders to make
significant improvements at Arlington while still accomplishing
the Cemetery's daily mission. Our 2010 IG inspection identified
76 findings and made 101 recommendations; 61 of those findings
were deficiencies.
This year, there were no deficiencies noted. We made 31
observations and noted 2 other matters for consideration on the
progress that has been made and the work that is still to be
done. This alone underscores the tremendous progress ANC and
the Army have made in correcting the problems at Arlington.
Let me talk first to the culture. The insularity which
contributed so significantly to the mismanagement and
deficiencies last year no longer exist at Arlington National
Cemetery. Instead, the Executive Director has established an
environment of collaboration, cooperation and coordination with
supporting Army staff, commands and agencies.
Equally important is the transformation of the Cemetery's
organizational climate. We administered two Defense Equal
Opportunity Management Institute surveys to Cemetery employees
this past year: one in January of 2011 and the second in June
of 2011. Both surveys reflect steadily improving morale and
organizational effectiveness over the last year. Sensing
sessions conducted by inspectors confirm those survey findings.
These radical improvements in the organizational climate
and workforce attitude can be attributed directly to the strong
leadership style and approach of both the Executive Director
and the Superintendent.
With regard to automated systems and processes, ANC now
possesses a fully functional information technology
architecture, enabled by current software applications and
hardware and supported by a comprehensive service agreement
with the Army's Information Technology Agency [ITA].
For instance, this morning while we sit here with Ms.
Condon and Mr. Hallinan, they are conducting 12 funerals at
Arlington National Cemetery. We could not have told you that
reliably last year. This year you can get it off their Web
site. It is pretty incredible.
ANC has partnered with ITA to route all incoming calls to
ITA's consolidated customer service center at Fort Detrick,
Maryland. This has significantly improved customer service and
enabled a tiered response system using their remedy tracking
system. This system allows collaborative resolution by call
center personnel and Cemetery representatives and enables
Cemetery leaders to assess performance against established
measures of effectiveness.
ANC and the Veterans Administration are now partnering to
integrate the Cemetery's interment scheduling system and the
VA's Burial Operation Support System. This enhancement will
save significant staff hours within the Interment Services
Branch. ANC has partnered also with the Army's Chief
Information Officer to create a digital research tool for
digitized burial records, cemetery maps and headstone
photographs, which is enabling the Executive Director's
Gravesite Accountability Task Force to reestablish an
accountability baseline for each gravesite and inurnment niche
at Arlington.
With regard to information assurance, ANC now meets Army
standards in all functional areas. During the 2010 IG
inspection, ANC did not meet the Army standard in any of the
functional areas inspected; 57 deficiencies were identified in
their Information Assurance Program. Today, I can report to you
that Arlington National Cemetery's Information Assurance
Program is among the best in the Army.
With regard to contracting, during the 2010 IG inspection,
we found the Cemetery's procurement and contracting actions
were not compliant with Army, Defense or Federal acquisition
regulations. Untrained and unqualified personnel were
developing requirements and committing funds to contracts
without appropriate oversight. We also identified poor or
improper contract management by the agencies charged with
executing ANC's contracts.
This summer, we reviewed 17 ANC service contracts from the
Mission Installation Contracting Command and 8 ANC engineering
and construction contracts from the Army Corps of Engineers.
Today, the Cemetery's contracting actions are now properly
aligned based on scope of work, and both contracting agencies
are providing support teams to ANC and are properly providing
the oversight necessary to ensure that quality contracts are
properly awarded.
ANC is also effectively monitoring contract execution with
trained and qualified contracting officer representatives.
While there were some discrepancies found in contract
documentation this past year, they were all minor compared to
what we found last year. And systems, processes and management
of contracts at Arlington, which were nonexistent last year,
are now consistent with best practices in the Army.
With regard to Arlington's budget, ANC now uses Army
standard financial management processes and works closely with
the Army's Administrative Assistant and Assistant Secretary of
the Army for Financial Management to ensure the development,
execution and oversight of its program and budget. Further, the
Executive Director's decision to transition Arlington early to
the General Fund Enterprise Business System provides the Army
full visibility of the Cemetery's expenditures and has been
critical to reversing past budget shortfalls.
Turning to Arlington's outreach to families, during this
summer's inspection, we found that ANC's leadership and staff
were professional and compassionate in providing information,
support and outreach to families of interned or inurned
veterans when responding to possible burial discrepancies in
Arlington. Immediately after assuming her position, Ms. Condon
established a hotline at Arlington to respond to burial
inquiries. She also developed a tiered system to ensure that
proper efforts were made to address family member concerns.
To date, ANC has received almost 1,300 inquiries from
family members. In all but 13 cases, Cemetery representatives
were able to assure family members that there were no
discrepancies regarding the burial of their loved ones. In the
13 cases of substantiated burial discrepancies, which included
the 8 urns that were discovered in October of 2010, Cemetery
representatives worked closely with each family concerned and
invited their participation in correcting the error
accordingly.
In the case of the eight urns found in a single grave, only
four were able to be positively identified. ANC reinterred the
unidentified urns as unknown remains with the full dignity and
respect they provide. And to ensure that these inexcusable
breaches of procedure are prevented in the future, the
Executive Director and Superintendent have thoroughly revised
and imposed strict safeguards into the Cemetery's procedures
for interring or inurning veterans--or disinterring veterans.
Our key recommendations: While the Army and ANC staff have
made great strides in correcting deficiencies noted in the 2010
IG report, there is still more to do. In this year's IG report,
we presented Secretary McHugh with 53 recommendations designed
to enhance the progress already made to this point. A
description of some of our key recommendations follow.
In the last year, the Executive Director has revised 32
Code of Federal Regulations 533, and it is now being staffed
for public comment. We recognized that the CFR would need to be
published before the Army regulation could be appropriately
revised. The Executive Director is now working on that. We have
recommended that the Executive Director incorporate
requirements for long-term, robust, and continuous oversight
processes and mechanisms in the revision of the regulation.
We also recommended that the Executive Director revise
Department of the Army Pamphlet 290-5, ``Administration,
Operation and Maintenance of Army Cemeteries,'' to provide all
28 Army post cemeteries with sound, authoritative and current
guidance on standardized processes and procedures for cemetery
operations.
We also recommended a multiservice policy for Arlington in
order to standardize policies, processes and procedures for
interment and inurnment honors and for the management of
ceremonial and band units. We believe this will be both more
efficient and more responsive.
Both the Secretary and the Chief of Staff of the Army are
committed to ensuring we have sustained the progress that we
made at Arlington. We note that the Executive Director and her
staff have fundamentally transformed the control mechanisms and
oversight of cemetery processes. However, to ensure this
continues into the long term, we recommended that the
Department of the Army G-3 provide Secretary McHugh with future
options on how best to integrate the Army National Cemeteries
Program [ANCP], command and control, organizational alignment
and support systems into an established Army organizational
structure. The G-3 is already conducting the analysis on that.
During our inspection, we found that interments and
inurnments at Arlington are increasing each year, and that wait
times at Arlington continues to increase. This may result in
the Cemetery reaching its capacity before current projections.
We recommended that the Secretary of the Army request Army
National Cemetery's Advisory Commission, when convened, to
examine the causes and effects of increasing wait times and
increasing demand and make recommendations to contend with
these issues.
In conclusion, I believe the progress made at Arlington
since last June shows a significant turnaround in performance
at Arlington and demonstrates the Army's stalwart commitment to
ensuring all actions at this national shrine are executed to
exacting standards.
Ms. Condon and Mr. Hallinan have been systematically
correcting the deficiencies we found last year. Army agencies
and organizations have completed or are in the process of
completing the tasks specifically assigned to them by the
Secretary of the Army. And Arlington's efforts to provide
outreach information and support to family members are
professional and compassionate. Simply put, the mismanagement
that we found last year no longer exists.
Much has been done, but there is still more to do. The team
that is there is fully capable and focused on making continuous
improvements at our Army's sacred ground.
As the Army's Inspector General, I know that restoring
Arlington remains a priority for the Secretary and for the Army
and for me. We will conduct annual inspections there for the
next 2 years in accordance with Public Law 111-339, but we are
also looking for other external oversight measures and internal
oversight measures that can be implemented.
Further, as the son of a mother and father who are buried
at Arlington, I have a personal interest in ensuring that the
Cemetery is properly managed. I am confident that Arlington is
being run as well as possible and I have observed constant,
continuous improvement over the past 15 months.
Thank you once again for the invitation and the opportunity
to testify today on this most important subject. I present my
written testimony to you for the record and look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of General McCoy can be found in
the Appendix on page 35.]
Mr. Wilson. General, thank you so much.
And we appreciate your personal commitment.
As we proceed, I also want to recognize Representative Jon
Runyan, a member of the Armed Services Committee.
And also we appreciate his service as chairman of the
Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs of
the House Veterans' Affairs Committee. His subcommittee also
has oversight of Arlington National Cemetery.
And now we proceed with Ms. Condon.

STATEMENT OF KATHRYN A. CONDON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ARLINGTON
NATIONAL CEMETERY; ACCOMPANIED BY PATRICK HALLINAN,
SUPERINTENDENT OF ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY

Ms. Condon. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the
committees, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
regarding the progress that we have made at Arlington National
Cemetery.
Fifteen months ago, Secretary McHugh created the position
of Executive Director, the position that I hold, as a direct
report to him, to be solely responsible for all aspects of
Arlington's operations, identified deficiencies, inefficiencies
and areas of noncompliance as a result of the June 2010
Inspector General report.
I am pleased to report to the subcommittees today that
tremendous progress has been made and care taken to analyze the
76 deficiencies identified in that report. Since that time, the
Cemetery has established standards and crafted corrective
actions which addressed those deficiencies. As noted as early
as March of this year when the Inspector General did an interim
review, it was stated that we have significantly increased the
effectiveness and efficiency in all of our missions and
functions.
But first and foremost, the most important action taken was
hiring Pat Hallinan as the Superintendent. His years of
cemetery experience have allowed both of us to use his words to
reorganize, retrain and retool Arlington.
Over the past year, we have increased the end strength of
the organization by nearly 50 percent. We have resolved the 211
discrepancies that were identified in the 2010 IG report. We
have conducted 16 physical gravesite verifications as a result
of family queries. We have formed the Gravesite Accountability
Task Force, which is currently in the process of establishing
the accountability baseline of all gravesites and niches in the
Cemetery.
We are in the process of updating the CFR, the Code of
Federal Regulations. We have implemented the Army's General
Fund Enterprise Business System, allowing Arlington for the
first time to conduct a Web-enabled financial asset and account
management. We have validated all of Arlington's contracts, and
as a matter of fact, we recompeted all of our service contracts
this year. We brought Arlington into compliance with
information assurance, and we have directed the development of
a revised master plan.
And more importantly, we have improved our communication
with the public and the ability of families and funeral homes
to schedule interments and inurnments by creating an integrated
call center.
Mr. Chairman, most importantly, I want to highlight the
tremendous leap in the effective use of technology at
Arlington. From the soldiers of The Old Guard taking photos and
documenting each marker in the Cemetery--thank you, Captain
Peterson--to replacing the paper records of the past that most
of you have seen firsthand and to replacing those with a
digital system that uses industry best practices for database
management. We are no longer using an IBM Selectric typewriter.
To schedule interments, our team is leveraging a state-of-
the-art system that ensures visibility for all appropriate
stakeholders and the ability to share information like never
before. And we have initiated a Geospatial Application
Development initiative at Arlington. This will form a Google
Maps-like information system that enables the Cemetery to
better manage the grounds, for Mr. Hallinan to assign grave and
niche assessments, and to provide street directions and site
locations for our guests.
Although much has been accomplished, there is still a lot
of work that we need to do. We are on the right path and to
work to earn and maintain the faith of the American public. To
date, this calendar year, we have conducted 4,869 burials;
3,146 ceremonies; hosted over 4 million visitors and guests;
and as the Inspector General stated, reviewed and addressed
over 1,300 family member concerns.
We have executed these efforts while also maintaining our
current operational tempo. But in order to meet the ever-
increasing demand for dignified services, we have expanded
operations to include placement-only services on Saturday that
do not require honors. And we continue to conduct on an average
of 27 funeral services each day.
If you were to ask today what is necessary to continue this
positive and fast-paced trend, it is the continued stalwart
support of all of the committees that are represented in the
room today.
Thank you for allowing me to just highlight a few of the
examples of our progress to date.
And Mr. Hallinan and I look forward to answering any of
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Condon can be found in the
Appendix on page 56.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. And it really is
encouraging to get this update.
We will now be proceeding. Every person here, as a member
of the subcommittees that are affected, will have 5 minutes
each. We have a person above reproach, John Chapla, the
professional staff, who will keep the time. And he is very
proficient.
As we proceed, the first question--and actually, things are
coming together here in that the question I had you have
largely answered, Ms. Condon.
But first of all, I want to thank Captain Nate Peterson, of
The Old Guard. It was really heartwarming to find out that they
were out there taking headstone photographs. Gosh, that is so
real. And then putting it on the Web site so that family
members, historians, young people doing biographies of our
heroes, they can look it up. And I, 2 weeks ago today, was at
Arlington. Incredibly enough, Colonel Charles P. Murray, Jr., a
medal of honor winner, who was the former Deputy Commander of
The Old Guard from Columbia, South Carolina. And it just warmed
your heart to see the tribute to our military heroes.
I am glad you brought up, Ms. Condon, the--where this began
largely were paper records that were incredibly disorganized
and then, sadly, there was an effort of digitalization that did
not work. So can you restate again how this has been improved?
Is there any cost recovery to prior error? And then, with the
computerization and the Web site capabilities, let us know how
this works.
Ms. Condon. Certainly, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, as you know, we have established the
independent accountability task force. And what we were able to
do is we were able to from the previous efforts to--of scanned
records--to use those. But in our discovery, as we built our IT
[information technology] tools, we discovered that not all
those records were scanned. So we are completely rescanning,
and we have rescanned all of the paper records of the Cemetery.
As a result of The Old Guard, we now can tell you that we
have 259,978 gravesite locations in the Cemetery. But those are
just the actual locations. That does not tell you the number of
decedents that we have buried in the Cemetery. So what we are
doing in the task force right now is to match those headstones
and markers with each and every record that we have in the
Cemetery. And we are well on our way, sir, on that effort.
Mr. Wilson. And I am glad it was brought up and I like the
term general customer service. That means customer friendly.
And I was happy to hear there has been a change in the
telephone system to include voicemail. But I am still concerned
that there is a waiting list for interments because we know
there are family members who are in jeopardy between the time
of death and interment. What is being done? And you have
identified some. But how can we help, on helping reduce the
waiting list?
Ms. Condon. Sir, as you know, we are almost the victims of
our own success. Before, they only averaged answering 47 phone
calls a day. Right now, we are averaging 230 phone calls. We
are answering every phone call that comes into the Cemetery.
And of those phone calls that are coming in, the average right
now is around 40 of phone calls are for individual scheduling
and interment service in the Cemetery.
Mr. Hallinan and I are doing our best, and I will turn over
to him to give the operational perspective on how we are
addressing that increase in volume. One of the things that we
did was, as I noted in my opening statement, was we now have
Saturday services. And that is for family members and military
members that do not want the honors, so that we can do
placements on Saturday rather than that.
Pat, is there anything that I missed?
Mr. Hallinan. I would just add that the true intent of the
Saturday burials was a customer service initiative. There is no
other national cemetery in the United States at this time that
inters on a Saturday. We are working 6 days a week. That is a
credit to the crew, and that is a credit to the planning and
the efforts we are leading.
As Ms. Condon stated, we are victims of our own success. We
do not know how many people in the past called up, didn't get
through, got frustrated and decided to bury elsewhere. The
requests for burials at Arlington is up. I think that is a good
reflection on the trust and confidence of the American people.
There are a lot of logistics and complexities involved, as you
know, interring at Arlington. But we are working together as a
team, Ms. Condon and I and our staff, along with the Military
District of Washington, to see what we can do on a daily basis,
Monday through Friday, to try to decrease that backlog.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
We now proceed immediately to Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate--really it is good to hear from all of
you. I appreciate the fact that you said continuous progress is
really dependent on our support, and I think we all heard that
clearly.
But I wonder if you could speak to budgetary constraints as
you move forward and what you have the most concern about as,
you know, we look for at the, unfortunately, the dollars and
cents of those improvements. Where have you found real
efficiencies and where, on the other hand, as you speak about
Saturday burials, which is such a positive thing for our
families of loved ones who are requesting Saturday burials,
there is obviously a cost to that? So I think just giving us a
better sense of where are we and what is it going to take, I
guess, to keep that continuous improvement? How do you see the
impacts of budgetary concerns?
Ms. Condon. Congresswoman, the issue that we have is right
now, we have been doing all we can as was identified in the
Inspector General report to bring in all of the unliquidated
obligations from previous years so that--and we have been able
to use those dollars to pay for the increase in manpower, most
importantly to improve the equipment that Mr. Hallinan has
introduced to the Cemetery for our workforce to make us more
efficient and effective. They were using outdated equipment.
One of my best examples, and I don't have the experience that
Mr. Hallinan has when it comes to burials, but I will scare you
now what I know about running a cemetery was we used to--when
you refill a gravesite after you do an interment, they used to
use a backhoe to tamp down the gravesite. And now by just
introducing equipment like a gas held tamper, we no longer have
the sinkages that Mr. Hallinan and I experienced when we took
over last June.
But that is an efficiency because what that also means is
that we are now not paying the contractor to come in and
refinish, redo the gravesite, resod, et cetera. So by
introducing state-of-the-art modern equipment to the workforce
and training the workforce, it has been an efficiency.
My concern is we have been capturing prior year money and,
you know, that has enabled us to do all of the things that we
have been able to accomplish in the last year. I am looking
seriously, you know, at the next budget submits if we do have
enough to maintain and sustain the operation.
Mrs. Davis. And is there an area in particular that you
would target, for example, and again just to give us a little
further direction?
Ms. Condon. One of the areas that we are most concerned
about is there has been a tremendous lack of paying attention
to maintenance and repair of the Cemetery. This summer, we had
two catastrophic failures of our air conditioning units in our
visitors center, which is where our 4 million guests go to use
the restroom facilities, and also in our administration
building. The administration building is where our family
members come to, you know, at the start of their service, and
literally, we had a catastrophic failure when we were at 100
degree temperature. Our roads are in very poor condition and
our sidewalks. We were very fortunate that we didn't have
tremendous damage with the hurricanes and earthquake, but we
did have damage. So backlog of maintenance and repair, ma'am,
is one area where we truly have to focus our resources in the
future.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Could you comment on transferring jurisdiction to the VA?
There has been discussion about that as you know. And I just
wonder what your thoughts are about it.
Ms. Condon. Congresswoman Davis, I was put in Arlington to
fix the Cemetery. The decision on, you know, should it go to VA
I think is well above me. But I think people who are probably
better to answer that question--I am a little parochial--is
probably either Mr. Hallinan who came from Veterans Affairs or,
you know, the Inspector General.
Mr. Hallinan. I would be happy to offer my opinion. And it
is just that; it is one person's opinion. But I have over three
decades of experience running 131 National Cemeteries. That
expertise is now at Arlington, and it has contributed I think
to some of the positive outcomes that we are testifying to
today.
The final decision would be left up to the distinguished
Members. That is above my purview. On a personal note, I do
believe that the Army has demonstrated the resources and the
commitment. The question is, is this really a core mission of
the United States Army? And as I have told Ms. Condon, it has
been a core mission of the United States Army for 150 years. So
they interred those first Union soldiers after that first
Battle of Manassas. And the United States Army has forensic
experts. It has the labs in Hawaii. It has the labs in Dover.
The United States Army has the greatest registration expertise.
It is unfortunate what happened. We have done everything we
can and we will continue to do to correct the mistakes of the
past and be sure they do not happen again. But I believe the
resources and, more importantly, the passion and the commitment
to the mission is there with the Army.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
General McCoy--Mr. Chairman--did you want to just briefly?
General McCoy. I would like to answer that. First, as a
soldier, I will tell you that from the standpoint of core
competencies, Mr. Hallinan indicated that, you know, we have
been doing this for 150 years. We took our eye off the ball I
think for a while, and we made a mess there that we have now
cleaned up. The Army is capable of running this. The Army has
the resources. And if you introduced another Federal agency, it
would create an additional level of bureaucracy I believe. They
already coordinate and partner very closely with the Veterans
Administration.
As a soldier, you know, you ask us to do things that aren't
really our core competency a lot. We do firefighting. We do
nation building and nation assistance. We do things all the
time. And I think the Army is probably the only organization in
our government that is postured to go anywhere, anytime, and do
anything and get the job done. So that is my opinion.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you for that very important question.
We now proceed to Chairman Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General McCoy, I want to follow up on the issue of the
Veterans Administration, and you noted in your report that the
Army has had a number of elements that they brought to bear to
look at Arlington to make sure that there was progress toward
institutional reform, including some direct oversight by the
Secretary of the Army. And I think that is admirable.
Based on that, putting in a larger perspective, what do you
believe is the best organizational structure for Arlington? And
how robust a role could the Veterans Administration play in the
future? And along those lines, can you explain why the Army
hasn't asked the VA to come in and do an independent
evaluation, to just have an agency outside or an external group
to look in to give an independent evaluation and say, hey, this
is how we see things going, here are some of our
recommendations? It is great to have the internal
investigation, but it is also good I think with another agency
that has expertise in that to say, listen, why don't you do
that? It has been recommended that that be done, and it hasn't
been done. So I just want to get your comments on the structure
and then where you see Veterans Administration playing a role
in helping the future of Arlington.
General McCoy. Okay. Thank you, Congressman. I will tell
you that we did recommend last year, first, a different
structural solution, and the Secretary made a determination,
based on his own judgment and advice, that he would establish
this structure with the ANCP, the provisional oversight group
and the Executive Director. And that system is working. We have
asked the G-3 to come back and look for a long-term solution.
In the short term, this is a good fix, and my sense is based on
what we have seen is that it has worked very well.
We did recommend last year that they sign an MOU, a
memorandum of understanding, with the Veterans Administration
to partner with them on their Veterans Assessment and
Inspection Program. Ms. Condon did one better and she hired the
expert out of Veterans Administration who wrote that program to
be the Superintendent. So now he is here doing that.
In addition to that, she has had a lot of help from
organizations: GAO [Government Accountability Office]; we have
been there continuously since she arrived; AAA [Army Audit
Agency] has been there; Secretary of the Army for Logistics and
Technology has been there; the Chief Information Officer. And
she has in that time also established her own internal
assessment programs, although she still has some work to do
there. She has established and reviewed analysis capabilities
throughout the Cemetery. My sense is there is still an
opportunity to partner with the Veterans Administration as they
do in information technology now and also in other matters. And
they have done that with training this last year, but there is
still more that they could do. I think Mr. Hallinan has a
couple of comments.
Mr. Hallinan. Mr. Chairman, just for a point of fact: we do
have the written agreement between the Department of Veterans
Affairs and the Secretary of the Army.
And Ms. Condon and I have spoken with the current Under
Secretary, my former boss, Mr. Steve Muro. And we plan on
sending four to five Arlington employees to their
organizational and assessment training program in St. Louis,
which is the academy that I helped found and started and did a
lot of the training of the senior leaders. And that is the
beginning.
In order to do a proper assessment, based on cemetery
operations--because they are kind of unique--you need properly
trained people to do an assessment or they can cause more
problems than issues they may fix. So that agreement is in
place. I expect the first four or five individuals to be
trained this year. We look to train additional personnel. We
look to use that program along with an Army inspection program
to assess ourselves. And then we look to invite the VA in maybe
the following year to come also to take a look at us. So we
have our peers in a similar industry also with their objective
set of eyes helping us.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Ms. Condon, I want to follow up on the issue of training.
You know, in the IG report, it was pointed out as a deficiency,
the lack of a comprehensive training program, ensuring that all
the employees there have the knowledge and skills necessary to
perform their tasks in their specific areas. It seems to me
along those lines that defining those core tasks and
establishing conditions for training are critical. Can you tell
me where you are in making progress towards putting those core
tasks in place, having them clearly identified for each
employee and then how they will be trained and then how those
employees will be put in place, how they will be deployed based
upon that training regime, because as you know, it has
sometimes been the cart before the horse. It is employee starts
working, and then later on, you find out, well, they don't have
the core competencies or their core tasks aren't identified. If
you could maybe define where things are going with that
particular deficiency pointed out in the IG's report.
Ms. Condon. Sir, as you know, the IG pointed out that what
we are doing is we are having each employee have an individual
development plan. But personally, the first thing that Mr.
Hallinan and I had to do at the Cemetery was to implement the
standards and procedures to effectively not only run the
Cemetery operations but to do the administration tasks such as
contracting and resource management. So what we are doing is we
are making sure that the employees all have a training program
and we are doing that, you know, as we speak. So we are
addressing that issue because it is a concern of both Mr.
Hallinan and I that our employees are trained to do the job
rather than what happened in the past, where it was just on-
the-job training. And so that is one of the issues that we are
working. And I don't know, Pat, if there is anything you wanted
to add to that one.
Mr. Hallinan. Mr. Chairman, you speak about when an
employee comes on the job for the first time, that they don't
have the skill set that is required, that would be a flaw and a
mistake in the hiring process. One of the things that Ms.
Condon and I have done since we have arrived is train the
supervisors at Arlington in performance-based interviewing
techniques. We have had over a 20 percent turnover in staff in
the last 15 months. That has allowed us to bring in new people
with new skill sets based on performance-based interviews. And
I have to say that they have done a better job of selecting
candidates; I am feeling pretty confident with the quality of
people we are bringing on board. We are training on site
internally. We are also sending people out professionally to be
trained, whether it is at St. Louis with the VA under the
memorandum of agreement or even to Caterpillar training in
Peoria, Illinois, where my equipment operators and Ms. Condon's
equipment operators are being trained at the highest industry
standard. That will save the taxpayer money and wear and tear
on equipment. That will save us in the prevention of accidents
to employees or the visiting public. And we should gain
operational efficiencies from the backhoe operators and
equipment operators in the future.
So when it comes to training, this is going to be the year
of intense training, as I spoke to the Inspector General about.
You need to have standards and measures. Each employee will
be issued a copy of the standards and measures and trained in
all standards and measures which are the very best in the
country. So they will know word for word and line for line what
is in those standards and measures. Then you need standard
operating procedures to support the standards and measures.
Then you need an assessment program to ensure that everyone is
doing just that. So it is a three-legged stool, and we are well
on our way, sir.
Ms. Condon. Sir, if I may add. One of the things that we
are also doing is we are doing succession planning. We are
bringing individuals in at a lower level and actually grooming
them to positions within the Cemetery, both from the
operational side and the administration side.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We now proceed to Ranking Member Jim Cooper of Tennessee.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think it is very important to get a long-term solution to
this problem. I was very impressed by the statement of the
American Legion and to highlight the importance of that
statement, I would like to read from it. ``The American Legion
urges Congress to place the ultimate ongoing responsibility of
managing and operating Arlington National Cemetery directly
with the Department of Veterans Affairs through the National
Cemetery Administration, with ceremonial duties still preserved
by The Old Guard. In the entire government, no other agency can
match the track record of success and satisfaction of NCA, that
has worked hard to achieve. NCA is well known for their
attention to detail and their ability to perform the task of
ensuring the dignity of our fallen service members like no
other.''
They point out how Arlington is struggling to track graves,
and NCA has already had a downloadable app for Smartphones for
some time, so why reinvent the wheel. The American Legion goes
on to point out that the ``DOD has one critical mission, to
prepare for and execute the warfighting necessary for this
Nation's defense. Sidelining resources of money and staff to
nonwarfighting tasks degrades the efficiency of the DOD. NCA is
already managing 131 cemeteries and doing it very well.''
They go on to point out that in a consumer satisfaction
index, NCA scores a 96, which is higher than any other
government agency and higher than any other organization in the
United States. So the American Legion believes this is
indicative of the level of commitment in getting the job done
right for the families.
So to me, Mr. Chairman, this is pretty persuasive case, and
I think the committee should be looking at something like this.
As the American Legion says, the efforts of Director Condon
and Superintendent Hallinan are laudable, but they do not
represent a long-term solution, nor should that be asked of
them. So I appreciate the accomplishments that you have
achieved. But we all need to remember this is a scandal that
never should have happened. And the Army is always going to be
distracted by more important missions, and I appreciate
Inspector General McCoy and others volunteering for duty and
getting this done. But if the Veterans Administration is doing
such a great job and Ms. Condon herself had to hire Mr.
Hallinan from the Veterans Administration, I think that a long-
term solution is very much headed in that direction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
And we now proceed to Mr. Scott of Georgia.
Mr. Scott. Ladies and gentlemen, I thank both of you.
And I will tell you I do hope that it stays under the
control of where it is, as much respect as I have for my
colleague. I remember quite well as a teenager visiting the
beaches of Normandy and the impact that it had on me. And for a
long, long time, I had a picture of a tombstone and my
recollection was it said this soldier known only to God, but
looking--it may have said a comrade in arms known only to God,
as I look at the things. And the impact that one of those
funerals has and visiting one of those treasures on our
teenagers, especially, that are growing up, I think is
extremely important.
And my granddad was a B-17 pilot. I cannot help bring that
up with the honor flight that is here today. I saw them going
in the Capitol, and certainly we are losing that generation at
a rapid pace.
I want to first say, thank you. I want to thank you for
going out and taking your time to take the pictures because it
is important to me as an American, and it is more important to
those families whose loved ones are being now properly taken
care of.
General, the question I have is Andersonville is very close
to home for me in Georgia. I have family members that are
buried there. Are we looking at the other areas to make sure
that we don't have similar issues that we have had here?
General McCoy. You are talking about other cemeteries,
correct?
Mr. Scott. Yes, sir. Correct.
General McCoy. There are two moves afoot. First, as the
Secretary walked away from this hearing last year, he
recognized that there may be other autonomous organizations in
the Army. So he created a task force to look at, where might he
have other autonomous organizations? And that task force
concluded that we have several organizations in the Army that
had the same kind of governance structure that Arlington
National Cemetery had. So now we are moving to look in detail
at those.
But more to the point of the cemeteries, in addition to the
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, which is part of the Arlington
National Cemetery Program--or the Army National Cemetery
Program, there are 28 cemeteries throughout the Army that are
on for the most part post camps and stations in the continental
United States. Ms. Condon as the Executive Director of ANCP,
Army National Cemeteries Program, also has proponency for
those, and she is establishing as part of her Department of the
Army Pamphlet 290-5, she is establishing procedures and
processes for proper gravesite burial and management there.
So my sense is that while those cemeteries are much less
engaged than hers is, than Arlington National Cemetery, she
understands what she has to do to make those changes at those
cemeteries as well.
Mr. Scott. Okay. One last question or comment.
When my grandfather died, we chose to bury him in a family
plot. He was a POW [prisoner of war] in World War II, and we
simply asked for an Honor Guard to carry out the service, the
flag and the rifles and the playing of taps. And obviously, it
was carried out from a base in Georgia, and the gentleman in
charge was a very, very respectful, but commented that, you
know, we simply don't have the manpower to carry out all of the
requests that we are getting. I would just ask, obviously this
is the priority of this committee hearing right now, that maybe
we consider how we are going to handle the respect for those
who are not being buried in Arlington and maybe even if we
worked with ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] programs
throughout the State--I represent a very rural area of the
country in many of the counties that I represent and whether or
not we could work with an ROTC program to make sure that those
families have the service that they request. Thank you. Thank
you for everything you have done.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
And we now will proceed to Ms. Tsongas of Massachusetts.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you all for being here. And it is a
pleasure to hear this report compared to that which we heard
over a year ago. So I want to commend you all for the great
progress you have made. And the progress has been significant,
but I think if you look at what we heard initially, there was
no other way than up. So you are on a good path.
And I would also like to say that in my office, I have a
wounded warrior; his name is Paul Corbett. And I let him know
that I would be attending this hearing today. And he asked that
I recognize the tremendous work that he has seen performed by
our service members who work at Arlington National Cemetery. He
has attended too many ceremonies there as a result of his
service but said he has always been incredibly touched and
moved by the seriousness and professionalism of The Old Guard
and their incredible commitment to burying our soldiers with
dignity, the dignity they deserve. So I just wanted to convey
that to you.
I also, in reading your testimony, was sort of alerted to
your Web site and I went on it just out of curiosity. I had a
free moment. And I found it to be very well done. So I commend
you for that as well. And as I was looking through it, you
know, I saw one of the little tabs where it talks about
eligibility and who was eligible to be buried there. And I
wondered if one of the issues you are contending with in the
delay, part of it is a result of the improvements you have
made, that people are now able to get through and otherwise
might have given up. But what the process is for determining
eligibility. You have criteria. But once somebody makes it
known that they would like to bury a loved one there, how
efficient is that process? What does it look like? Does it need
more resources? Would that help address the delay? Whoever
feels it would be suitable to answer that.
Mr. Hallinan. Well, I will start off by saying I believe
Arlington has gotten strong support and enough resources to
carry out the mission. Whether adding additional resources is
going to impact the situation, I really don't believe so. I do
think it is volume. I think also it is logistics. There is only
a number of open and first interment sections in Arlington.
They are all in a certain location within Arlington, almost in
the corner of Arlington.
So we need to be very careful. We have gone from 27; our
goal is to do 30 interments a day to address the backlog. But
we need to be real careful as we try to reach 30 interments a
day, that we don't impact any of the other families because of
the logistics and locations. So today we have 27 interments. If
we had 30, and the service is going on with another service
coming down and disrupt that family and impact that service in
a negative way. So there is a balance. I don't think the
possibility of an additional caisson, a changing of work
schedules, is only going to add 1 additional interment, 5
interments a week, 24 a month. That will start to address the
backlog. But I guess I question, my staff, when you raise
people's expectations, interest in Arlington may go up again.
You may get more calls. The more efficient you become, the
higher the standard you operate to, you raise people's
expectations. So I think we are doing everything we can
locally. I don't really think it is a resource issue at this
time. I think it is more coordination and logistics.
Ms. Tsongas. Is eligibility a fairly cut-and-dry
determination? Is that fairly quickly determined?
Ms. Condon. Yes, ma'am, it is. And you did mention one of
the factors by putting up the new Web site. I think one of the
issues before was it wasn't clear, people didn't know where to
go to actually find what the criteria was for eligibility. So
we put out a new administrative guide, which is also on our Web
site. Just they didn't have the information, and it is pretty
clear on who is eligible to be buried at Arlington.
Ms. Tsongas. And in the context of our discussion as to
whether or not it should be transferred to the VA or remain
under the Army, do you keep figures on--from what branches of
the services people are being buried, family members, numbers
of family members versus those who have served? Do you have
that broken down into categories?
Ms. Condon. Yes, ma'am, we do.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Ms. Tsongas.
We proceed now to Colonel Allen West of Florida.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To the visiting chairman, and also ranking members, thank
you very much.
And to the panel, thank you for joining us here today.
And I want to commend you all because the Army that my
father served in, in World War II; that I served in for 22
years; and that my nephew is now serving in, we don't run away
from our missions, and we don't run away from challenges. We
step up to the plate, and we make the corrective action. So I
commend you for this and keep pressing on because I don't want
to see this great tradition to be taken away from my Army, and
that is an important thing that we have to understand. So, with
that being said, I would like to ask a little bit about the
inspection program because as we know, previously, as it said
in the IG report, there was not an OIP [Organizational
Inspection Program]. So I would like to get a little bit more
information as far as the schedule by which we will have these
OIPs coming up.
I know, General, you talked about having inspections over
the next 2 years. Now, will those be IG driven inspections, so
there will be reports? Or will we have a formal OIP program
from an external entity? And then, also, Ms. Condon, if you
could kind of give us an understanding about your internal
assessment programs that you will have.
General McCoy. Congressman, I will start with just two
things, and then I will turn it over to Ms. Condon. The
inspection I was talking about for the next 2 years required by
Public Law 111-339 is a DAIG [Department of the Army Inspector
General] inspection that will result in a written report in
order to determine that continuing progress is made based on
the findings that we had in 2010. So that will continue. The
organizational inspection program is kind of--there are three
tools available to Ms. Condon. One, obviously, is an internal
program that she can implement herself. But it also includes
staff assistance visits. And the staff is very focused right
now on being at her beck and call to help in many ways.
Sometimes it is too much help. But the fact is, they are there
to help, and she is leveraging that very powerfully. And then
the other part is command inspections, things that we can--that
the Secretary can ask us to go drill into specifically if he
wants us to look at things. And then finally her own internal
processes to get out and about and look at the operations
inside her program to make sure that they are operating
properly. Our recommendation to her was that she develop
internal processes, the external ones are going to continue for
the foreseeable future.
Ms. Condon. And, Congressman, we have been able to get to
the state we are today by having had independent people coming
in and looking and addressing where issues are, everything from
contracting to resourcing to how we do our operations. I am
going to follow, you know, in good Army tradition, the Army
regulation on the program for inspection. We are going to have
internal inspections. I am very fortunate, from a cemetery
operation standpoint, that I have Mr. Hallinan here because he
was the one who was responsible for all of those inspections
and that fabulous rating that was given to the VA cemeteries.
And I welcome any external agency to come in and do an
inspection.
I think to date, we are probably the most inspected
organization in government. But that is okay because it has
enabled us to fix those issues that need to be corrected for
our veterans and their loved ones.
Mr. West. Last question. And that kind of goes along with
what my colleague was saying. In being a victim of your own
success and understanding the constraints that you have with
the capacity there, the increased requests now, are you seeing
that you have to make any type of changes in the prioritization
or the guidelines and criteria that you have for interment
there at Arlington National Cemetery?
Ms. Condon. Sir, this is a great segue. As you know,
Secretary McHugh is in the process of establishing and we are
putting together our first meeting of the Arlington Commission,
which is an outside body to look at us. And those are the kind
of issues that we would like to present to that commission. Do
we need to relook at the eligibility requirements for the
Cemetery as well as the expansion of the Cemetery? How best
should we utilize the land that are part of the expansion? So
that is what we are going to do to address those issues.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Colonel.
We now proceed to Chairman Jon Runyan.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And again, Ms. Condon, Mr. Hallinan, General McCoy, thank
you again for your testimony.
Ms. Condon, again, thank you for everything we are doing.
Every time we have a hearing, we are enlightened and encouraged
by moving forward, but I think the black cloud that hangs over
us a lot of times is a lot of what I hear a lot of times.
People see the the forward progress, but they want to talk
about the bad things, and I want to talk about one right now.
As you know, we had a briefing--and I know there is an
ongoing criminal investigation going on--but we had a briefing
not too long ago in the VA with the Army CIS [Criminal
Investigation Command, CID] and the missing contract that has
to do with digitizing the records of the last time when we
found the 69 boxes. Have they found that contract as of yet,
the base contract? Not the one with the subcontractor but the
base contract that we were looking for?
Ms. Condon. Sir, I will have to take that one for the
record since it is under investigation. I am not aware if they
found the contract or not.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 77.]
Mr. Runyan. General, do you have any idea on that?
General McCoy. No, Congressman. We do not investigate
criminal matters inside the IG. So that was passed to the
Criminal Investigation Command, and they have taken that on
now. We can take that back.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you.
And just to comment, Mr. Hallinan: when we are talking
about maybe transferring, you know, Arlington to the VA, just a
statement, and I think you would probably agree with me because
you ran it, are we not duplicating the same process in the VA
here in the Army?
Mr. Hallinan. We are providing the same service. I don't
know if we are duplicating the same process because Arlington
does things completely differently. I think if the VA in fact
does have Arlington transferred under their jurisdiction, there
are going to be some change that they are going to have to deal
with, some very real challenges. They do not do graveside
burials. They do not do the honors that are rendered, the
coordination of military honors units, the 4 million tourists,
the visitation from heads of state who come to pay their
respects to America's service men and women. These complexities
they do not deal with. They deal with their regional, local
cemeteries and their local communities. Arlington is unique.
Arlington is special to the American people. It is special to
the world. It is the world stage. So it is very challenging. My
eyes were opened and my ears were opened somewhat, Congressman,
when I went to a meeting of TAPS [Tragedy Assistance Program
for Survivors]. And these are the Gold Star Mothers and
Fathers. When we first came on board, we felt it important to
meet with those most deserved stakeholders, and we were
discussing the many issues that Arlington was facing, but what
I got out of it was a number of times, they were quite adamant
that Arlington remain with the Army and we don't want it to be
a VA cemetery. And they kind of directed it towards me because
I had VA written all over me at the time. So I was in the
defensive mode. But on the most human level, I understood
exactly what they were telling me.
Despite everything that happened, the honors that they
received, they know that the Army had taken their eye off the
ball, as the Inspector General spoke of, but the Army can fix
it, the Army has fixed it, and they look for the Army to
maintain that trust and commitment going into the future. So it
was right there right in front of us. They were very vocal
about it.
Mr. Runyan. Understood. And I respect that totally. But I
think in a world where there are some very similar aspects for
it, and there may be room in the future for a collaboration
there to actually--because we are stewards of the taxpayers'
money, and that is ultimately what we are about, and there may
be something to move forward to where we can help the taxpayer
out a little bit more. So I thank you.
And, Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we conclude, I have a brief question, but, Ms. Condon,
you touched on it. It is expansion. What reassurance do you
have to the American people as to space at the current location
of Arlington Cemetery, and looking ahead, has Arlington II been
identified?
Ms. Condon. Sir, as you know, when Mr. Hallinan and I
started, we were given data, and the data that we were given
was that we were going to run out of niche space in the
Cemetery in the year 2016 and in-ground burial in 2025, which
caused Mr. Hallinan and I to relook the expansion designs, to
look at the designs that we inherited from the previous
administration for the Millennium Project and the expansion to
the Navy Annex.
What we have done is the Army's Concept Analysis Agency,
our research, organizational research guys, have put a model
together for us which looks at not only the available acreage
but also looks at the eligibility criteria so we can change the
factors, because our number one priority is to expand the life
of Arlington Cemetery for our veterans and their loved ones to
the maximum extent possible.
As a matter of fact, last week, Mr. Hallinan and I
participated in a design charrette for the Millennium Project.
And it was very interesting because I think Mr. Hallinan had
much more fun. I had to go back to meetings, but he got to
spend more time with them to redesign, to put his expertise to
look at the designs of how we can expand in the future. And I
don't know if you want to say anything else on that, Pat.
Mr. Hallinan. As I looked at the Millennium Project, some
of the expertise that Ms. Condon is referring to is, you know--
if we change the gravesite layout pattern--and this comes from
my years of experience with the VA, Congressman. We are
collaborative. I am on the phone with the Under Secretary and
we are willing to share training and resources. And there are
more opportunities in the future. And we are going to take them
up on that and leverage any assistance we can get. But
something as simple as changing the gravesite layout from a 5-
by-10 gravesite to a 3-by-8 will increase the yield and the
longevity of Arlington National Cemetery.
And as the commission that Ms. Condon spoke of, the
Secretary of the Army has directed looks at eligibility. It may
impact that decision. Because if we can increase the yield at
Arlington National Cemetery, we may not have to revisit
eligibility so those that are eligible now would remain so. You
would not have to restrict it.
There is a finite footprint to Arlington National Cemetery,
as we all know. But based on something as simple as changing
the gravesite layout may have a significant impact on longevity
at Arlington National Cemetery from an operational standpoint.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you. And you do identify finite. Is
there a second location under consideration at all?
Ms. Condon. Sir, that is one of the issues that we are
going to present to the Commission for Arlington, is that we
all know that there is a finite time when we will run out of
burial space at Arlington National Cemetery. So that would be
one of the issues we would tee up to the independent commission
is, what after Arlington?
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
Are there any further questions?
Hearing none, at this time we adjourn.
[Whereupon, at 11:16 a.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

September 23, 2011

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

September 23, 2011

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.041

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.042

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.003

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.001

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.037

?

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

September 23, 2011

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70787.040

?

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

September 23, 2011

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. RUNYAN

Ms. Condon. Criminal Investigation Command (CID) determined that
the contract vehicle described by CID in the briefing to Congressman
Runyan and the Veterans Affairs Committee has not been found. The
contracting relationship between Arlington National Cemetery (ANC) and
the company Office Solutions was documented in 2004 (awarded 26 MAR
2004). The original (basic) contract file was required by Federal
Acquisition Regulations (FAR) to be retained for a period of 3 years
following fiscal closeout. The basic contract file and documentation is
presumed destroyed IAW [in accordance with] the FAR, due to the
retention period expiration. None of the basic contract files have been
discovered by CID and are presumed to have been destroyed. What CID was
able to locate was the documents related to Office Solutions that were
retrieved from the Electronic Document Access (EDA) system maintained
by Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), Ogden, UT. We have five
Standard Form 1449, Solicitation/Contract/Order for Commercial Items
and three Standard Form 30, Amendment of Solicitation/Modification of
Contract, consisting of 139 pages. A review of the documents from the
EDA system did not reveal anything of evidentiary value. As stated
previously, we do not have, nor have we been able to locate, the base
contract. [See page 21.]
?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

September 23, 2011

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WEST

Mr. West. With the significant development of tracking systems in
the past few years, commercial and government organizations are now
using RTLS (``Real-Time Location Systems'') to track their high-value
assets in real time. Indeed, the Department of Defense is already
applying such technologies to a variety of high priority items. For
example, the U.S. Army Depot at Tobyhanna, Pennsylvania is using RTLS
technology to provide a real-time location capability that enables the
effective tracking and tracing of weapons system parts. What
technologies like this are you evaluating and/or benchmarking against
within DOD so that Congress and the public can be assured that there
will be a stewardship system in place at Arlington National Cemetery
that will accurately account for the remains of our Nation's veterans
from theatre to the cemetery and, within Arlington, to burial?
Ms. Condon. Arlington National Cemetery is diligently working to
meet the legislative requirements set forth by Public Law 111-339 by
conducting a full accounting of Arlington National Cemetery Gravesites.
In August 2010, the ANCP Executive Director formally requested
support from the Army's Assistant Chief of Staff for Installation
Management (ACSIM) to field Arlington National Cemetery a world class
geospatial information system (GIS). This system once fielded will
provide Arlington Cemetery a ``Google-maps like'' ability to digitally
track and audit the management and assignment of gravesites for our
nations' veterans. This system is on track to be fielded in March 2012.
The Department of Defense (DOD) uses the Defense Casualty
Information Processing System (DCIPS) to track individual remains as
they transit from theatre to their final destination.
Arlington National Cemetery has investigated technologies that
could provide Radio Frequency Identification Technologies as well as
looked at how mobile applications and digital photographs could
permanently enhance the burial records of Arlington National Cemetery
to assure the public of stewardship of burial remains. In addition to
Arlington's internal research, through partnership with the VA we
understand the Department of Veterans affairs is investigating asset
management systems as part of their Memorial Affairs Redesign (MAR)
project and if such technology could enhance the stewardship provided
to the remains of our nation's veterans from theater. This research is
part of their requirement development phase as they undergo a
replacement for their Current Burial Operations Support System (BOSS).


