- THE EUROZONE CRISIS: DESTABILIZING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE EUROZONE CRISIS:
DESTABILIZING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE AND EURASIA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 27, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-94

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-950PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ENI F.H. FALEOMAVAEGA, American
DANA ROHRABACHER, California             Samoa
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         DONALD M. PAYNE, New Jersey
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
RON PAUL, Texas                      GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             DENNIS CARDOZA, California
TED POE, Texas                       BEN CHANDLER, Kentucky
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DAVID RIVERA, Florida                FREDERICA WILSON, Florida
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania             KAREN BASS, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
ROBERT TURNER, New York
Yleem D.S. Poblete, Staff Director
Richard J. Kessler, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Europe and Eurasia

DAN BURTON, Indiana, Chairman
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio
TED POE, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Jacob Funk Kirkegaard, research fellow, The Peterson
Institute for International Economics..........................     7
Desmond Lachman, Ph.D., resident fellow, American Enterprise
Institute......................................................    28
Mr. Bruce Stokes, senior Transatlantic fellow, German Marshall
Fund of the United States......................................    43

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Dan Burton, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Indiana, and chairman, Subcommittee on Europe and
Eurasia: Prepared statement....................................     3
Mr. Jacob Funk Kirkegaard: Prepared statement....................    10
Desmond Lachman, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.......................    31
Mr. Bruce Stokes: Prepared statement.............................    45

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    60
Hearing minutes..................................................    61
Congressional Reserch Service Memorandum: The Eurzone Debt Crisis    62

THE EUROZONE CRISIS: DESTABILIZING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe and Eurasia,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock
p.m., in room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dan
Burton (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Burton. The committee will come to order. This hearing
is on the eurozone crisis and the potential destabilizing of
the global economy. And the subcommittee will come to order.
Since the fall of 2009, starting with the revelation of
Greek fiscal problems, we watched a series of unfortunate
events take place that have fostered bailouts of Greece,
Ireland and Portugal and possible intervention in Spain and
Italy. Europe and the entire global economy are in a dire
predicament that has far-reaching consequences. Trillions upon
trillions of dollars are at stake as we look to stem a possible
worldwide economic depression.
Members of the European Union created the Eurozone in 1992
with a vision to create a single monetary policy for all of
Europe. The euro would become the common currency adopted among
nations who all adhered to a strict monetary policy that
provided greater stability. However, the Eurozone also brought
additional bureaucracy where individual nations still acted in
their own best interest, oftentimes hiding or misstating
realities of their economy, which only exacerbated the
situation. In addition, the European Union failed to adopt
mechanisms that could move swiftly to deal with quickly
changing market conditions and important oversight institutions
to provide transparency and accountability among the Eurozone
partners.
The current economic situation in Europe has uncovered many
of these shortfalls and has exposed them as the main causes of
the ongoing crisis. Accordingly, the Europeans have left the
world wondering if the steps they are taking to right the
crisis are effective and enough.
Due to the crisis, we have witnessed a creation of three
European lending mechanisms, the largest, the trillion dollar
European Financial Stability Facility, along with the
assistance from the European Central Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, has so far lent Portugal, Greece and Ireland
over $1 trillion. This is only the beginning as some analysts
estimate that Europeans will need another $2 trillion to
recapitalize European banks and the coffers of crisis
countries.
Meanwhile, European leaders continue to meet repeatedly and
results depend on a clear consensus on how to resolve a problem
that has been fluctuating for nearly 2 years.
The United States is not immune from these troubles, and
this is not just a European problem that Europeans must solve.
The U.S. economy intertwines with the European economy, and
the nations of Europe combine to be the largest trading partner
of the United States and the partnership is approximately five
times greater than our partnership with China. Due to the
crisis, U.S. exporters face tougher market conditions, as the
euro devalues and European partners cannot afford to import as
many manufactured or agricultural goods.
The United States stock markets, which are going up like a
rocket today, are in a constant flux as traders react to the
changing stabilities of the investment climates. U.S. banks,
despite ample warnings of the ongoing market volatility, still
hold European bonds and securities, a value estimated to be as
high as $2 trillion, and we will talk about that in a few
minutes.
As chairman, I visited with leaders and discussed with
experts the complexities of the crisis. Many public leaders I
have met with have not provided clarity and have not been
forthcoming regarding the true extent of the crisis. Political
leaders over the months, including U.S. officials, have
routinely relayed to us that the crisis is close to
stabilizing, that recovery is working, that governments are
taking reform measures and that growth is just around the
corner.
In contrast, the EFSF has grown from 440 billion euros to
780 billion euros to now over 1 trillion euros. Additionally, I
asked Treasury officials to testify in September, to which they
asked for postponement until after the IMF and the World Bank
meetings and the meetings they had yesterday. This past
Tuesday, they again asked us to delay this hearing to November
until after the G-20 meetings. Their excuse, contrary to what
we hear from public statements, is that the markets are too
volatile and that any statement can further harm the situation.
These are not signs that recovery is working or that growth
is just around the corner. The U.S. Government should not ask
or expect the American people to play kick the can while
political leaders sort out the global economy behind closed
doors. The people and the markets have a right to know. If we
are not open and transparent, we are only preserving an
artificial sense of stability. And this is not sustainable, and
the longer we wait, the worse it will be when reality comes
crashing down.
The current situation does not call for us to point fingers
and lay blame. I recognize that the crisis is not easy to
solve. The complexities of the crisis are diverse and unique,
with each country having its own cocktail that has led to its
current predicament. However, we must be honest about the
situation and no longer gloss over dilemmas that may drag the
entire globe into a deep recession, and we are very concerned
about the financial involvement that the United States may face
down the road.
And with that, I will yield to my goodlooking friend here,
my ranking member Mr. Meeks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burton follows:]

----------

Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Chairman.
And I want to thank Chairman Burton for scheduling this
hearing on the Eurozone crisis and its effects on the global
economy. The Transatlantic trade relationship is the largest in
the world, and it is in our interest to make sure that this
works to the benefit of the estimated 15 million jobs that have
been generated from this relationship on both sides of the
Atlantic.
I agree with the chairman that it is important for us to
get an accurate perception of U.S. exposure to the Eurozone
crisis. But I think it is just as important to look forward and
examine how we can transition from this situation, where the
Eurozone is under immense pressure, to a situation where growth
is generated and jobs are created from our mutual trade and
investments.
The financial crisis has exposed serious structural
shortcomings in the mechanisms governing the euro project and
tested European unity. I find it relevant to note that while it
has not been beautiful to look at, European leaders do appear
to have the resources, the capacity and the political will to
deal with the challenges they face.
Just yesterday European leaders reached an agreement with
the banks to take a 50-percent loss on the value of their Greek
debt and expanding their capital reserves. There is also an
agreement to expand the European Financial Stability Facility
to approximately $1.4 trillion. And I hope that these measures
will allow Europe to move forward.
I think it is important for us to acknowledge that there
are different reasons for the Eurozone problems. I suspect that
we are committing an analytical error by discussing one
Eurozone crisis as opposed to a Greek fiscal crisis, an Irish
banking crisis and a Portuguese competitiveness crisis. Are
they even really related? Are we throwing ourselves off track
by cobbling these issues together and looking in vain for
single causes, symptoms and solutions? I hope that our panel
can give us a detailed perspective on that.
Some of the commentary that I have read recently seems more
like Schadenfreude, the German expression, which I did not
pronounce correctly, but taking delight in others' bad fortune,
than actual analysis. We can probably agree that the euro came
into existence prematurely and without the requisite
institutional oversight.
But it seems to me that we may have lost sight of the
advantages of the euro entirely during the last couple of
years. I would point to price transparency and stability;
elimination of exchange-rate fluctuations; fees and transition
costs; increased cross-border trade; market expansion; and
lower interest rates. And I ask our panelists to evaluate
whether these benefits no longer outweigh the disadvantages
that are more obvious today than they were in the past.
Estonia just joined earlier this year, and as far as I am
aware, others are still lining up to qualify. What should we
make of this fact? Is there a scenario under which the euro
emerges from the current situation in a stronger, leaner and
meaner form? I believe that it is important to know the details
about how problems arose in the Eurozone in order for us to
avoid them in the future.
But ultimately, I think the biggest question is how do we
find opportunities to ensure growth and job creation together
with the Europeans, for it is important for both sides of the
Atlantic to create jobs and to lift ourselves out of this
economic situation that we are in?
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
And I apologize because, Mr. Chairman, I know this hearing
is important, but there is an airplane waiting for me, and
there is a meeting waiting for me in New York.
Mr. Burton. And your wife is waiting for you.
Mr. Meeks. And my wife is waiting for me. I got 670,000 who
vote for me, and they need me there.
Mr. Burton. That is more information than I need, but I am
glad you are here. We will give you all the questions and
answers, and the other members.
Mr. Meeks. Great. Thank you, sir. And thank you for being
here.
Mr. Burton. I want you to know that, since you are only
looking at me----
Mr. Meeks. I am just nervous leaving you here by yourself,
though. You know, generally, I have to hold your hand and kick
you under the table.
Mr. Burton. Get out of here.
Let me just say to you that this is a very important
hearing, even though you just have me to look at.
Many of my colleagues had to get back to their districts;
that is why they left. But I can assure you that all of the
information you are going to give us today will be utilized and
that everybody on the committee will have it, as well as
others, because this is a very, very important issue right now.
I know the stock market and everybody is Kumbaya today,
everything is great, but I hope you will give us the real
picture so the American people know where we stand.
Jacob Kirkegaard, you have been with the Peterson Institute
for International Economics since 2002. Your diverse current
research focuses on long-term fiscal challenges, European
regional economic integration, structural economic reform
issues, among other issues, and it is good to see you again.
I appreciate you being here.
Desmond Lachman joined American Enterprise Institute after
serving as managing director and chief emerging market and
economic strategist at Salomon Smith Barney. He previously
served as deputy director on the International Monetary Fund's
Policy, Development and Review Department and was active in
staff formation of IMF policies. At AEI, Mr. Lachman is focused
on the global macro-economy, global currency issues and the
multilateral lending agencies.
I really appreciate you being here as well.
And Bruce Stokes joined the German Marshall Fund as a
senior Transatlantic fellow for economics in September 2010. He
is a former international economics columnist for the National
Journal, a Washington-based public policy magazine, where he is
now a contributing editor. He is also a former senior fellow at
the Council on Foreign Relations.
So since I am going to be using your testimony in a lot of
ways, I need to swear you in, so that we have it, because I am
going to have the Treasury testify, and if there are any
differences, we want to make sure that we have got it on the
record.
So could you stand and raise your right hand, please?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Burton. Thank you very much. Okay.
Mr. Kirkegaard, would you like to start off?
Mr. Kirkegaard. Most certainly.
Mr. Burton. If we could try to keep the remarks to 5 or 6
minutes, we would really appreciate it, so we can get into the
dialogue and questions.

STATEMENT OF MR. JACOB FUNK KIRKEGAARD, RESEARCH FELLOW, THE
PETERSON INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS

Mr. Kirkegaard. Chairman Burton, Ranking Member Meeks----
Mr. Burton. I don't think your microphone is on.
Mr. Kirkegaard. Chairman Burton, other members of the
committee, it is a pleasure for me to appear before you to
testify on the origin, current status of and responses to the
euro area crisis.
In my oral remarks today, I intend to summarize my
available written testimony as well as briefly touch on the
events of last night in Brussels. It is clear that the euro
area has gradually, since May 2010, taken the central place in
an increasing volatile global economy. The correct diagnosis
for the euro area crisis is, however, not one but at least four
deep overlapping and mutually reinforcing crises: A crisis of
institutional design, a fiscal crisis, a crisis of
competitiveness; and a banking crisis. None of the four crises
can be solved in isolation. The current euro area situation is
therefore characterized by an extreme degree of complexity.
Essentially no single comprehensive answer to the crisis is
currently available to European policymakers, and as a result,
the drawn-out inconclusive crisis containment efforts witnessed
in Europe since early 2010, in which I will include yesterday's
deal in Brussels, will continue. Economic catastrophes may be
avoided, but certainly all volatility will remain with us for
the foreseeable future.
The euro area suffers, first and foremost, from a
fundamental institutional credibility problem. It needs a new
rule book. Binding rules for individual member states' fiscal
performance must be crafted enabling the euro area as a whole
to compel even large countries, such as Italy, to comply with
them. The currency union must moreover be equipped with a
sizable independent fiscal capacity capable in a crisis of both
providing emergency financial assistance to member states in
need and act broadly and forcefully to restore market
confidence. European leaders have so far merely begun these
tasks, and ultimately any credible solution will require a
revision of the European treaty, a process which in itself will
take several more years.
Secondly, the euro area suffers from a fiscal crisis
centered in Greece, a country which will need to restructure
its government debt. However, as concerns over fiscal
sustainability in the euro area stretches also to Italy, a
country which is too big to bail out, the principal challenge
in the euro area is how to avoid the issue of contagion and how
to ring-fence an inevitable Greek debt restructuring so as to
avoid a generalized undermining of the risk-free status of euro
area government debt. To achieve this goal, substantial further
financial support will in the years ahead have to be made
available to Greece, Ireland and Portugal, and it is clear that
such resources should overwhelmingly come from the euro area
itself with a component provided by the IMF. However,
ultimately euro area fiscal stability will only be achieved
through the longer-term domestic consolidation and reform
effort, notably in Italy.
Thirdly, large parts of the euro area's southern periphery
suffers from an acute crisis of competitiveness, which these
countries, without the ability to devalue national currencies,
have no short-term way to overcome. Instead, the euro area
periphery is compelled to gradually restore their
competitiveness through deep supply-side structural reforms of
labor and product markets. Previous experiences from other
countries suggest that this type of reform will only have a
positive economic effect in the long run, while indeed
adversely affecting growth in the short term.
Lastly, the euro area suffers from an oversized and
undercapitalized banking system which owns a large amount of
national government debt from the euro area. There is,
consequently, across the euro area a large degree of
interdependence between the financial solidity of large
domestic banking systems and the national government--and
national government solvency. Euro area leaders have recently
raised capital requirements for euro area banks last night
again to 9 percent core tier equity, but recalling the
precarious fiscal situation of several governments themselves,
they will be unable to bring the longer-term recapitalization
process of the euro area banking system to an expeditious
conclusion. Instability will consequently continue to haunt the
euro area banking system in the times ahead.
Now, turning now to the Transatlantic relationship and the
effects on the U.S. from this farfetched crisis, there is no
doubt that Europe, as the largest destination of U.S. exports
and foreign direct investments, as well as extensive cross
ownership of loss financial institution, the United States will
suffer a significant negative adverse shock from a further
unexpected rapid deterioration in the euro area crisis.
It is consequently in the vital national interest of the
United States that Europe fixes its problem. However, the
possible direct action by policymakers in the United States had
been limited by the fact that this is, despite increasing
global spill-over potential, still at heart a domestic economic
crisis inside another sovereign jurisdiction. The ability of
U.S. Government--of the U.S. Government to bilaterally affect
the outcome of the euro area crisis is consequently and indeed
appropriately limited.
At the same time, in my opinion, the U.S. Government
representatives have since the beginning of the euro crisis
exercised important indirect pressure through multilateral
channels and especially the IMF to expedite the European crisis
resolution process and push it in generally beneficial
directions.
However, it is not for the United States to bilaterally
provide any financial support to the euro area. This is a task
predominantly for Europe itself as well as the appropriate
multilateral organization, notably the IMF. Indeed, the euro
area crisis has underlined how it is in America's evident
national interest to help maintain the prominence of the IMF as
the key global financial crisis manager. As a declining
relative share of the global economy, it is evidently in the
United States' direct interest to sustain the global dominant
role of the IMF, thereby shielding it from potential threats
from new institutional initiatives originating outside the
traditional G-7 countries.
Upholding the dominant position of the IMF, in whose
establishment, design leadership, and current modus operandi
the United States has historically played a far larger role
than its current and especially future global economic weight
will dictate, is a critically important issue. It is
consequently in the direct interest of the United States to
continue to fully support the IMF and participate fully in all
internationally agreed capital commitments to the IMF and
provide the organizations with the biggest possible toolkit
with which to combat future global economic crisis in general,
including currently in the euro area.
However, the euro area crisis is first and foremost a
European crisis and should and will ultimately be solved
predominantly through European efforts and resources.
I thank you for this opportunity to address the committee
today and look forward to answering any questions you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Kirkegaard follows:]

----------

Mr. Burton. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lachman.

STATEMENT OF DESMOND LACHMAN, PH.D., RESIDENT FELLOW, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Lachman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the
honor to testify before this subcommittee.
In my remarks, what I would like to do is to emphasize the
seriousness of this Eurozone crisis and to provide reasons why
I think we are going to see an intensification of the crisis in
the months ahead, despite the summit last night.
What I would also like to do is I would also like to
emphasize the importance of this crisis for the United States
economy, both through our export side and through our bank
exposure.
I agree that the crisis is a complex crisis, but I would
say that the main origin of the crisis is that for many years,
the countries did not play by the rules of a currency union.
Whereas the Maastricht criteria required that these countries
run budget deficits of 3 percent of GDP, countries, Greece,
Portugal, Ireland and Spain, routinely ran deficits either well
in excess of 10 percent of GDP or very close to 10 percent of
GDP. As a result, they built up huge debt positions well over
100 percent of GDP; they lost competitiveness; and they had
very large balance of payment deficits.
The essence of the peripheral countries' problem right now
is, how do you correct those kind of imbalances when you don't
have a currency to devalue? IMF EU-imposed fiscal austerity in
these circumstances is driving these economies into very deep
recessions. That in turn is making them lose their tax base,
make them lose the political willingness to stay the course,
and it is an exercise in futility to impose further fiscal
austerity on them of the type that we are getting right now.
I think that what is also important to understand in the
crisis is that while we are talking about relatively small
countries at the European periphery, these countries are
enormously indebted to the banks in the core countries. If we
look at Portugal, Ireland, Greece and Spain, we are talking
about $2 trillion worth of sovereign debt, and a lot of that is
held by the banks.
What we have seen in recent months is not an easing of this
crisis but an intensification of the crisis. Greece's economy
is on the cusp of a major default. Its economy is in free fall.
They are not meeting the IMF targets. There is really real
political tension on the streets. The Papandreou government
doesn't look like it has got a long life ahead of it.
This has spread to Ireland and Portugal, but what is really
of concern is the difficulty of Spain and Italy to borrow in
capital markets without the support of the ECB. If Spain and
Italy were to fail, that would be the end of the European
experiment.
The European banking system is already showing real signs
of strain that are reminiscent of our banking crisis in 2008-
2009. Banks are not lending. Banks are parking money with the
ECB. They don't trust one another's balance sheet. We are
already at the start of what could be a credit crunch in
Europe.
The final point about the intensification of the crisis is
we are seeing that the key economies of Germany and France are
losing steam. They look like they are already on the close edge
of a recession. And if we do get a banking credit crunch, that
is almost certain to push them into recession. And without
growth in Europe, there is no way that the countries on the
periphery are going to resolve their problem.
A positive sign in Europe is that at last, after many
months of denial, the Europeans are recognizing that they have
got a major problem. What they tried to do last night is move
the crisis in the right direction. They tried to get resolution
on the Greek situation. They tried to begin recapitalizing the
banks. And they tried to put up a firewall against Spain and
Italy.
I am afraid that I have got doubts about the efficacy of
this program, and I think that this might be another episode of
too little too late that has characterized the Europeanefforts
to date. It is not clear that a haircut of Greece of 50 percent
puts Greece on a sustainable path when the Europeans themselves
recognize that Greece's debt after all of this is still going
to be at 120 percent of GDP.
It is also not clear that the Europeans can come up with
$1.4 trillion of unconditional money to provide a credible
firewall to Spain and Italy. That money is going to be subject
to Italy and Spain agreeing to conditions either imposed by,
effectively, the Germans through their Bundestag or through the
IMF.
Funny, I would say, that on the issue of the bank
recapitalization, the way in which it is being gone about is
this is likely to provoke a deepening in the credit crunch in
Europe because the banks, far from raising capital at depressed
equity prices, what they are going to do is they are going to
engage in restricting their lending and selling off assets,
which is going to be not good for the European economy.
My final point is that we in the United States should not
take any comfort out of what is going on in Europe from purely
self-interest reasons. You have mentioned that the United
States has got very strong trade relations with Europe. We have
got very strong investments in Europe. I would say that that is
certainly true. But what is of deep concern is the
interconnection between the United States financial system and
that in Europe.
I would just point out that money market funds in the
United States were reported by Fitch rating agency to have as
much as 45 percent of their $2.7 trillion of assets lent out to
European banks. That is an amount that is way in excess of $1
trillion. The U.S. banks themselves have got loan exposure to
France and Germany of $1 trillion. And we don't know the extent
of credit default swaps and other derivatives that our banks
have written both on the periphery and on the European banking
system, so we really do have to hope that the European
situation resolves itself.
The U.S. is helping the Europeans, both through the Federal
Reserve, providing liquidity through their swap operations and
through the IMF.
I would just close by saying that I am not sure that there
is a whole lot more that the United States can do or that the
United States should do. The problems in Europe, in my view,
are ones not of liquidity but are ones of solvency that require
debt write downs and don't require more money to be thrown at
it. I don't see why United States taxpayers should be putting
up more money risk on that side.
And I would just note that in 2008-2009, when the United
States had a banking and credit market crisis, the Europeans
did not come and provide us with financing. I think I would see
it exactly the same way; this is a European problem that the
Europeans need to address. And we have got to hope that they
address it correctly because if they don't, we are in the same
boat as they are.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lachman follows:]

----------

Mr. Burton. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stokes.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRUCE STOKES, SENIOR TRANSATLANTIC FELLOW,
GERMAN MARSHALL FUND OF THE UNITED STATES

Mr. Stokes. Chairman Burton and Ranking Member Meeks and
distinguished members of the committee, it is a distinct honor
and a privilege to appear before you today. My remarks today,
of course, represent my own opinions and not the views of the
German Marshall Fund of the United States.
I would like to focus my remarks, if I could, not on how we
got into this mess and not even on what the U.S. could do
directly to help Europe with its problems, but how we can both
work together to both help grow the Transatlantic economy out
of the dilemma we now face in a way that is of mutual self-
interest to both Europe and the United States.
I think it is particularly timely that you have called this
session today, Mr. Chairman, after the European summit about
the euro crisis. It is far too early, I think we all agree, to
have a definitive decision about what has been decided last
night and whether Europe can stem its bleeding and start to
heal its own wounds.
But experience has taught us that at every juncture of this
unfolding saga, the European actions have been a day late and a
euro short, so I think we have every reason to be skeptical.
And we can only hope for the best.
As you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, America has a huge stake in
Europe finally resolving its crisis. I don't need to belabor
you with the numbers. But clearly, we have intertwined
economies. And as Ben Franklin once said, we may all hang
together, or we are going to hang separately here. So we have
to work together on this crisis, because a European lost decade
would do profound damage to the U.S. economy.
To date, much of the discussion in Washington about the
euro crisis has been about how to defend ourselves against
contagion from Europe's sovereign debt problems, but to turn
the old American football maxim on its head, in this case, I
suggest you use it: The best defense would be a good offense.
The great recession has demonstrated once again that the
economic fates of Europe and America are inextricably linked,
stubbornly high unemployment on both sides of the Atlantic and
flagging consumer and investor confidence has shaken the
Transatlantic marketplace more than any other event since the
Great Depression. The need for closer economic cooperation to
overcome these problems, I submit to you, has never been
greater.
Americans and Europeans are both telling their elected
leaders that they need jobs, and they need growth. Our mutual
debt overhang and the near exhaustion of monetary policy means
both Washington and Brussels must look elsewhere to address
their citizens' needs. The most promising and immediate way to
do this is by launching a Transatlantic jobs and growth
initiative, anchored in an effort to remove all taxes on and
barriers to Transatlantic trade and investment. Never has such
an initiative been more timely, nor more necessary.
The benefits of such an effort would be significant. A
study last year by the European Center for International
Political Economy in Brussels estimated that the elimination of
all EU tariffs on U.S. goods would boost American exports to
Europe by $53 billion. In 2009, a European Commission study
found that eliminating nontariff Transatlantic trade barriers
would add more than $50 billion to the U.S. economy.
These estimates are a reminder that Transatlantic barriers
to trade and investment may be small compared to the barriers
we face in other parts of the world, such as China, but their
removal will pay significant dividends. To put these
prospective benefits in context, the payoff from eliminating
Transatlantic trade barriers exceeds the likely economic
benefit to the United States from completion of the Doha round.
It also exceeds the potential economic benefit to the United
States of TPP, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which we are now
negotiating.
How can we possibly leave these benefits sitting on the
table while we pursue less substantial, more elusive payoffs
elsewhere? Interest in a Transatlantic jobs and growth
initiative is growing. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has called
for the elimination of all barriers to goods traded between
Europe and the United States as a first step toward a full
fledged Transatlantic free trade agreement. The U.S. Coalition
of Services Industries has suggested pursuit of a Transatlantic
free trade area in services. The Transatlantic Business
Dialogue has long advocated the establishment of a barrier free
Transatlantic market. The Transatlantic Policy Network, made up
of Members of Congress, the European Parliament and
Transatlantic business leaders, has recently called for a
growth and jobs initiative that would lead to the creation of a
Transatlantic market by 2020.
And late in September your counterparts in the European
Parliament called for a comprehensive Transatlantic growth and
jobs initiative. I might add, the German Marshall Fund is also
helping to facilitate a task force led by the Swedish trade
minister and your former colleague, Representative Jim Kolbe of
Arizona. Early next year, it will add its own recommendations
to these calls for creating jobs and growth through greater
Transatlantic trade and investment.
So how might we proceed? At the U.S.-EU Submit November
28th, President Obama and his European counterparts should
instruct their teams to come up with a Transatlantic jobs and
growth initiative. This initiative should be ready to be signed
in mid-May 2012 at the G-8 submit in Chicago. The initiative
should have multiple pillars. These could include but would not
necessarily be limited to elimination of all tariffs, free
trade in services and an investment agreement. Most important,
these efforts should run in parallel but not be dependent upon
each other. We can eliminate tariffs rapidly so we should do
so. If it takes longer to hammer out an agreement on services,
that should not hold us back from harvesting the benefits of
eliminating taxes on goods.
Mr. Chairman, the current economic crisis presents a unique
opportunity for political leadership. Americans and Europeans,
both as consumers and investors, want jobs. They want growth.
And I submit to you, above all, they want a reason to hope.
What they lack is a sense of direction and purpose. A
Transatlantic jobs and growth initiative is a way to turn the
euro crisis into an economic opportunity for all Americans.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions and
comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stokes follows:]

----------

Mr. Burton. Do you have a proposal? I would like to have
that to be able to disseminate that to my colleagues.
Mr. Stokes. I would be happy to do that.
Mr. Burton. Because that might be food for thought.
When we draft some legislation, that might be helpful.
Mr. Stokes. Terrific.
Mr. Burton. Obviously, it is not going to happen right
away; it is going to take some time.
The first thing I wanted to ask you about is, and it is
very interesting, after listening to you, how the stock markets
jumped up 300 points or so today because of the announcement
yesterday. Talk about building hopes on dreams. I mean I think
it is great, but from what you all said, it is pretty obvious
that there is a long way for us to go or for the world to go.
According to the information that we got from the CRS,
Congressional Research Service, we have about $2.08 trillion in
direct exposure and potential exposure to Europe from the
countries of Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, Spain, Germany
and France. And I was interviewed on television a while ago,
and they said, well, why are you including Germany and France,
because they don't have any problem? But Germany and France,
according to CRS, have a great deal of exposure to these other
countries, Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece and Spain. And as a
result, if they go belly up, then it is going to have an impact
on them as well.
So I guess the first question I would like to ask is, what
do we do? I just got back from Greece, and you just said, Mr.
Stokes, that we ought to have this Transatlantic initiative and
that there ought to be the ability to create jobs so that there
will be more purchasing. I don't know how that is going to
work.
I had people I was with over there from the government that
were having their salaries cut by 40 percent, their retirement
cut by 40 percent, and that is just the first tranche. I mean,
according to what happened yesterday, there are going to be
additional cuts in economies in Greece and these other
countries, and I don't know how they are going to be able to
expand their economy when these cuts take place. I mean, how
can a person or a country that has a 40-percent cut in the
incomes of people or in their retirement, how can they afford
to buy products or even produce products and expend them and
sell them around the rest of the world? The solution is kind of
a Gordian Knot.
And what we wanted to find out from you today is, first of
all, what is our exposure? And second, what can we do, without
exposing ourselves further, to stimulate a solution to the
problem? And I will ask any of you to answer that question. It
is a tough one. Go ahead.
Mr. Lachman. First, let me take your question on exposure.
That is the right way of looking at it, is if the United States
has loaned money to French and German banks that are themselves
exposed to Greece, Portugal and Ireland, we are exposed to
Greece, Portugal and Ireland. So our exposure to the German and
French banking system is of relevance, even though we don't--
even though we haven't made loans to Greece and Portugal and
Ireland. By lending to the banks in France and Germany, we have
got that exposure.
So the crisis in the periphery can lead to a major European
banking crisis. Officials at the European Central Bank worry
about if Greece defaults, then we are going to get a whole wave
of defaults and the European banking system is going to have
its Lehman moments, and that would really impact us. I think on
your second question, that goes to the heart of the matter in
terms of Greece.
We have got to realize that over the past 2 years, Greece's
GDP has already fallen by 12 percent. Their unemployment is
already at 16 percent. The main driver in that process has been
a savage approach to the budget, massive cuts all around,
raising revenues to the tune of something like 5 full
percentage points of GDP in a single year at a time that the
country is already in recession, that is driving it further
into recession. What Greece has now got to look forward to
under the IMF EU program is more fiscal austerity in even worse
circumstances. So it shouldn't be any great surprise if the
Greek economy collapses any further in 2012.
The way out of the solution from Greece's point of view is
problematic from the rest of Europe's point of view, is that
Greece has to write down its debt in a major way. A start was
made last night toward that. But that is not nearly sufficient
if Greece is, after all of these cuts in this restructuring,
Greece's debt is still going to be 120 percent of GDP. That is
far too high for--after a restructuring. But Greece is probably
going to have to leave the euro at some stage, that it has a
very much depreciated exchange rate; that would boost both its
export sector and its tourist sector, would allow Greece to
become a more viable economy. I am not saying that that is an
easy path for Greece to follow, but what I am saying is that
for Greece not to follow that path is a sure recipe for a deep
depression, not for 1 year, not for 2 years, but probably for
the whole decade.
Mr. Burton. Go ahead.
Mr. Stokes. Just a couple of points, Mr. Chairman.
One, I think to echo Desmond's point that he made in his
testimony, it is not clear that we understand our total
exposure. If you talk to the Fed or you talk to the IMF, they
aren't sure who holds a lot of this insurance that banks have
taken out on their debt.
Now, it may well be they know and they just aren't about to
share it because it would move markets. But it does seem to me
that certainly in closed session, that is something that
Congress should press them on, because at least people like
yourself and the committee need to know what our real exposure
is, and if they don't know, to find out what needs to be done
to find out so that we don't have an AIG experience.
Mr. Burton. Pardon me for interrupting, but we just met
with some of the officials from the Treasury Department, and we
were not able to at that particular moment get any additional
information other than what we already had. And they kind of
downplayed the situation, saying that over the next several
months, when Europe and the EU work out these kinks and come up
with a final plan, that the solution or the situation could get
a whole lot better.
They didn't allay a lot of my fears, and that is why I
wanted to have you gentlemen here today, so we could get the
independent view from outside our Government.
Mr. Stokes. Two other points. One to your point about, why
would we assume that there could be demand in places like
Greece in the immediate future. And I think that is absolutely
right; there is not going to be. I was trying to lay out a
strategy, it seems to me, if we are trying to somehow at some
point in the future help restore growth in Europe. But I think
in the immediate term, we have to assume that Europe is in for
a prolonged period of stagnation, if not recession.
And that leads me to my third point, which seems to me a
valid point for this committee to be focusing on, is what are
the foreign policy implications to the United States of a
Europe that is stagnating or actually having a lost decade in
terms of our ability to work with Europe on a range of issues
from Russia to other parts of its periphery, to the global
public goods issues of defense and foreign aid and things of
that nature? How do the Chinese take advantage of this? I think
all of those are legitimate concerns that we all need to be
more worried about.
Mr. Burton. Well, what I would really appreciate, and you
gentlemen are the experts, and you have the expertise and the
background to come up with potential solutions, and those of us
in the Congress are neophytes when you start talking about
world economics, we just obviously don't know the answers. And
when you talk to the people in the government, as you said, it
is kind of a veiled answer with a lot of hyperbole without any
real juice. So what I would really appreciate, and I really
mean this, I would like to have you and your think tanks to
come up with, as well as the Heritage Foundation, to come up
with some potential solutions, even if it is not of an
immediate nature, something that might take 5, 10 years.
Because from what I see in my small amount of wisdom, this
thing is not going to go away any time soon, and it is going to
have an impact on us.
Now, the other question I wanted to ask is, the President
has been calling Sarkozy and the German leader every day or two
talking to them about this. And Sarkozy said that he is
planning to go to China to talk to them about these bonds and
the potential purchasing of these bonds. You are shaking your
head there, so I would like to hear your response after I ask
the question. And they are also talking about Japan purchasing
some of these bonds.
What puzzles me is if financial institutions and
individuals are taking a 50-percent haircut on Greece and the
problem is not served, you still have 120 percent of GDP, what
is the incentive for anybody to buy the bonds, knowing the
fiscal problems that exist, not only in Greece but these other
countries? And if these countries do buy the bonds, what is the
incentive? Is it going to be a high rate of interest, which is
going to be a very difficult thing to deal with? And is the
United States in some way going to be involved in purchasing
some more of this problem? And that is really concerning me,
because as I looked at these figures from CRS, and I know I am
covering a lot of ground, so please bear with me, because this
is not an easy issue, and you see that we have got a total by,
in CRs' opinion, of exposure of over $2 trillion, how in the
world could we involve ourselves by buying more of that debt?
And can the Fed and the Treasury Department circumvent Congress
as it has in the past with the first two tranches to buy these
bonds? Is there a way that they can do that and circumvent
Congress? I know I am covering a lot of ground here.
Mr. Kirkegaard. Well, starting with your first question
regarding the Chinese and potential Asian involvement in these
type of bonds, I will say that I think these type of headlines
should basically be discarded in my opinion.
Mr. Burton. Well, then where is the money going to come
from, because they are talking about taking this up to $1
trillion?
Mr. Kirkegaard. Well, I would say that every talk coming
out of Europe in the last day or so, since last night, about
turning the EFSF into a bazooka, whether you do it with
leverage or you do it with Chinese or other bricks or oil
investments or whatever you choose to do, is a side show. It is
not essentially in my opinion going to be credible. Because the
money, in my opinion, is not going to be there. Because China
has a long history of essentially meeting with various European
leaders and promising maybe a lot--there are a lot of headlines
in the press--but they basically never commit. The only major
assets that China buys, euro-denominated assets that China
buys, are essentially safe German Government bonds as well as a
relatively small amount of these EFSF bonds. The idea that
China is going to pour hundreds of billions of dollars into
this new investment vehicle I regard, frankly, as a fantasy.
Mr. Burton. How about Japan?
Mr. Kirkegaard. Again, I think the Japanese might be
willing to do it. But again, it is not to the tune that is
required. If the idea here that we want to turn this into a
bazooka, something that can intimidate and have the respect of
markets, that is where the number of the 1.4 trillion euros
comes from. It is not--the money isn't going to be there. And I
think the biggest illusion, and this is essentially where I
come back to the side show that I talked about, is that the
Europeans are trying to basically create the illusion that the
European Central Bank is going to hand over to this new
leveraged EFSF, this new bazooka, if you like, these new
entities, such that the European Central Bank no longer has to
be directly involved. But the reality is very different. The
reality is that the European Central Bank is going to remain
very directly involved as the ultimate financial backstop for
the euro area as a whole, and essentially, all these both of
these two new options, the leveraged bond insurance scheme that
they have talked about, as well as this new special investment
vehicle that is open for interested private and public
investors, as I said, I don't think we should expect very much
of that. But it doesn't actually matter very much because the
ECB is going to remain involved. The one thing that we were
sure about last night was that there will be no handover.
Mr. Burton. How can the European Central Bank come up with
the funds that are necessary? I mean, I am----
Mr. Kirkegaard. Well, the European Central Bank is a
central bank. They can create money. That is the ultimate----
Mr. Burton. How do they create money? They don't have the
ability to print money like we do in our Treasury, do they?
Mr. Kirkegaard. Yes, they do. They call it a security
markets program in which they can basically----
Mr. Burton. So they can inflate the money supply?
Mr. Kirkegaard. If they wanted to.
Mr. Burton. Okay. I am sorry, go ahead.
Mr. Lachman. Well, I would agree with Mr. Kirkegaard that
the Europeans don't have a bazooka in place, and that is cause
for great concern about Italy and Spain over the longer run,
whether Italy and Spain aren't going to be tested by the
markets in the way in which they were in July, which would
really be a big headache for Europe. But the issue on the ECB
is while theoretically the ECB could behave like the Federal
Reserve and print money and go out and buy bonds and engage in
quantive easing, the major shareholder of the ECB, namely
Germany, thinks that that is the road toward deflation,
debasing the currency, all sorts of problems, that we have
already had two governors of the ECB of German origin, Axel
Weber and Juergen Stark, leave the ECB precisely for those kind
of reasons. The president of the Bundesbank doesn't think it is
a good idea. The President of Germany thinks that the ECB is on
the wrong track. So the notion that the ECB is going to go up
there and print the money, I just don't see that the German are
going to allow it. And that was part of the deal yesterday with
Mrs. Merkel that the Bundestag indicated that they were dead
set against converting the EFSF into a bank that would then be
able to borrow from the ECB. So there are serious political
constraints on the ECB from the German----
Mr. Burton. I will go back to you, but they have had huge
inflation problems in past history in Germany.
Mr. Lachman. Absolutely.
Mr. Burton. And assuming that the European Central Bank
does inflate the currency supply, it would seem to me that the
big kahunas over there, i.e. Germany, would say, ``Hey, no.''
Go ahead.
Mr. Kirkegaard. Maybe I should just clarify. When I say
that the ECB is going to be the final backstop, I am not saying
that--I am certainly not suggesting that I believe the European
Central Bank is going to go out and do what we understand as
quantitative easing here in the United States.
What I suggest is that the ECB will do what is necessary to
calm a financial panic, which means that they will effectively
put a floor under the--or they will cap what, for instance,
Italian yields can go up to. Currently Italian yields are
somewhere between 5.5 and 6. When they reached 6.2 or 6.3 in
early August, the ECB intervened, bringing them back down
again.
Mr. Burton. How long can they do that?
Mr. Kirkegaard. Well, they can essentially continue to do
that for as long as they want. They would prefer not to do
that. But what I am suggesting is that they can do that to the
extent they won't be able to drive it back down to say a spread
of, or a yield of say 300 or 400 basis points, so that the
economic pressure will remain very heavily on the Italy and
especially the Italian Government, but from the perspective of
the ECB, this is actually leverage. This is something that the
ECB arguably, in my opinion, believes is necessary to force the
Italian Government under Silvio Berlusconi to do the kind of
structural reforms that the ECB has been calling for the
Italian Government to do for many, many years. They basically
are effectively painting Mr. Berlusconi into a corner.
And the other thing is that when they do these emergency
interventions, and I think we should try to keep things in
perspective, because they have done this already, they have
expanded their balance sheet with about 1--or just 1.6 or maybe
about 2 percent of euro area GDP. The Federal Reserve and the
Bank of England have expanded their respective balance sheets,
you know, 13 or 14 percent of GDP. So the relative magnitudes
of ECB interventions are quite small, much, much smaller, and
they are also sterilized. So the expansion area effect on the
monetary supply isn't there, or essentially not there at least.
So I don't think that there is any immediate inflationary risk
involved with this. And the really key issue here is the ECB is
the only institution that has that capacity, and they use this
power strategically to put pressure on elected politicians in
Europe to do the kinds of reforms that they believe are
necessary for the European----
Mr. Burton. I don't know, that just sounds like a stretch
to me that they are going to be able to control all that. But
then you guys are the experts, and I am not.
Now, let me ask the big question, how do we protect
America, and is there anything we can do to protect America?
Because we have this potential 2 trillion, and it is probably a
lot more than that--because of what you said awhile ago, I
think it was you, Desmond, where you said that 45 percent of
our money market funds are invested in Europe. My gosh, that is
trillions and trillions of dollars. So if they go south, how do
we protect ourselves? I mean, the financial institutions, what
is the answer?
Mr. Lachman. Well, I think that the answer is at least to
try to be transparent about it to recognize what the problem
is, to come up with solutions that would be of a prudential
side. I think the same thing would be true of economic planning
in general. If we really do have the risk that Europe is going
to be into recession and that it is going to impact our
economy, it doesn't make sense for us to be basing our budget
projections, for instance, on very rosy scenarios that the
Congressional Budget Office is coming up with. This really
would underline how much more serious our long-run budget
problems are. It would also inform how we would deal with
foreign stimulus in the short run.
All of these kind of issues I think really have to be
looked at rather carefully that one really has to take into
account that Europe accounts for a third of the global economy,
that if Europe runs into trouble it is almost certain to impact
us in a very hard way, and we should be basing our policy on
that basis. I don't think that we can do much to stop this
event in Europe occurring, that that is way beyond what we can
do or what we should do, but we should at least base our
policies on the likelihood that we are going to be hit by
European shock in 2012.
Mr. Burton. You think it is going to be in 2012.
Mr. Lachman. I should just mention that I spent a career at
the International Monetary Fund looking at fixed exchange rate
systems. And I think I know when an exchange rate system is
approaching its end game; that this is really occurring in
Europe.
If you look at what has occurred over the last 18 months,
this is accelerating that what we are getting both in the
periphery, we are getting what we call austerity fatigue that
the people--there is so much more budget adjustment that they
can do. Yet in the core countries, the richer countries of the
north--and I am not just thinking about Germany. I am thinking
about the Netherlands. I am thinking about Finland. I am
thinking about Austria. I am thinking about Slovakia. They are
suffering from bailout fatigue. Their taxpayers feel that they
have been lied to by the politicians, that in May 2010, this
was only going to be a one-shot deal. Then we get Ireland in
December. Then we Portugal in April. Then we get another
round--this is endless.
The taxpayers, 70 percent of the German population is
against bailouts. You know, that this is what is occurring,
that as this crisis continues, what you are going to get is you
are going to get more austerity fatigue in the periphery; you
are going to get more bailout fatigue in the core. And that
doesn't, in my view, make for a happy outcome.
Mr. Stokes. If I might just amplify what Desmond said in
terms of our own condition. It seems to me that at the end of
the day, we will do what we need to do for the U.S. economy,
based largely on our domestic needs. But as we move forward, I
think the prospect of stagnation in Europe has to inform more
of our discussion than it has in the past.
And this is going to run counter to some of the things that
we seem to now hold dear to our heart about trying to cut the
budget. It may in fact mitigate against cuts in our budget
initially, just because we may need the stimulus.
It does, it seems to me, impact on what we do about
promoting exports. I think we are going to have to do more to
try to promote exports because if Europe is stagnant, the
dollar may rebound, and that would hurt our exports.
Mr. Burton. You think the euro is going to devalue?
Mr. Stokes. I say that, but there is no explanation as to
why the euro is as strong as it is now. But that may well be
because money is flowing back into Europe from European banks
overseas to try to fortify their positions. That won't last
forever.
And I think we also, to answer your question, how do we
unwind this? We have to do it very carefully because if we pull
our money out of Europe in a very defensive and dramatic way,
we could really send things spiralling downward.
Mr. Burton. I am going to ask you a pretty tough question
here. You may not have the answer.
I am on the Government Reform and Oversight Committee as
well, and we had Secretary Paulson before the committee and
Geithner. And I believe they misled us. But nevertheless, I
think I could even prove it. But I don't think I will go into
the details.
But the thing is, there was a financial institution, and it
eludes me which one it was, and Paulson allegedly talked to the
chairman of the board and told them they had to do certain
things to purchase another entity and if they didn't do it,
that the CEO was going to lose his job. And I think the CEO
ultimately did lose his job. It was later on.
I just wonder, do you think it is possible that the
administration through the various agencies of government,
Treasury and so forth, could literally force financial
institutions to buy these euro bonds to try to help void up the
situation over there?
Mr. Lachman. If they did, I think that that would be
terribly misguided.
Mr. Burton. I am sure of that.
Mr. Lachman. Why expose them to further losses? We have got
a sufficient exposure to Europe without our buying additional
bonds.
Mr. Burton. So you would not see that under any
circumstances?
Mr. Lachman. I would think that if they coerced--it is
another thing if markets are operating and they decide----
Mr. Burton. No, I am not talking about markets.
Mr. Lachman. I think that a coercive purchase would be
rather foolish because part of the problem is that we are
dealing with solvency problems and that what has been going on
for a long time is we are kicking the can forward just by
financing. So to engage in this kind of operation, one is just
continuing the process of kicking the can further down the
road, only to have a bigger crisis down the end.
Mr. Burton. Let me ask you one more time, each one of your
think tanks, if you could--the chairman of the Ways and Means
Committee is a friend of mine and Appropriations. I would be
happy if you could give us some suggestions on things we can do
to try to protect the American economy and our currency, either
legislatively or through talking to the various agencies of
government. If you could get that to me, I will make sure it
gets to the proper people.
Our committee oversees Europe and Eurasia from a number of
standpoints, but fiscally, we are not the ones to make these
suggestions or changes. But I will get it to them.
Now, let me ask you one last question, why is the stock
market up 300-plus points today, because everything you have
told me makes it sound to me like we are still building this
castle on a house of cards? And I just don't understand it,
because there is no real solution. They haven't even come up
with a plan.
Mr. Stokes. As a friend of mine on Wall Street once said to
me, Bruce, you have to understand these trades are made by
over-caffeinated 24-year-olds, who basically trade on the
headlines. They don't even read the details. And not only do
they trade on the headlines, but they trade on how they think
the other 24-year-olds are going to trade on the headlines. In
other words, it is about how other people will react, not even
whether they think the headline is right.
So I think we won't know whether this is sustainable for
another week or so, when people begin to actually delve into
the details.
Mr. Kirkegaard. I would just add to that, it certainly
shows the European leaders were very good at playing down
expectations in the market for the actual deliverable, so that
when they came up with what they came up with last night, which
I was, I will say, I was personally marginally surprised on the
upside; clearly, the market was surprised substantially on the
upside. So it is clever expectation management to a certain
extent in my opinion as well.
But I agree with what Bruce said; we won't ultimately know
whether last night's deal was really worth anything until we
see the fine detail or until we know what, for instance, Silvio
Berlusconi and others are actually going to do what they said
they were going to do.
Mr. Burton. Well, I just met with the Treasury Department
people before this. They didn't want to testify in an open
session. But Berlusconi sent a 7-page letter, I guess,
explaining how and why and what he would do to comply with the
EU and their demands. And it remains to be seen.
The other thing that they said, from the Treasury, was
that--I asked well, who is going to buy these bonds? And they
both mentioned both China and Japan. And you seem to have a
different opinion about that. And if that is not the case, I
still wonder where in the world they are going to get the
money. And you keep going back to the European bank--Central
Bank. Anyhow, go ahead.
Mr. Lachman. I think that you could get outside money by
the way in which they are doing it, because what they are doing
is they are taking $250 billion euros, and they are using that
to provide insurance that they will take the first loss. So
what they are doing is they are offering to take the first 20
percent of any loss on bonds purchased.
So, for instance, if you buy an Italian bond, you know that
if the Italian bond goes from 100 to 80, you don't lose; you
pick up the 5-percent interest rate. So that is a reasonable
deal in the case of Italy, where it is unlikely that Italy is
going to devalue by more than 20 percent. So you could get
people to buy on that basis.
What you are doing, though, is you are putting the German
and the French taxpayer at huge risk, that this is like a
structured product where the German and the French have got the
equity tranche of a CEO, which isn't a good idea for them to
have. But if you are the Chinese, you can feel comfortable
having the mezzanine or the AAA rated part of that structure.
Mr. Stokes. And I think, to amplify Desmond's point, I
mean, what Desmond was saying, in essence, the money is going
to come from the Germans. And whether the Germans like that or
not, and there is no political support for that, the Germans
can afford to do this. They have to make a calculation about
whether it is in their self-interest to do it or not. And their
leadership has certainly not convinced their public that it is
in their self-interest. And I think that we have to continue to
pressure them to say look, there is money in Europe to deal
with a lot of this problem and you haven't mobilized all of
your own resources. And I think we need to continue to press
them on that.
Mr. Burton. I want to thank you very, very much and your
testimony has been very, very enlightening. And I will make
sure--and I would like to have your opening statements and all
of the details of it, and I am going to make sure that our
colleagues on the financial institutions committees get a copy
of that and make sure they read it.
With that, thank you very much. We will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record


