- ASSESSING U.S. FOREIGN POLICY PRIORITIES AMIDST ECONOMIC CHALLENGES: THE FOREIGN RELATIONS BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING U.S. FOREIGN POLICY PRIORITIES
AMIDST ECONOMIC CHALLENGES: THE
FOREIGN RELATIONS BUDGET FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2013

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 29, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-132

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-119                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  GARY L. ACKERMAN, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ENI F.H. FALEOMAVAEGA, American
DANA ROHRABACHER, California             Samoa
DONALD A. MANZULLO, Illinois         DONALD M. PAYNE, New
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California              Jersey
deceased 3/6/
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                       12 deg.
RON PAUL, Texas                      BRAD SHERMAN, California
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
TED POE, Texas                       THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DENNIS CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   BEN CHANDLER, Kentucky
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
DAVID RIVERA, Florida                ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania             CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                FREDERICA WILSON, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             KAREN BASS, California
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
ROBERT TURNER, New York
Yleem D.S. Poblete, Staff Director
Richard J. Kessler, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State, U.S.
Department of State............................................     5

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Hillary Rodham Clinton: Prepared statement.........     6

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    52
Hearing minutes..................................................    53
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    55
Written responses from the Honorable Hillary Rodham Clinton to
questions asked by committee members during the hearing........    57
Written responses from the Honorable Hillary Rodham Clinton to
questions submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida, and chairman, Committee on Foreign
Affairs......................................................    75
The Honorable Howard L. Berman, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California.................................    96
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in
Congress from the State of New Jersey........................    98
The Honorable Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, a Representative in
Congress from American Samoa.................................    98
The Honorable Donald A. Manzullo, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Illinois...................................   100
The Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California......................................   101
The Honorable Steve Chabot, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Ohio............................................   103
The Honorable Russ Carnahan, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Missouri........................................   103
The Honorable Connie Mack, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.........................................   104
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas...............................................   106
The Honorable Ann Marie Buerkle, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York...................................   109
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Rhode Island...............................   111

ASSESSING U.S. FOREIGN POLICY PRIORITIES AMIDST ECONOMIC CHALLENGES:
THE FOREIGN RELATIONS BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. The committee will come to order.
Because the Secretary must leave at 4:00, after opening remarks
I will ask the Secretary to summarize her testimony, and then
we will move directly to the questions from our members. Given
the vote situation, the ranking member will be recognized to
deliver his opening remarks if we are going to be interrupted
by votes, but here you are and there's no problem.
So I am going to give my remarks and then yours, because
you were going to be----
Mr. Berman. You were going to give my remarks?
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. No, I will give my remarks. I don't
trust you with my remarks. But without objection, members may
have 5 days to submit statements and questions for the record.
Madam Secretary, welcome back to the committee to discuss
the administration's foreign relations budget request. All of
us have great respect for you, Madam Secretary, as well as for
the dedicated men and women who promote the interests and
values of our Nation throughout the world.
Our Nation faces unsustainable deficits, so we must justify
every dollar that we spend, especially because 35 cents of
every dollar is borrowed. I appreciate your restraint with the
top-line number in your budget proposal, coming in at $5.2
billion below last year's request, but I disagree with the
priorities and programs funded with those limited resources.
In Iraq and Afghanistan, both these governments must be
pushed to take the necessary steps to be our long-term,
reliable partners. We are not seeing such a commitment from
Karzai or Maliki. Too much American blood and treasure have
been invested in both countries for us to have governments in
place that threaten American interests. Iran's belligerent and
unhelpful role in Afghanistan and Iraq is worrisome,
particularly with reports indicating their co-option of those
governments at senior levels. So, Madam Secretary, what
additional pressure can we bring to bear to offset the Iranian
influence in Afghanistan and Iraq?
In Pakistan, the level of cooperation, as we know, that we
get from the government continues to fall short. Serious
questions persist about whether elements of the Pakistani
Government support prominent insurgent groups fighting against
our troops in Afghanistan.
In other Middle Eastern countries, I have had concerns from
day one about the administration's approach to the Arab Spring
and to the forces at work there, including radical Islamist
groups. The administration appears focused on spending a lot of
money in search of a policy. Your budget request doubles down
on that approach by requesting a $770 million Middle East and
North Africa Incentive Fund, a fund with almost no restrictions
on how it can be used.
Even though press reports indicate that Egypt may have
decided to lift the travel ban on our NGO workers, we should
not reward Egypt with aid when it is demonstrating hostility to
Western democratic entities and is engaging in an ongoing dance
between authoritarians and the Muslim Brotherhood. In contrast,
the administration did the right thing by enforcing U.S. law
and cutting off funding to UNESCO after it undermined peace by
admitting the nonexistent state of Palestine.
Your request to now change the law and send $80 million to
UNESCO would be a grave mistake. Any weakening of U.S. law
would undermine our credibility and give a green light for
other U.N. agencies to grant recognition of a Palestinian
state. U.S. funding for UNESCO must only be restored if UNESCO
votes to un-admit Palestine.
The budget for the Western Hemisphere, which is not
mentioned in the prepared testimony, is another example of
misplaced priorities. The administration has requested an
increase in funding for the general budget of the Organization
of American States, yet you cut U.S. contributions to the OAS
Fund for Strengthening Democracy by almost $2 million.
The administration is proposing increased financial
assistance to Nicaragua, Bolivia, and Ecuador, three
governments that continue to undermine U.S. security interests
in the hemisphere, disregard human rights, and ignore the rule
of law. There can be no justification for such an increase in
funds to these countries. In Nicaragua, State has spent
millions to promote free, fair and transparent elections. That
money was not used wisely, as the elections in Nicaragua were
fraudulent and ran afoul of the Nicaraguan constitution.
We must not repeat last year's performance in Ecuador or
Bolivia, where State Department spent more money on
environmental programs than counternarcotics operations or good
governance. This budget fails to hold abusers of democracy in
the region accountable, and cuts support for democracy. Instead
of standing in solidarity with the Cuban and Venezuelan people
in their time of need, this budget turns its back on them.
Repression continues unabated in Cuba. The Castro regime
orders its State Security Forces to beat members of the Ladies
in White, Las Damas de Blanco, as they leave church services on
Sundays. Prisoners of conscience die while many worldwide turn
a blind eye to their plight. In Venezuela, the Chavez regime
has demolished the authority of the National Assembly and
intimidated the opposition by leveraging control over the
judicial system.
Turning to the disastrous situation in Syria, this
administration does not appear to have a coherent strategy. The
Russians and the Iranians clearly have a strategy, and it could
be summarized as ``actively support the repression by the
Syrian Army.'' The Iranian regime defies responsible nations
and pursues nuclear weapons capabilities. A nuclear-armed Iran
is unacceptable, and we must oppose any policy that relies on
mere containment as a response to this mortal threat. President
Obama has said that the United States has an ironclad
commitment to the security of Israel. So, will the U.S.
militarily back Israel if it decides to protect itself from an
Iranian nuclear threat?
Finally, Madam Secretary, I have grave concerns about
today's North Korea announcement, which sounds a lot like the
failed agreements of the past. While it is good that it
mentions the uranium enrichment program whose existence the
North Koreans had so long denied, we must recall that regime's
constant duplicity. We have bought this bridge several times
before.
One troubling new aspect is the discussion of nuclear
issues and food aid in the same announcement, which blurs the
separation of humanitarian aid from the nuclear negotiations,
which has been maintained since 1995. The North Koreans will
view this food as payment due for their return to the
bargaining table, regardless of the transparency and monitoring
we hope to secure in the future.
Again, Madam Secretary, thank you so much for making
yourself available today. I look forward, and the members do as
well, to receiving your testimony.
And now I am pleased to recognize my friend, the gentleman
from California, the ranking member, Mr. Berman, for his
opening statements.
Mr. Berman. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chairman. And
Madam Secretary, welcome. Thanks for being here. At the
outset--there are some differences in our view--I would like to
commend you for your hard work on North Korea. Today's
announcement that Pyongyang has agreed to freeze long-range
missile launches, nuclear tests and uranium enrichment
activities, and allow the IAEA back into the country appears to
be an important step on a long and difficult path. You know,
the chair knows, I know, we all know that we have been down
this road before, and it does remain to be seen whether the
North will keep its promises this time.
But in a more general sense, I would like to recognize the
tremendous commitment and dedication you have shown to
reestablishing the United States, not just as an indispensable
power, but as an indispensable partner. You have made it your
mission to show the world the best of who we are as Americans.
Eloquently and consistently, you have spoken up for women,
for the poor, and for those whose human rights and dignity has
been trampled. You have elevated development alongside
diplomacy and defense as a pillar of our national security.
Within the administration and in the halls of Congress, you
have fought to ensure that our diplomats and aid workers
receive the resources they need and the respect that they
deserve. They risk their lives every day to support American
interests abroad, and in the face of mounting deficits here at
home, it is important to remember that these civilian efforts
are much less costly than deploying our military.
Today, we are here to assess how the President's Fiscal
Year 2013 international affairs budget responds to the threats
and priorities we face as a nation. Many people believe,
erroneously, that foreign aid accounts for 20 percent or more
of our budget. The truth is, we spend just over 1 percent of
our national budget on diplomacy and development.
Yet, these programs have an outsized impact on our health,
prosperity, and security here at home. With one in five
American jobs dependent on trade, and half our experts going to
developing countries, our overseas programs are a critical part
of strengthening the American economy and getting Americans
back to work.
Our security is threatened if nuclear weapons fall into the
wrong hands, or if fragile and failing states become training
grounds for terrorists. Our foreign assistance dollars help
counter the flow of illicit narcotics and control the spread of
organized crime. Nearly a quarter of the 2013 Fiscal Year
international affairs budget request is dedicated to supporting
critical U.S. efforts in the front-line states of Iraq,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan.
And finally, the principles we cherish are undermined if we
allow families to go hungry, children to die of easily
preventable diseases, and girls to be kept out of school. In
short, helping countries become more democratic, more stable,
more capable of defending themselves, and better at pulling
themselves out of poverty is just as important for us and our
national security as it is for them.
To succeed, we must ensure that our budget resources are
allocated wisely, our international programs are carried out in
the most efficient and effective manner.
Before closing, I would like to highlight two of my top and
somewhat interrelated priorities: Middle East peace and the
effort to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapons
capability.
Madam Secretary, for the past 3 years, the Palestinians
have simply refused to engage seriously in peace talks. My sad
conclusion is that Palestinian leaders don't have the will or
the desire to make the compromises necessary to achieve peace.
They don't want to engage seriously because they know that, in
the end, they won't be able to do the deal.
That is what happened at Camp David in 2000, at Taba in
2001, and in the Olmert talks in 2008. And now, nearly two
decades after Oslo, I see no evidence that the Palestinians
have begun in the slightest to prepare their public for the
prospect that they will have to relinquish the so-called right
of return and recognize Israel as a Jewish state, two critical
elements of any peace deal.
I find that disturbing. Meanwhile, the Israelis continue to
say they will negotiate any time, any place. If Palestinian
leaders really want statehood, they will have to show it both
through their public commitments and by engaging in serious
negotiations with Israel. If they try to circumvent
negotiations by once again taking their case to the United
Nations, they will get no recognition from the United States
and they won't get the time of day from the U.S. Congress.
The only solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
can bring peace and security to both parties is a two-state
solution, and that only can become a reality through direct
negotiations.
Let me turn to another issue, what I consider the greatest
security challenge facing both Israel and the United States,
namely the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran. I believe it was
during your first testimony before this committee in 2009 that
you first said that our goal was to impose crippling sanctions
on Iran if the regime doesn't suspend its uranium enrichment
program and otherwise comply with the demands of the U.N.
Security Council.
Now the sanctions are finally starting to have some bite,
and within a few weeks or so the Congress is likely to pass new
legislation for the President to sign--legislation that
tightens sanctions and that gives the administration new
authorities to tighten sanctions still further. The House
passed its version of that legislation, the Iran Threat
Reduction Act, by an overwhelming vote late last year. Can you
give us a status report on the impact of sanctions in Iran and
on whether there is any sign that they are starting to have the
desired effect on the thinking of Iranian decision-makers?
Thank you, Madam Secretary. I look forward to hearing your
testimony.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. I thank the ranking member. It is
the chair's intention to continue the hearing during votes. And
now, it is an honor to welcome the Secretary to our committee
today. The honorable Hillary Rodham Clinton has served as the
67th Secretary of State for the United States since January 21,
2009: The latest chapter in her four decade career of public
service.
She has served previously as a United States senator from
the State of New York, as First Lady of the United States and
of the State of Arkansas, as an attorney and a law professor.
Madam Secretary, without objection your full written statement
will be made part of the record. If you would be so kind as to
summarize your written remarks, we can then move quickly to the
question and answer discussion under the 5-minute rule in the
hope of getting to all of our members before you have to
depart.
So Madam Secretary, welcome again, and the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, SECRETARY OF
STATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Secretary Clinton. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman and
Ranking Member, and it is very good to be back here. I am
grateful to your committee and the members for the support and
consultation that we've enjoyed over these past 3 years. I look
forward to your questions. I will submit my entire statement to
the record, and look forward to having a chance to exchange
views with you today. Thank you.
[Secretary Clinton's prepared statement follows:]

----------

Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. So we can get right to
the question and answer, Madam Secretary?
Secretary Clinton. Yes.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Delish. Thank you so much. So, the
Chair recognizes herself for her questions.
Madam Secretary, I have heard from a number of my
constituents--as you know, I represent South Florida, the
gateway to the Americas--who are worried that ALBA countries,
led by Chavez, continue to pressure to invite Cuba to the
Summit of the Americas in April, even though the Castro
dictatorship does not meet the criteria to join the meeting, as
you know.
Will you pledge here today that if Cuba is invited, that
President Obama and you, Madam Secretary, will refuse to attend
the summit meeting?
And secondly--and I will ask it all at once, so you can
answer, Madam Secretary--on Iran in the Western Hemisphere:
Just last month Ahmadinejad's tour of tyrants, as I called it--
his trip to Venezuela, Nicaragua, Cuba and Ecuador--reaffirmed
Iran's commitment to undermine U.S. national security
interests. I am concerned about Iran's willingness to attack
the United States homeland or our critical allies, such as
Israel.
With the rising threat posed by the Quds Force and its
Iranian proxies such as Hezbollah in our region, will we
dedicate more attention to these illicit activities in the
annual terrorism report?
And lastly, what is the administration doing to ensure
cooperation from our allies in the hemisphere with respect to
Iran, and to hold accountable those countries that are
supporting and enabling Iran's threatening activities?
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Secretary Clinton. Thank you very much. With respect to the
question about the Summit of Americas, we do not believe there
is any intention to invite Cuba. We have made our views on that
well known. They don't fit the definition of democratic
countries and the development of democracy in the hemisphere.
So at this point, we see absolutely no basis and no intention
to invite them to the summit.
Regarding Iran and the Western Hemisphere, obviously Iran,
facing these very effective sanctions and their aggressive
enforcement, is becoming increasingly desperate, looking for
friends wherever they think they can find them. And they are
not getting the kind of response--on that tour of tyrants that
you referenced, our analysis of what happened is that it fell
very far short of what the Iranians had hoped for.
That said, we are concerned about the activities of Iran
and Hezbollah in the Western Hemisphere. We continue to monitor
the situation closely. We will take appropriate action to
counter any threat that may arise. We are aware of and
concerned about allegations that some Latin American drug
trafficking organizations are linked with Hezbollah and Iran.
We have not found information to verify a lot of the
allegations, but of course the recent incident concerning the
attempted assassination of the Saudi Ambassador is a very large
question mark and wake-up call.
We are continuing to look for direct links, and we are
engaged very extensively with our partners in the hemisphere,
both to educate them about the dangers posed by Iran and
Hezbollah, and also to work with them to heighten our
intelligence sharing. Now, we did impose sanctions in 2008, and
extended them last year, on the Venezuelan Military Industries
Company for violating a ban on technology that could assist
Iran in developing weapons. So if we find information that we
can verify, we are committed to taking action.
But what we instead are seeing, much to our encouragement,
is that our partners in Latin America are really understanding
the threats. Recently at the IAEA Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and
Chile joined us in voting for a resolution calling on Iran to
address concerns about the nuclear program. Last year, Chile,
Mexico, and Brazil voted to create the U.N. Human Rights
Council Special Rapporteur on Iran. And our close coordination
with Mexican authorities actually was instrumental in breaking
up the assassination plot against the Saudi Ambassador.
So I think, Madam Chairman, we are alert to this. We are
watching it closely. We are building a very strong
international and hemispheric coalition against any efforts by
Iran and Hezbollah in our area.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I yield
back the balance of my time. Mr. Berman?
Mr. Berman. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman. Madam
Secretary, the Obama administration is the first administration
to use congressionally-mandated sanctions on Iran in a robust
way, and you deserve considerable praise for that. I know that
the President and you, and numerous officials at State, at
Treasury, at Defense, have put in literally thousands of hours
trying to persuade foreign officials and foreign businessmen to
respect our sanctions and to help isolate Iran, all for the
purposes of implementing a policy intended to lead Iran to
abandon its nuclear weapons program.
In that regard, I think it would be helpful to put to rest
concerns of some observers that the administration is resigned
to Iran's becoming a nuclear threshold state. I think it is
very important to reassure us on that point. Based on my
understanding of the administration's policy, I think you
should be able to do that.
Three months ago, on December 1st, Secretary of State Burns
and Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Ayalon issued a joint
statement that spoke of ``preventing Iran from developing a
nuclear weapons capability,'' and a Pentagon publication last
month also said that the U.S. seeks to ``prevent Iran's
development of a nuclear weapons capability.''
So when Senator Graham yesterday asked whether the
administration seeks to deny Iran the ability to become a
nuclear threshold state, you responded by saying that, ``It is
the position of the administration to prevent them,'' meaning
the Iranians, ``from attaining nuclear weapons.'' So I think it
is important to clarify.
Is it, in fact, administration policy to prevent Iran's
development of a nuclear weapons capability, or is the policy
merely to prevent Iran from attaining nuclear weapons? And what
is the real difference between these two? Does the
administration have a red line beyond which it will not allow
Iran's nuclear program to progress? Can we feel assured that it
is the administration's policy to make sure Iran remains well
short of the ability to produce nuclear arms?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, I think it is
absolutely clear that the President's policy is to prevent Iran
from having nuclear weapons capability. And that has been the
stated position of this administration. It has been backed up
and reiterated. So let there be no confusion in any shorthand
answer to any question, the policy remains the same.
And certainly in pursuance of that policy, we have worked
closely with the Congress to implement the most far-reaching
sanctions that have ever been imposed. And after 3 years of
intensive diplomatic effort, we have developed an international
coalition that recognizes the importance of preventing Iran
from obtaining nuclear weapons capability that is working with
us.
You know, 3 years ago we didn't have that consensus in the
international community. There was a lot of unwillingness, and
resistance, even, to going along with tougher sanctions. But
from the beginning, we have had a two-track policy: Pressure
and engagement. And as we talk today, the pressure is
ratcheting up. We are aggressively working to implement the
sanctions.
We have very strong support for this position from the
recent report by the International Atomic Energy Agency
pointing out all of the suspicions and questions about Iran's
pursuit of nuclear weapons, and we have seen, finally, a
response from Iran that they are willing to discuss their
nuclear weapons program with the P5+1. So we think that these
sanctions are affecting the thinking of the Iranians in the
leadership, but we have to remain vigilant and we have to keep
the pressure on.
Mr. Berman. Well, thank you very much. Do you think I could
get a question and answer in 44 seconds?
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Or you could yield back and give
other members more time, as I did.
Mr. Berman. All right. Well, with that appeal to----
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir. Thank you. And being
the wise legislator that he is, Dr. Paul elected to stay here,
and so he gets to ask his question.
Mr. Paul. Well, that is wonderful.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Congressman Paul of Texas is
recognized. I have learned not to say anything negative about
Ron Paul.
Mr. Paul. Welcome, Madam Secretary. I do want to get your
comments a little bit about the stir that was caused by the
apology over the Qur'an. And the administration has received a
lot of criticism about this, and I think you have expressed a
point that maybe this doesn't help your job any by stirring up
the resentment. But the whole issue of an apology, I think, is
an interesting one from a national level.
And I recall what happened after McNamara wrote his
memoirs. And he was apologetic about what happened, and how he
orchestrated the Vietnam War. And a reporter asked him if he
should apologize, and he said, ``What good's an apology?'' He
says, ``If the policies are wrong, you have to learn something
from it and change the policy.''
So a lot of emotions come out on this issue of apology, and
I keep thinking that those who criticize him, I don't think
they criticized the last administration when the President
apologized for using the Qur'an as a target. So sometimes they
are not--apologies aren't always all equal. But even that said,
there is--there were torture photographs before, they were very
aggravating. Recently there was urinating on bodies, on
corpses. We didn't particularly apologize for those, did we? I
mean, there weren't apologies there.
But some of these things are emotional, but what about the
whole idea of invading a country, and occupying a country, and
disturbing their country, creating hundreds of thousands of
refugees and suffering? Does it ever get to a point where
apologizing about the Qur'an is rather minor to some of the
other problems that we have created in these countries? And can
you comment on that?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, first I appreciate
the very measured comments you have made about our Presidents--
not only this one, but prior Presidents--offering apologies
when we are deeply sorry for unfortunate incidents that occur,
that were not intentional, and which we know have emotional
resonance with people.
The larger question you ask, I think it is also important
to put into context. President Obama promised to wind down the
Iraq war. He has done so. He is in the process of transitioning
out of Afghanistan in a manner that is done appropriately, in
keeping with the very large decisions that have to be made
about helping the Afghans defend themselves, working with our
partners and allies in that effort.
And I think the underlying premise is certainly one that
can be debated among Americans of good faith. I believe that we
were justified in going to Afghanistan, which is the----
Mr. Paul. I want to apologize, because I don't want to get
on that subject.
Secretary Clinton. Sure. And I accept your apology. Thank
you, sir. [Laughter.]
Mr. Paul. There you go. But I do want to touch on something
else, to get a little different perspective on the nuclear
enrichment in Iran. Because we hear different stories. Even in
Israel there are debates. Tamir Pardo actually said, ``If they
get a weapon, it's not an existential threat to Israel.'' So I
am sure there is probably a more nuanced debate in Israel than
there is here sometimes. But isn't it true that Iran has the
right to enrich up to 20 percent for peaceful purposes?
Most people--you know, the way we talk, and you hear the
discussion, they have absolutely no right to enrich. Don't they
have that protection under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty? But it never seems to have a balanced approach to that,
and the best I can tell from what I read, there is no evidence
that they have a bomb. There is no evidence that they are on
the verge of getting it.
And even the administration, whether it is Panetta or
Clamper or General Dempsey, they are saying, ``It wouldn't make
any sense to have a preemptive attack on there.'' Could you
give us a sense of a proper balance here? Because a lot of
people are convinced it is Syria, and then it is Iran. And I am
personally concerned about that, because the last thing the
American people need is another war. We don't have the money.
We don't have the resources. And the military is not ready for
another war.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. 9 seconds.
Secretary Clinton. Congressman, I would direct your
attention to the most recent Director General's Report from the
International Atomic Energy Agency, not an American document,
which outlines the concerns about the non-peaceful use of
civilian nuclear power. There is increasing evidence that what
the Iranians do is not consistent with--you are right--their
right to have the peaceful use of nuclear power. And I will be
happy to get you a copy of that, because I think you ask a very
important set of questions.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Congressman.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Mr. Ackerman, the ranking member on
the Subcommittee on the Middle East and South Asia.
Mr. Ackerman. Thank you. Welcome, Madam Secretary. Always
great to have you here.
Secretary Clinton. Thank you.
Mr. Ackerman. It is exceptional to me that sometimes you
can't win for winning. And even with the unprecedented
victories that you and the administration have had in the
foreign policy area, some people continue to look at it--I
guess I would call it the Goldilocks game, with the three
bears: The porridge is always too hot, or the porridge is
always too cold. I think you got it just right. I think,
instead of Goldilocks, you are more like the guy on the Ed
Sullivan show who used to be up there with the 12 bowling pins,
juggling them all at the same time, bouncing basketballs up and
down over his knees, and he has these sticks with the plates on
top that he is twirling in the air, and nothing ever falls to
the ground.
And it is more difficult, because you are really twirling
somebody else's dirty dishes, but nonetheless, you seem to have
everything pretty much together--I don't want to jinx it--with
all of the unprecedented problems in the world that we are
facing all at the same time. And I just want to thank you, and
congratulate you and the administration.
Three areas: North Korea, Egypt, and Iran. Hotspots. First,
on Egypt, congratulations on the announcement that we just
received within the hour that the flight restrictions on
Americans have been lifted. I think that is miraculous. I know
the great effort and work that you have put into this, both
behind the scenes as well as publicly, and how delicate this
negotiation has been.
Does this indicate to us some sense of where the power
shifting and shuffling in Egypt is going, and who is exercising
it, at least at this very sensitive moment? Or don't we want to
speculate on that?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, we do not have
confirmation that the travel ban has been lifted. We hope that
it will be, and we will continue to work toward that. And the
reporting is encouraging, but we have no confirmation.
Mr. Ackerman. Yes, we always get stuff from the AP first
also, before we hear that.
North Korea, congratulations on that as well. I know there
is never any nexus between humanitarian aid and shifting
policies, but congratulations on the great coincidence of the
240 metric tons of humanitarian aid and it's happening
coincidentally at the same time that the North Koreans have, at
least apparently, agreed to a lot more transparency than they
have had before, and cessation of their nuclear program.
Were other countries parties or observers at this bilateral
discussion that we had with the North Koreans? Did the
Russians, or the Chinese, or the South Koreans play any role,
or was that just us?
Secretary Clinton. Well, the meeting was held in Beijing.
The Japanese and South Koreans were intimately involved in the
back and forth of the negotiations. We also kept all of them
informed. But no one else was a direct participant, besides the
United States and North Korea.
Mr. Ackerman. In reading all the reports of that, it says
that they will allow inspection at Yongbyon. Do we have access
to other sites, or just that main site? Or isn't that clear
yet?
Secretary Clinton. That is not clear yet. I mean, that was
our principal objective, and we obviously have to continue
building on what was achieved.
Mr. Ackerman. And like some others that you deal with, you
know more than others that they are masters at the shell game.
And lastly, Iran. Congratulations on the biting effect,
that the sanctions are finally grabbing them and taking effect
to a tremendous extent. There seems to be a lot of indication
that some of our allies--one in particular in the Middle East
is very concerned and interested in us laying down markers,
rather than saying all options are on the table. And I suppose
that is going to get more play in coming days.
What are the red lines that the Iranians cannot cross? Are
we going to make that public, or are we going to continue to do
quiet negotiations on that?
Secretary Clinton. I think it is probably smarter for us to
be pressing on the sanctions and the negotiations, while we
keep our objective of no nuclear capability absolutely clear,
instead of setting other benchmarks at this time publicly.
Mr. Ackerman. I want to thank you for not concentrating on
strutting your stuff, and delivering on the steak and not
worrying about the sizzle. Thank you.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. My colleague from
Florida, Mr. Rivera. Wise man, staying around.
Mr. Rivera. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I learned
from the best, from you.
Madam Secretary, thank you so much for being here today. As
you know, recently we marked the 14th anniversary of the
February 24, 1996, shoot-down of the Brothers to the Rescue
airplanes in which, as you know, four Americans were murdered
over international airspace by the Castro dictatorship.
Subsequent to those murders, the U.S. Congress and then-
President Clinton passed and signed into law the Helms-Burton
Bill, which has never been fully implemented, as you well know,
because of a provision which allows a waiver, or a suspension,
every 6 months, to that law, for implementation of that law.
And that suspension, I believe, takes place around every
January or February, and mid-year as well. So we probably have
just recently seen the Obama administration suspend the Helms-
Burton law, as it has been done twice a year, every year, since
1996.
Now, the rationale allowed in the Helms-Burton law for
suspending implementation of the law is twofold. Number one,
that it serves U.S. interests, and number two, that it would
expedite a transition to democracy in Cuba. Given what we have
seen in the last few years during the Obama administration, and
what has been occurring in Cuba in terms of the wave of
repression against human rights activists and dissidents, given
the deaths of several hunger strikers, given the recent
persecution against the Ladies in White, peaceful activists in
Cuba that have been calling for democratic reform, given the
stern rebuff that Former Secretary Richardson received in Cuba
to his recent overtures or negotiations, can you tell us, just
in the last few years of the Obama administration that the
Helms-Burton law has been suspended, how has that expedited a
transition to democracy in Cuba?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, we take a backseat to
no one in our condemnation of the denial of human rights that
is a continuing feature of the Castro regime. And the
particular instances that you mentioned are ones of great
concern to us. We do think that increasing people-to-people
contact, supporting civil society in Cuba, enhancing the free
flow of information, promoting the capacity for more
independence, economically and politically, from the Cuban
authorities is in the interest of the Cuban people, and is in
the interests of the United States.
Mr. Rivera. And we may agree to disagree on that, but I am
just wondering if there is any evidence of results as a result
of that policy that the Obama administration has been pursuing.
Do we have any evidence at all of any inkling of democratic
reform, or a movement toward democracy? Is there anything
positive that has resulted from the Obama administration policy
toward Cuba that we have evidence, tangible evidence?
Secretary Clinton. Well, in the last 3 years, there have
been considerable changes in Cuba's economic policies, which we
see as a very positive development. We think having the Cuban
people given more economic rights, to be able to open
businesses, to have more opportunity to pursue their own
economic futures, goes hand in hand with the promotion of
democracy.
I wouldn't claim that our movements were a direct cause,
but they were coincident with. And very often in oppressive
regimes like Cuba, economic freedom precedes political freedom.
Mr. Rivera. Well, then you would agree that if there has
been economic freedom--and I dispute that, I don't believe
there has been any real economic reforms, genuine economic
reforms in Cuba. But you would agree that if there have been--
and we can disagree on that--there certainly have been no
political reforms, or a movement toward democracy,
notwithstanding the economic movements.
Secretary Clinton. Well, despite our very strong objection
to the treatment of Alan Gross, the in our view totally
unjustified charge and detention, a great number of political
prisoners have been released. And again, that in and of itself
is not final evidence of anything, but the fact that so many
political prisoners were released in the last 3 years is, in
our view----
Mr. Rivera. Are you aware----
Secretary Clinton [continuing]. A positive move.
Mr. Rivera [continuing]. That those releases were followed
by required expulsions from the country? You are aware of that.
Secretary Clinton. Well----
Mr. Rivera. They weren't released into the country. They
were expelled from the country.
Secretary Clinton. I am aware of that, Congressman. And as
I look out over the world and take a historic perspective, I
see sometimes that political prisoners are released and
expelled, where they continue to pursue their democracy work
and their advocacy on behalf of human rights from outside the
country. So I think the fact is, letting political prisoners go
is a very positive development.
I wish that they were inside Cuba, continuing to agitate
and advocate for freedom and democracy, but their voices are
still being heard, especially in the new communications
environment in which bloggers and others exist, so----
Mr. Rivera. I hope we will continue.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Rivera.
Mr. Rivera. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Mr.
Faleomavaega?
Mr. Faleomavaega. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Madam
Secretary, I have a couple of written questions that I want to
submit for your consideration.
Madam Secretary, that may be one of the last times
together, and so I want to publicly thank you for
reestablishing America's influence abroad, especially toward
the Asia-Pacific region. As you aptly stated, and I quote,
``The future of politics will be decided in Asia, not in
Afghanistan or Iraq, and the United States will be right at the
center of the action.''
Thanks to your efforts, Madam Secretary, I believe the
United States will be front and center, so I thank you for
bucking tradition for your first trip overseas. On your first
trip overseas, you visited Asia to convey a strong message that
America's relationships across the Asia-Pacific region are
indispensable. And in your many trips since then, from Vietnam
to Cambodia, to Myanmar, to China, to South Korea, to Japan and
beyond, you have been about the business of making and keeping
economic and strategic commitments that will pay dividends many
times over.
I applaud you for recognizing the importance of the Pacific
island nations in this multifaceted undertaking, and in the
context of this hearing, the foreign relations budget hearing,
I reiterate what you have stated, and I quote, ``Those who say
that we can no longer afford to engage with the world have it
exactly backward. We cannot afford not to. From opening new
markets for American businesses to curbing nuclear
proliferation, to keeping sea lanes free for commerce and
navigation, our work abroad holds the key to our prosperity and
security at home.''
I want to also note for the record, Madam Secretary, that
when American Samoa and the independent State of Samoa were hit
by the most powerful earthquake in 2009, which set off 30-foot
waves of a tsunami, which to this day have not yet fully
recovered, and yet your office were among the first to stand
with us. You have fought to make sure that relief supplies were
airlifted to us, and your tireless efforts for and on behalf of
those did not go unnoticed.
And I thank personally Assistant Secretary Dave Adams for
his help in this regard. At my request, Madam Secretary, you
personally made it a point to visit my little district, and on
behalf of the thousands of Samoan men and women who proudly
serve in the Armed Forces of our country, we are grateful for
your recognition of their services. My people thank you for
remembering us amid the many things you have done for our
nation.
Madam Secretary, it has been an honor to serve with you,
and I commend you for the initiatives you have taken, outlined
in this budget submission, for the East Asia and the Pacific
region.
I am glad I still have a couple of seconds to ask you a
couple of questions. Madam Secretary, can you reiterate again,
for the record, our fundamental policy of engagement with the
People's Republic of China, especially in reference to the
crisis we are faced with at the South China Sea?
Secretary Clinton. Well, first, thank you for those very
kind comments, but it is a great honor to represent the people
of your district, and to reach out to the South Pacific region
on behalf of our Government.
We are working to further a positive, cooperative and
comprehensive relationship with China. We think that is in the
interests of the American people, both economically and
strategically. We have welcomed the peaceful rise of China, and
we expect as China continues to develop that it will assume
more responsibilities globally.
With respect to the South China Sea, it has been our
position that, while we do not take any stand on the rights
attached to any territorial claim, we strongly support the
peaceful resolution of such claims in accordance with
international law.
That has been the position we have taken at ASEAN, at the
East Asia Summit. Because it is not only about the South China
Sea, which is, as you know so well, a very important part of
the world's oceans, through which more than 40 percent of the
world's trade passes. But it is also about how we resolve
disputes concerning territories in or near bodies of water,
whether it is the Arctic or the South China Sea.
So it is very important we stand for the rule of law, and
we stand for the peaceful resolution of any disputes. And we
have made that known to our friends in the region, as well as
to China.
Mr. Faleomavaega. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Faleomavaega. And
Madam Secretary, lacking other members, Mr. Berman and I have
agreed to share our 5 minutes with you, if that would be all
right?
Secretary Clinton. Thank you very much.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. I am going to ask about the Keystone
pipeline, so start the clock.
Mr. Berman. I withdraw mine.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. As gas prices continue to soar,
Madam Secretary, burdening the American people in this time of
economic hardship, we must continue to examine avenues to
depend less on foreign oil from rogue regimes. In October 2010,
you mentioned that you were ``inclined'' to sign off of the
Keystone project because the U.S. will either be ``dependent on
dirty oil from the Gulf or dirty oil from Canada.''
What was it about the pipeline that led you to change your
previous assertion, and can you please explain why an
additional, stable source of oil from a democratic ally such as
Canada does not deserve a national interest determination from
the Department of State?
And Mr. Berman, if you would like to ask your question?
Mr. Berman. A very specific question about Syria, the
security of the chemical and possibly biological weapons in
Syria should the Assad regime fall. How real is the danger of
these horrific weapons and substances leaving Syria and falling
into the hands of terrorists and terrorist groups? And what
about a Nunn-Lugar-type program to secure, dismantle, and
remove chemical and biological weapons and technology from
Syria?
Secretary Clinton. Well, first, with respect to Keystone,
what I said in 2010 was that energy security considerations
exist and needed to be taken into account, but that it had to
be part of what is the legal and regulatory requirements for
evaluating any pipeline application that crosses an
international boundary.
The State Department was in the process of making such a
determination, and when it became necessary to make a decision,
we did not recommend that the President say no, but rather that
the presidential permit for the project at that time be denied.
And with respect to the national interest, what we were
working on was a resolution of the very strong concerns
expressed by one of the states through which the pipeline would
move, a state that at that time did not have its own process
and needed to pass legislation, figure out what the alternative
route would be.
And then, of course, it fell upon the State Department to
evaluate the alternative route. That had not been established
when we were required to make our decision, therefore it was
impossible to assess the impact of that new route that had been
requested.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Secretary Clinton. No, just in the last 2 days, TransCanada
has made a move through a letter indicating their intent to
submit a new application which crosses the U.S.-Canada border.
At the same time, they are moving forward with parts of the
pipeline, like from Oklahoma to Texas, that don't cross the
border and don't need State Department evaluation or decision.
So I think we have handled this, Madam Chairman, in a way
that was commensurate with the law and the regulations. I
strongly believe we have to increase our energy security. I
strongly support the creation of our new Energy Bureau. Just
last week, we signed an important agreement with Mexico to
encourage transboundary exploration in the Gulf of Mexico,
something that was legally in limbo. So we are committed to
doing all that we can to help Americans get the energy supplies
we need.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Madam Secretary. And now
to Syria, from Canada.
Secretary Clinton. Yes, now on to Syria. Well, we are
concerned. I think that it is an issue that deserves the
attention of the international community. Nunn-Lugar, of
course, was in a permissive environment. It was after the
Soviet Union had fallen, the new Russian Federation came into
being. They welcomed our work with them, as in Kazakhstan and
Ukraine and other countries.
At this time, there is no permissive environment, but we
are going to stay very focused on the potential dangers posed
by any storehouse or depot of such weapons.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary, for your time. Mr. Smith from New Jersey, the
chairman of the Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and
Human Rights, is recognized.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Welcome, Madam
Secretary. Let me associate myself with the remarks of our
distinguished chairwoman on Cuba. We had a hearing just a
couple of weeks ago with Dr. Oscar Biscet, who had a 25-year
sentence. He is now out of prison, but he is not out of prison.
And he spoke via telephone right here, and the man is
unbelievably brave. He is calling for freedom, human rights,
and we have got to be very hard-lined, I believe, but also very
prudent. So I would hope--the gentlelady made a very important
point about not attending, and I hope that will be the case.
Let me ask you with regards to the Iranian Pastor, Youcef
Nadarkhani--we will have a resolution on the floor later on
today. If you could speak to the Iranians, if you would, and to
the world--there is a ratcheting up of persecution against
Christians that is unprecedented.
I have held two hearings on the Coptic Christians. The
kidnapping of Coptic Christian girls who are forced into Islam
as minors and then given to a man in Egypt who happens to be
Muslim is outrageous. It is an act of trafficking, and it is
not an isolated incidence. It is a serious, ongoing and
pervasive human rights hearing.
I actually held my first hearing on the global persecution
of Christians on February 15th, 1996. It was getting worse
then. It is now awful. In China, North Korea, we all know
people are tortured to death simply because they are
Christians. If you could speak to that.
I would like to ask you, if you would--and a very specific
and yes or no answer might suffice--and I thank you for the
briefing on Bosnia and the work you are doing to try and bring
Bosnia into NATO, as well as the other countries that are in
line.
Is there any instance, Madam Secretary, or instances, where
the Obama administration has withheld or has threatened to
withhold or plans to withhold, or use its voice and vote at
international and U.N. institutions to reward with debt relief
or loans, or to deny such, or in any other way provide a
retaliatory means based on that nation's policies on abortion,
and based on that nation's support or opposition to resolutions
at the U.N. regarding abortion?
Secretary Clinton. Well, as to that second question,
Congressman, I would like to take it for the record, because it
had so many parts to it and I don't want to give you an answer
that is not as accurate as I can make it. So I will certainly
get back to you on that.
As to the very troubling case of Pastor Nadarkhani, you are
100 percent right. His case is particularly egregious, but it
is, unfortunately, part of what we see as increasing
discrimination and persecution on the basis of religion. In
some parts of the world, it is sects of Islam. In some parts of
the world, it is Christians. But wherever it occurs, it is
deplorable, against freedom of religion, against human rights
that are universally recognized.
The United States has condemned the sentence against Pastor
Nadarkhani. We have pushed very hard, reached out to like-
minded countries, international organizations, to get a stay of
execution, to get him released from prison. He has done nothing
more than maintain his faith, and it is absolutely contrary to
every element of the universal basis for human rights that
someone like that would be condemned to death for being who he
is, worshipping as he chooses, exercising his freedom of
conscience.
So we call on Iran to honor its own constitutional
commitment to the protection of religious freedom, and its
obligations under international law. And they can begin by
commuting this death sentence and letting this man go free.
Mr. Smith. If you could get back on the other question as
quickly----
Secretary Clinton. Yes.
Mr. Smith. We hear from U.N. ambassadors that some are
fearful they will lose foreign aid if they don't back the U.S.
position on abortion at the United Nations. You know, you are
shaking your head no, so I am happy to hear that, but if you
could provide a very definitive answer it would be very
helpful.
You probably saw the spate of articles that China is
changing its policy slogans on the one child per couple policy
but not the law itself. That was one of the headlines that
Yahoo! News had. There is a whole spate of articles to that
effect.
I would hope that we would redouble our efforts to combat
the one child per couple policy. The fact that there are so
many missing girls--as we all know, the estimates are in excess
of 100 million missing girls, systematically exterminated
simply because they happen to be girls. And by 2050--and I had
a hearing on this very recently. I have had 38 congressional
hearings on human rights abuse in China--by 2020, 40-50 percent
of men won't be able to find wives because they have been
systematically eliminated. So China is becoming and will
increase as a trafficking magnet.
I am almost out of time, but if you could really speak out
strongly against forced abortion, forced sterilization, and for
those baby girls in China who are suffering immensely, along
with their mothers.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Mr. Sherman,
the ranking member on the Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade, is recognized.
Mr. Sherman. Madam Secretary, glad to have you back here. I
want to join so many of my colleagues who have praised your
work for our country, and how much you have been able to
accomplish with less than 1 percent of our budget. I have got a
lot of topics to cover, and would expect that you just want to
respond for the record, but interrupt me at any point if the
spirit moves you.
The first is to focus on the Javakh region of Georgia. We
have been very generous to the Republic of Georgia. Javakh is a
region in Southern Georgia with a large ethnic Armenian
population, and the Embassy of Georgia is now in support of the
idea of the United States focusing a good chunk of its aid for
Georgia on the Javakh region. This would help bind Javakh to
the Republic of Georgia, and would help achieve our goals in
the Caucasus.
Last time you were here, I mentioned the idea of Voice of
America broadcasting in the Sindhi language. This committee
adopted my amendment unanimously to direct the Voice of America
to spend $1.5 million broadcasting in the Sindhi language. I am
not sure that that bill will become law, but it does show the
wisdom of the committee.
There are elements in the government in Islamabad who would
prefer to try to impose the Urdu language on the entire
country. In fact, the idea of imposing the Urdu language on
what was then East Bengal created, as much as anything, the
independent Republic of Bangladesh. And I would hope that in
deciding whether or not to broadcast in the Sindhi language, we
not try to accommodate the most extreme nationalistic, or just
extreme, position of some elements in Islamabad. Because right
now we are broadcasting in Urdu, and Sindhi is spoken by far
more people in Pakistan. And we do have a very complicated
relationship with the Pakistani Government. We need to reach
out to the Pakistani people, particularly those in the Sufi-
influenced south of Pakistan, where the version of Islam is so
compatible with American values.
I know I won't be the only person up here to talk about
Camp Liberty and how important it is that we ensure the
humanitarian safety of everyone who is there. There are certain
elements to how that camp has been set up that makes it look
almost like a prison camp. There are reports that the residents
have no access to lawyers, their family, no freedom of
movement. And obviously, the Iranian Government is going to be
pressing the Iraqis to be as inhumane as possible to the
residents of that camp, and I hope that we will be pressing on
the other side.
And then finally--and this is a propitious day with regard
to this issue--as you may know, there is the SWIFT system,
which is the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
Telecommunications. There is an effort to exclude all Iranian
banks from that system, and earlier today I had a chance to
talk to Chairman Bernanke, who represents us in the SWIFT
system and has a role in supervising that system.
And he said that he didn't have a national security advisor
over at the Federal Reserve, and would want to hear from
elements of the government that do focus on national security
whether it is in our interest, not just to exclude some Iranian
banks, but all Iranian banks from the SWIFT system, thus
further isolating Iran's financial system. And so perhaps you
could respond right here as to whether you would advise the
chairman to do everything possible to exclude all Iranian banks
from the SWIFT system.
Secretary Clinton. Yes, we certainly would. And we believe
that using the SWIFT system is a very effective way of further
isolating Iran, and the Iranian flow of financial transactions.
So we will engage with the Federal Reserve in terms of
providing such information, and with respect to all of your
other issues, Congressman, we will get back to you in a timely
manner.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. And I hope your advice to Bernanke
would be all Iranian banks, not just those that have been
sanctioned by the EU.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Sherman. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Mr. Burton, the chairman on Europe and
Eurasia, is recognized.
Mr. Burton. Madam Secretary, it is nice seeing you again. I
understand that today or yesterday there was an indication that
we might once again open some kind of dialogue with North
Korea, and I just checked and we gave North Korea during the
Clinton administration over $1 billion in fuel and food aid, as
well as money we spent building their light water reactor. And
of course, they violated the agreement that they made.
The only reason that I bring that up is, I hope that if we
start a dialogue with them we realize that their history is one
that you certainly can't trust. And even though Kim Jong Il is
gone, and we have a new leader there, I think it is extremely
important that the State Department get everything written in
blood, so to speak, to make sure that we are not shafted again.
Recently Tom Donilon and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
went over to visit Israel, and the tone of the reports that I
received--and of course, all this isn't in writing, but the
tone was that they were urging Israel not to take any
unilateral action as far as an attack on Iran is concerned. And
I know that they just recently said that they certainly weren't
going to in any way involve, so to speak, the United States, to
give us some semblance of separation from that.
I wonder why it is that the administration doesn't give
complete support to Israel and say, ``If Iran continues with
its program, we will do whatever is necessary to stop that
program,'' and give Israel the support that I think they need.
Right now, they are surrounded by all of the potential enemies
you can count. And they really need, I think, in the world of
public relations, to know--and the world to know--that the
United States is with them through thick and thin.
The last thing I talked to you about when you were here--
and I will give you a chance to respond--was that I have been
very concerned about the entire northern tier of Africa and the
Persian Gulf becoming radicalized. Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, maybe
Syria, and in the Persian Gulf area I have been talked to by a
number of the ambassadors and others there. They are all
concerned about radicalism taking over. And although we want to
get rid of people like Muammar Gaddafi and Mubarak--although he
was a pretty good friend as far as the Camp David accords are
concerned--although we want to get rid of the bad guys, I would
like to know what we are doing to guarantee that we are not
supporting radical Islamists who are going to end up causing a
bigger problem than the problem we already had.
I understand that we want to get rid of people that are
persecuting their populations, but we also have to be concerned
about what it means to the United States as far as energy is
concerned, and stability in the region, Israel and all those
things. And I would like to know what guarantees we have that
the governments that we are supporting over there, or the
fledgling governments that we are supporting over there, are
not going to be radicalized and start supporting and
implementing Sharia law, and thus we would face a more
difficult problem down the road than we face right now.
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, with respect to
Israel, I can assure you that not only does the Obama
administration strongly support the defense and security of
Israel, but we have put more money behind that pledge than has
ever been put before. We have increased U.S. security
assistance to Israel every year since FY09. This budget
includes $3.1 billion for foreign military financing, a $25-
million-increase from the FY12 level. We have a very strong
support for Israel's missile defense programs, which are an
essential aspect of what Israel needs in these very challenging
times.
And you know, Prime Minster Netanyahu has called the
bilateral security cooperation unprecedented, particularly with
respect to cooperative missile defense developments and
realistic military exercises. So there is an ongoing
consultation at the very highest levels between our two
governments. And we share our assessments with the Israelis We
listen to their assessments. And I think that the Prime
Minister's words really speak for themselves, that it is
unprecedented, the level of cooperation and funding that we are
providing.
And I will look forward to providing an answer on the
record regarding North Africa. I just returned from a visit to
Tunisia, and Algeria, and Morocco. I think we have an
opportunity there, but I am conscious of the risks and dangers
you identified.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Thank
you, Mr. Burton. Mr. Meeks, the ranking member on the
Subcommittee on Europe and Eurasia.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Madam Secretary, it
is always a delight to have you before us. And I just want to
say, on behalf of I believe all of the American people, what a
splendid job you are doing.
I have three questions that I am going to try to ask you in
the time that we have allotted. One about our complex
relationship with Russia, which I believe presents significant
accomplishments, challenges and opportunities, and our
disagreements are sometimes profound and frustrate multilateral
efforts for coordinated action to confront threats of life as
in Syria, or global security as in Iran. Notably, however, the
Cold War is behind us, and the United States and Russia are no
longer eyeball to eyeball with fingers posed over red buttons
that would release arsenals aimed at one another, and we are
often now elbow to elbow at conference tables, which I think is
a good thing.
Madam Secretary, will you comment on your priorities and
the strategy with respect to Russia? You may know, or may not
know, that I am particularly interested in expanding trade and
economic relationships with Russia, which in the year ahead I
hope will be a good news story for the United States.
Secondly, Turkey, which continues to be a strategically
important player in a challenging part of the world. In fact,
Turkey has demonstrated leadership in supporting change and
peace in Syria, and receiving the tens of thousands of Syrian
refugees who spill across the common border. They have stepped
into the spotlight, too, regarding events in the Middle East
and north Africa, and they facilitate U.S. redeployments from
Iraq. Can you speak about Turkey's growing prominence and the
United States' relationship with Turkey, including what seem to
be rough spots with Israel and Iran?
And lastly, the U.S. leads the world in promoting racial
and ethnic tolerance and gender empowerment, and I want to
commend you for your personal leadership in these efforts. I
would like to focus your attention for just a second on the
U.S.-Brazil joint action plan, as well as the U.S.-Colombia
action plan to promote racial and ethnic equality, and I would
like to hear about your plans for continuing these works on
these initiatives, especially since I didn't see--I was not
clear about the funding of these initiatives in 2013, and it is
very much a concern to me whether that is going to continue in
the Bureau of the Western Hemisphere.
And when I was in Brussels, now being the ranking Democrat
on Europe, our European counterparts have expressed a strong
interest in concluding such a joint action plan with us also,
and so I was wondering if the State Department could expand on
this initiative and look into negotiating an agreement with the
EU.
Secretary Clinton. Well, thank you very much for that
description of a lot of the most important issues that we face.
Let me focus at the start on Russia, because there will be
coming before the Congress important work to be done in order
for American businesses to benefit from Russia's membership in
the WTO. The United States believes that having Russia in the
WTO is very much in the interests of the kind of rules-based
economic system that we think benefits Americans, and that we
are very keen on establishing firmly for the 21st century.
So we are looking to have the Congress vote to grant
permanent normal trade relations to Russia, because it is a
vote to create American jobs. For U.S. businesses, farmers and
workers to receive the maximum benefit from Russia's entry into
the WTO, we have to give unconditional permanent normal trading
relations treatment to Russian goods that we provide to all WTO
members.
That commitment requires us to terminate the application of
the Jackson-Vanik Amendment. And Jackson-Vanik achieved its
historic purpose by helping thousands of Jews emigrate from the
Soviet Union. And Jackson-Vanik is not any longer the kind of
active tool that we need to promote universal human rights vis-
a-vis Russia. Because we want to continue to press for human
rights inside Russia, but failure to lift Jackson-Vanik will
put our farmers, our manufacturers, American businesses, at a
disadvantage.
So we very much hope that the Congress will grant PNTR to
Russia, lift Jackson-Vanik, recognize the need to keep pressing
on human rights inside Russia, and create American jobs as a
result.
And with respect to your other very important questions and
areas of concern, Congressman, I will just end by saying we
strongly support the work we are doing with Colombia and Brazil
to promote racial and ethnic equality. We do have the means to
continue to work on that within the existing budget, and it is
a very high priority.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Meeks,
Madam Secretary. Mr. Rohrabacher of California, the chairman of
the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, is
recognized.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and I too respect the
good job you are doing. We have some disagreements, but the
fact is, you work hard and you take your job seriously. And
probably of all the members of the Obama administration, you
have more respect here on Capitol Hill than your other
colleagues. Sorry, that is a backhanded compliment. I shouldn't
have said that.
But there are many lives that depend directly on the
decisions you make in your job, and I would like to ask two
questions relating directly to people who are now in grave
danger, who will be affected by your decision-making. And then,
after that, if I have some other time, I will ask a couple
other questions.
The first one is about Dr. Afridi in Pakistan. As you are
aware, it is now illegal for the Government of Pakistan to
receive any aid money from the United States unless you, as the
Secretary of State, certify that Pakistan is cooperating with
the United States in counterterrorism efforts and preventing
terrorists from basing their operations in Pakistan.
Well, of course, the one Pakistani who did cooperate with
us was Dr. Afridi, who was the medical doctor who helped
provide the information that led our Navy SEALs to where Osama
bin Laden was hiding. But he now has been arrested by the
Pakistani Government, and is facing a treason charge. His
property has been confiscated. His office staff has been fired.
And he is being called a national criminal by that government.
So can you certify? Are you able to certify that Pakistan
is cooperating with us, as long as Dr. Afridi, the man who
helped us get Osama bin Laden, is in custody and being charged
with treason?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, I agree that there is
no basis for holding Dr. Afridi or any of his staff. In fact, I
think his work on behalf of the effort to take down bin Laden
was in Pakistan's interests as well as the United States'
interest, and we have made that view very well known. We will
continue to press it. And it is going to be taken into account
as we move forward.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, if they do not let Dr. Afridi go--
let me just put everybody on notice here--and I believe we are
going to be watching this closely--there is nothing that could
suggest that Pakistan is cooperating with us in the fight
against terrorism, when they have Dr. Afridi, the man who
helped us get Osama bin Laden, in prison and are treating him
this way. That is their decision of non-cooperation.
About one other group whose lives are in danger, there are
3,000 Iranian exiles who have been residing in Iraq, who you
are fully aware of. Because they were enemies and are enemies
of the Iranian mullah dictatorship, these exiled members, who
are members of the MEK, are in great danger. Our designation to
their organization as a terrorist organization has been a major
stumbling block in efforts to resettle them and take them to
safety. Are we going to wait until there is some kind of
another slaughter of these people--they already were
slaughtered down there, unarmed--before we act to try to get
them resettled? Something as easy as trying to take that
designation off, of the terrorist organization, would help
dramatically, and we can do that unilaterally.
Secretary Clinton. Well, first, we are deeply concerned
about the security and safety of the residents of Camp Ashraf.
And we have supported the work of the United Nations to find a
path forward to relocate the residents, and that has now begun.
We fully support the MOU, signed in December, between the
United Nations and the Government of Iraq, and it includes
commitments from the Iraqi Government for the safety and
security of the new camp where the relocation is taking place.
As you know, there were 397 residents relocated on February
18th. There were complications, but it was peaceful. There was
no violence. The safety so far has been protected, and we are
watching that very closely. We continue to work on our review
of the MEK's designation as a foreign terrorist organization in
accordance with the DC Circuit's decision and applicable law.
And I would note that not every resident relocated to what
used to be Camp Liberty--it is now Camp Korea--may be an MEK
member. The organization's structure and history dictate that
we take a serious look at each individual, not prejudge
membership or the conditions of that person's presence at
Ashraf. And you know, once again the UNHCR process will be
expedited. So no government has raised the FTO issue with the
Department of State as a bar to receiving individuals. And we
are going to continue to work to ensure the safety and
security, and we think that we have a good plan.
And I would say, Congressman, that given the ongoing
efforts to relocate the residents, MEK cooperation in the
successful and peaceful closure of Camp Ashraf, the MEK's main
paramilitary base, will be a key factor in any decision
regarding the MEK's FTO status.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Engel of New York,
the ranking member on the Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere, is recognized.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Madam Chair. And welcome, Madam
Secretary. The United States is proud of you, but in New York
we are especially proud of you. I want to ask three questions.
I will try to do them one at a time. I have just come back from
a trip to Israel, where I have met with people at the highest
levels of government. There is a big fear in Israel that the
United States is adjusting to the containment of Iranian
nuclear weapons, rather than stopping them at all costs. And as
you, of course, know, we have said, ``Let sanctions work,'' but
many in Israel believe that if we wait too long we will be at
the point of no return, and then Iran will not be stopped at
all.
Can you please comment on that, and assure us that we are
not for a position of containment?
Secretary Clinton. Our policy, Congressman, is prevention.
Our policy is to prevent Iran from attaining nuclear weapons
capability. We have a two-track policy, pressure and
engagement. We are pursuing both simultaneously to that end.
Mr. Engel. Okay. Thank you. I want to speak with you about
the Balkans. You and I had several discussions in the past week
or so about Kosovo, and I want to just praise you publicly for
guaranteeing that Kosovo's rights as a sovereign country remain
secure throughout recent negotiations with the EU and Serbia.
While I am glad that Kosovo will take its rightful place as
a sovereign state in regional negotiations, and I commend Prime
Minister Thaci for taking this difficult decision, I am
concerned that Belgrade is advancing to candidate status before
meeting all of the EU's conditions in normalizing relations
with Kosovo. And at the same time, as you and I discussed, I
hope the U.S. will seek additional ways to support Kosovo
during this process, including through the Millennium Challenge
program and by pressing the EU to stop dragging its feet on
Kosovo's European future, and to make sure that Serbia
implements deals to which it agrees.
Secretary Clinton. Well, I thank you for your constant
support of Kosovo and the Kosovar people. I agree with you that
Prime Minister Thaci showed great leadership. The invitation to
candidacy that the EU has extended to Serbia has many
milestones along the way, and resolving border issues,
resolving a lot of the unfinished business that has to be
negotiated between Serbia and Kosovo are some of those.
At the same time, I think it is very important that the
European Union has reached out to Kosovo and is working to move
Kosovo closer to European integration as well. This is a
difficult piece of business. It is a historically complex area,
as you know better than most, Congressman. But I think we are
slowly making progress, and I am going to continue to press
forward.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Two things about the Western
Hemisphere, which the ranking member--the FARC has recently
announced that it is going to release some of its political
prisoners, and want people to believe that they have reformed.
While I am obviously skeptical about anything that the FARC
says, I wonder if you can comment? President Santos of
Colombia, of course, has said that it is a good move in the
right direction, but not nearly enough. I wonder if we could
have your thoughts on that.
Secretary Clinton. Well, I think that President Santos is
exactly right. It is a good move, long overdue, to end their
kidnapping and their illegal detention of innocent people, but
there is a lot yet to be finalized. I think that this Congress
and administrations of both parties should take a certain
amount of credit for Plan Colombia, for sticking with it, for
providing the Colombian Government and the Colombian people
with the means to be able to defend themselves against a
paramilitary terrorist organization and the drug traffickers.
So yes, this is a good step, but it is not enough yet.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. And finally, last year this committee
adopted a bipartisan amendment which I authored supporting the
establishment of U.S. Embassies in the five Caribbean countries
where we have none. These Embassies would be similar to the
posts we have in Grenada, and would show our Caribbean partners
that we pay attention to their region. And it would, of course,
also help connect millions of Caribbean-Americans with their
ancestral homelands. It will be minimal or no cost, because our
representation would be established with only five of the
hundreds of diplomats returning from Iraq and Afghanistan. And
I am wondering if you can comment on that.
Secretary Clinton. Well, of course, we believe strongly in
having positive diplomatic relations with our eastern Caribbean
friends and partners. And it is a matter of cost. It is a
matter of resources. I will respond to you in writing, because
it is a difficult tradeoff for us, Congressman.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Engel, Madam Secretary. And Mr. Royce, the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade, is
recognized.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Madam Secretary, you
and I have talked about Joseph Kony, who abducted 30,000
children, the boys he turned into child soldiers, the girls
into concubines, and some of the horrible circumstances that we
have had with some of the worst human rights abusers. And
likewise, people like Viktor Bout, who is now in custody, but a
gun runner supreme who, as an arms trafficker, armed both sides
of some civil conflicts.
There is a rewards program the State Department has, and I
have legislation to expand that, to include transnational
organized crime, to go after people like Viktor Bout, as well
as those engaged in the worst human rights abuses, like Joseph
Kony. And I know that your department is interested in putting
a price on the head of people like Kony, so that we can find
their whereabouts. And I know the goal is to take him off the
battlefield, and we would need that to do that.
So we will have a hearing next week on this subject. I
wanted your thoughts, if I could.
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, this is the first
time I have heard of your legislation, but speaking personally
I would support it, because I have the responsibility of
signing off on rewards that go to people who have helped us
apprehend serious criminals and terrorists. I think it is a
good program. It does provide incentives. So I would be very
interested in working with you. It is also a lot less expensive
than some of the alternatives of trying to track down some of
these bad guys. So let us work together on that.
Mr. Royce. It is time-tested.
Secretary Clinton. Yes.
Mr. Royce. Well, again, Madam Secretary, on another
subject, this morning it was announced that North Korea has
agreed to suspend its uranium enrichment, and to a moratorium.
But that was announced in tandem with the Obama
administration's finalizing its details on food aid to North
Korea, 240,000 metric tons of food aid.
I had legislation passed last year that prohibited food aid
to any country that diverted it for unauthorized use. And I
will just explain my concern here. The French NGOs told us of
monitoring the food aid, which ended up on the food exchange in
North Korea's capital. And likewise, we have numerous examples
of sighting of how food aid went to the military in North
Korea.
So the law now would indicate that we would have to verify
that. And we have been duped a number of times in North Korea,
by North Korea, on these agreements. Of course, what I am most
concerned about is when they sell it on the food exchange for
hard currency, it goes into their weapons program, reportedly.
So I would ask you about that, and get your response.
Secretary Clinton. First of all, I think you are right to
be cautious. We are, too. The provision of humanitarian
assistance is something that we do because of the concern we
have for the welfare and well-being of people, including those
who are starving in North Korea. And we have done a series of
assessments and concluded that a targeted 240,000 metric ton
nutritional assistance package that targets the key vulnerable
groups--mostly women and children--is merited.
But before any assistance program could begin, we have to
reach agreement on monitoring mechanisms to ensure that the
food is reaching the people that we intend it for. And that
will be our responsibility, to try to set up those mechanisms
and to be as sure as we can be that it is going to be put to
the right use.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Madam Secretary. And within the
confines of the new law, because we do have to verify this, I
have suggested a crackdown on North Korea's illicit activities.
I have seen in the past where that was effective. When they
were counterfeiting $100 bills, we had the sanctions on the
bank, Banco Delta Asia, that they were using to run their
illicit activities through. A lot of their drug smuggling and
cigarettes and other activities, when you cut off that kind of
currency, you force the regime to come to the table.
And I guess one of my great frustrations was, although we
shut that down for a number of months, and he couldn't pay his
generals, and the word we were getting back from defectors was
that they couldn't get the parts--there was a piece for a
satellite that they needed, or actually, this was for a missile
program. They needed a gyroscope. They were trying to buy it on
the black market. They didn't have the money for it, because we
had, effectively, with sanctions, done this. And then the
sanctions were lifted.
My hope would be that the administration would approach
this from the standpoint that that could be effective. And I
wanted to ask about----
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Royce.
Mr. Royce [continuing]. Whether the administration was
going to follow through on the illicit activities.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Royce. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Mr. Carnahan is recognized.
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you, Madam Chair. And Madam Secretary,
it is great to have you back. I just first want to say thank
you for following up with co-chair Chris Smith, Chairman Smith
and I, with the Bosnian Caucus and those concerns that we had
raised earlier. Given the fact that they have the new
government in place, we hope that continued U.S. and
international support can help move the forward. So first of
all, thank you for that.
I also wanted to commend you on the recently announced
international partnership, the Climate and Clean Air Coalition
to reduce short-term pollutants. It underscores the global
nature of the challenge, as well as the advantages to working
with our partners at the U.N. and around the world. I wanted to
ask, has that investment paid off in terms of stronger
commitments by developing countries? And can we count on them
to continue to fulfill those commitments if we are not honoring
our pledges?
Secretary Clinton. Well, thank you for raising that,
Congressman, because we continue to believe that climate change
and the consequences of climate change pose national security
problems to us. And so we are looking for ways to try to move
forward where we can, and take practical steps. The fact is
that the short-term climate forcers--things like methane,
things like black soot, or black carbon and soot--are more
easily dealt with than carbon dioxide. And I think that what we
have put together here, which is the Climate and Clean Air
Coalition, has developed countries like Sweden, underdeveloped
countries like Bangladesh, developing countries like Ghana,
Canada, and we have had a really positive response from
countries around the world, asking how they can be involved.
So we think this is a way to help cut down on about 40
percent of what the pollutants in the atmosphere are that
affects climate change. So we are going to be promoting this
issue. It is not as controversial, it is not as far-reaching.
We still have to deal with the greenhouse gas emissions and try
to come to grips with CO2, but it gives us something that
people can do.
And I will give you a quick example. We have a Global
Alliance on Clean Cookstoves. How women cook, about 2 billion
of them around the world, creates respiratory illnesses, puts a
lot of soot, black carbon, into the atmosphere. If we can
create a market for a more clean-burning cookstove, we improve
health and we improve the environment at the same time. So
there are a lot of win/win strategies that we are working on
here.
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you. I also wanted to follow up on the
SIGIR Audit Report of the police development program, and it
revealed issues in Iraq of poor planning, mismanagement,
inefficient evaluation metrics. So in this current budget, what
is being done to enhance those monitoring mechanisms in a way
that ensures that police training is really being ramped up the
way that it needs to be? It is also ensuring the integrity of
our tax dollars. And really related to that, as this similar
kind of transition is approaching, fast approaching, in
Afghanistan, the lessons we have learned in this transition in
Iraq, how can we apply those in Afghanistan as well?
Secretary Clinton. Well, the police development program has
been operating since October 1, 2011, when the State Department
became the U.S. lead for police development. Since October, our
senior police advisors, who are the most experienced group of
police advisors ever fielded by the U.S. Government, have had
approximately 690 total mentoring and advising sessions with
over 86 Iraqi counterparts. And we have recently completed an
assessment of Iraq's Ministry of Interior and police services,
so that we can really refine how we are monitoring and what
kind of performance measurements we need.
I think that SIGIR performs a valuable oversight service.
We welcome helpful recommendations about how to make the police
development program better. We are implementing the
recommendations from the fall audit, and we are going to
continue to look at opportunities to improve the effectiveness
of these programs. We think they are critical to the stability
and security of Iraq. So we take it very seriously, and we take
recommendations from SIGIR and others very seriously as well.
Mr. Carnahan. And finally, in my remaining time, I just
want to add my voices to others about our continued effective
and full engagement at the U.N. Certainly not a perfect body,
but one that--certainly there have been some successes there,
vital for our security and economic interests. And I appreciate
those continued efforts.
Secretary Clinton. Thank you.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Mr. Chabot, the
chairman of the Subcommittee on the Middle East and South Asia,
is recognized.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Secretary,
because of limited time I would like to raise three issues and
then give you the remaining amount of my time to address them.
First, Iran. On the subject of the Iranian nuclear program, the
Fiscal Year 2013 Congressional Budget Justification notes that,
``The Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs will maintain pressure
through sanctions to encourage Iran to return to the
negotiating table.''
This policy, however, is essentially the same unchanged
Iran policy that the administration has had since it took power
back in January 2009: Engagement and pressure. On July 12th,
2009, over 2\1/2\ years ago, you stated that, ``We understand
the importance of offering to engage Iran and giving its
leaders a clear choice. The opportunity will not remain open
indefinitely.''
As we enter year 4 of this policy, it seems to me to be
painfully obvious that this administration's policy is not only
the same, but that it has failed to achieve the core objective:
Persuading the regime in Tehran to abandon its pursuit of
nuclear weapons capability.
Just this morning, in your testimony before the House
Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, you said
that you believe we are making progress on the sanctions front.
My question is, how have these sanctions actually altered the
Iranian regime's calculation about its nuclear program? And let
me say, I don't think merely getting them to the table is
enough. We have seen numerous times that the regime in Tehran
uses negotiations as a delaying tactic, and that a willingness
to negotiate does not equal a willingness to make concessions.
Second, I would like to ask you about Iraq. Within hours of
the departure of the final U.S. convoy, a political crisis
started occurring in Iraq which, if not checked, has the
potential to throw the entire country back into sectarian civil
war that we spent years working to resolve. Many Iraqis
continue to die in daily attacks across the country, and
according to one report our influence over the Maliki
government has diminished significantly.
The State Department Congressional Budget Justification
notes that, ``Renewed sectarian conflict or increased
interference by malign regional actors seeking to fill a vacuum
left by U.S. disengagement would pose a significant threat to
U.S. influence in the region.'' It seems undeniable that the
continued presence of even a modicum of U.S. troops would have
resulted in far more stability and security than we are seeing
now.
Given our lack of a military presence and our diminished
diplomatic leverage, how does the administration plan to deal
with the current deterioration on the ground in Iraq?
And finally, Madam Secretary, if I may, I would like to
briefly touch upon the issue of outstanding claims by American
companies against the Government of Saudi Arabia. In the last
20 years or so, thanks in large part to congressional and
executive branch pressure, a number of previously unsettled
cases involving more than a dozen American firms, totaling
somewhere in the neighborhood of $500 million, have been
resolved.
I learned last year that at least one such unsettled claim
with the Saudis remains. Despite continued efforts by the
party, Gibbs & Hill, the U.S. Government, and repeated
encouragement from Members of Congress, the claim, resulting
from a desalinization project in the last '70s and early '80s,
and totalling, I am told, more than $130 million, has still not
been settled.
I discussed this case with the Saudi Petroleum Minister
when I met with him in Riyadh last year, and I offered an
amendment to the Foreign Relations Authorization Bill to
further encourage the Saudis to move expeditiously to resolve
this claim. I would be happy to work with your office on this
issue. This claim is of significant importance to an American
company and their workers, and it should be of importance to
the reputation of the Saudi Government, which I am sure does
not want to be known as one which does not pay its bills.
And we have got about 1 minute for all of those, Madam
Secretary.
Secretary Clinton. Well, I will take the last one, because
that is shorter, and then get back to you on the important
questions concerning Iran and Iraq.
The State Department is well familiar with the Gibbs & Hill
contract dispute. It has been raised at high levels for a
number of years. At the request of counsel for Hill
International, the State Department recently conducted a review
of all of our records in this matter. We have a standing
invitation to officers of Hill International to come in and
discuss the results of this review, to bring not only
representatives but counsel of the company.
We regularly meet with representatives of Hill
International, because they still do business in Saudi Arabia.
In fact, they do quite a bit of business. And they come in and
talk to us about commercial ventures and business climate, so
if they wish to come in and talk to us about our review of the
records, we stand ready to do so.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chabot.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Mi hermano Cubano-Americano--now,
that was easy enough for everybody to understand--Mr. Sires of
New Jersey is recognized.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Secretary, thank
you for being here and thank you for the service that you give
this country. You certainly make us proud. And I don't know how
you do it, but every time I see you, you are in a different
country. It is amazing. I also want to commend the
administration for standing firm on Cuba not participating in
the Summit of the Americas. And I also wish to add that, if we
could use some of our pull with the OAS, maybe they could speak
up a little louder about the human abuses that are occurring in
Cuba currently.
And with that, it brings me to Alan Gross. And I know you
mentioned Alan Gross before, but I just want to know that there
are no negotiations going on for a swap between the Cuban spies
that are in prison for Alan Gross. And I know that we have two
senators who were in Cuba a couple days ago, and I was just
wondering if you know anything about any kind of negotiations
for a swap.
Secretary Clinton. Well, I have to say that the continuing
imprisonment of Alan Gross is deplorable. It is wrong. It is a
violation of human decency as well as human rights, and at
every single meeting that we possibly can arrange, we raise
this issue. We call people around the world to raise this
issue, because Mr. Gross deserves to come home.
At no point, however, has the United States Government been
willing to give any unilateral concessions to the Castro
regime, or to ease sanctions as a means to secure Mr. Gross'
release. We think this should be done as a matter of
humanitarian concern, as evidence that the Castro Regime is
willing to demonstrate that it is moving in a different
direction. But it hasn't happened yet. So we have not had any
success in our diplomacy. We would like to see Mr. Gross home,
but we have made no deals, we have offered no concessions, and
we don't intend to do so.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. And I would also like to associate
myself with my colleague, Chris Smith, on the human rights
abuses, and especially what is going on in Egypt with the
Coptic Christians. I have a big population of Coptic Christians
in my district, and they are very concerned about the family
members that they have back home. And I hope that we continue
to speak up on their behalf.
I also--I know you didn't address this, but if we could use
our leverage with the OAS to speak up more on human rights
abuses, that would be great. And one of the things that is my
pet peeve, I know that the State Department operation funding
for Iraq has been reduced--I think this year it is going to be
$4.8 billion--and I know that the Department of Defense also
has reduced from 9.6 to 2.9, almost $3 billion.
I was just wondering if any of that money is used for
infrastructure building in Iraq. We have a situation in America
where our infrastructure is falling apart, and since I have
been here we have been giving money to Iraq to build their
infrastructure. So I was just wondering how this money is going
to be used. Do you know?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, as you know, we have
dramatically scaled back on what we spend in Iraq, primarily
because the military has left in agreements that were
negotiated by the prior administration. And now what we are
focused on is our civilian presence. So we don't fund Iraqi
infrastructure any longer, and what was funded was primarily on
the military side, not the civilian side.
Mr. Sires. Okay. And getting back to Cuba, my last issue.
We have a criminal who killed a state trooper in New Jersey,
JoAnne Chesimard. She has been living in Cuba for over 20
years. She shot a state trooper point blank, and every time I
am back in the state and running through the state troopers,
they want me to raise this issue, to see if the State
Department, when you meet with Cuba, or when you do your
conversations with some of the Cuban counterparts, is the issue
of JoAnne Chesimard ever raised, or is it just a forgotten
issue?
Secretary Clinton. Well, it will be now raised, if it
hasn't been raised. And I thank you for raising it, because I
well remember that terrible case. And I am confident it has
been raised, but I will assure you and the state troopers in
New Jersey it will continue to be raised in the future.
Mr. Sires. Okay. Madam Secretary, thank you for your
service to this country.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. My Florida
colleague, Mr. Mack, the chairman of the Subcommittee on the
Western Hemisphere, is recognized.
Mr. Mack. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I also would like to
thank the Secretary for being here, and making herself
available to questions from the committee. I want to go and
continue to explore the Keystone XL pipeline, but I first want
to--just for a point of clarification for everyone, we would
much rather, as a policy in the United States, buy oil from our
friends and allies in Canada than we would from Venezuela.
Would you agree with that?
Secretary Clinton. Yes. And we do buy, as you know, a lot
of oil from Canada.
Mr. Mack. If we had the option to stop buying oil from
Venezuela and get more oil from Canada, that is also a policy
that we would pursue, isn't it?
Secretary Clinton. Well, obviously, we would rather buy oil
from friendly countries. And we are doing everything we can to
diversify our oil supply, including producing more oil here in
the United States, which is all to the good.
Mr. Mack. So why the flip-flop on the Keystone XL pipeline?
Secretary Clinton. I don't think there was any flip-flop,
Congressman. I think that this was always a matter that had to
be evaluated in accordance with legal and regulatory standards.
Certainly energy security consideration was a key factor, but
not the only factor. There was a lot of concern on the part of
one state through which the pipeline traveled----
Mr. Mack. And on that note, your environmental impact
statement approved the original route, and now there has been
an agreement upon another route that the Governor and others
have come out and supported, correct?
Secretary Clinton. Well, I think that what the finding was,
is that there was minimal environmental disruption, but the
national interest consideration had not yet been finalized,
which is why State Department representatives fanned out across
the states affected, and there were quite large and contentious
and emotional meetings in Nebraska, and a plea by the Governor
and everybody else that a different route be considered.
And once that was requested--and it was complicated because
Nebraska didn't have legislation that really got it into the
business of judging routes before, but they were concerned
because of the sand hills and the like--once they demanded a
different route, and then there was an effort to work out a
different route, the Congress of course, through an amendment
to the payroll tax cut said, ``No, you have to make a decision
right now.''
And legally, there was no alternative but to deny the
permit. We did not recommend to the President that the answer
be no, but that the presidential permit for the project be
denied at that time, because there would have been, I think at
a conservative estimate, several hundred lawsuits if there had
been any other decision made, which would have pushed the
decision, whatever it might be, far into the future.
Mr. Mack. So are you prepared to do it now, then?
Secretary Clinton. We have no pending application now.
There is no application----
Mr. Mack. If you had an application, would you approve it
now?
Secretary Clinton. We have to----
Mr. Mack. Have all of the other scenarios been----
Secretary Clinton. Congressman, we would have to go through
the process, because it would be a new application. Now, what
TransCanada is doing is announcing that it is----
Mr. Mack. Because my time is limited, if I can get to----
Secretary Clinton. Okay.
Mr. Mack. I mean, even the former President, Bill Clinton,
says, ``Embrace it, and we need to move forward with the
Keystone XL pipeline.''
Secretary Clinton. He is a very smart man. [Laughter.]
But unfortunately, he is not bound by the laws and
regulations any longer of the United States to make decisions
that follow a certain procedure. And that is what we have to
do.
Mr. Mack. So is it a mistake for the former President to
say, ``Embrace it?''
Secretary Clinton. Of course not. I think it is not a
mistake for people to--this is America. People say they embrace
it, people say they hate it. Our job is to take a very clear-
eyed look at what the facts are. There is no pending
application.
Mr. Mack. Did the White House ask you to delay the process?
Secretary Clinton. No. Our job was to make a
recommendation----
Mr. Mack. Here is where I have the problem. Because in
conversations that you and I have had, and also in front of
committees, you have led us to believe that it is something
that the State Department was going to approve, and it just
seems a little fishy to me that, at the height of this thing,
that it seems that the President found a way to wiggle out of
it, and wants to make you the scapegoat. And I don't understand
why--just, the facts don't mesh up.
Secretary Clinton. Well, you know, Congressman, that is
just not how we see it. I think that the people in the State
Department--I was fully and regularly briefed on the
Department's review process. I fully support the recommendation
that the Department made. This is a difficult decision for the
State Department to make, because most other pipelines are not
within the purview of the State Department. We don't have the
kind of staff experience, expertise and numbers that you have
in other places within the United States Government.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Secretary Clinton. But under the laws, if that pipeline
crosses an international border, then it is our responsibility.
So what TransCanada is doing is announcing they are going to
start building parts of the pipeline that don't cross the
international border. But I have to defend the process that the
State Department went through, which was fully in accord with
the laws of the United States.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Mack, Madam
Secretary. Another Florida colleague, Mr. Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Madam Secretary,
thank you for being here. It is safe to say that, certainly
here on the Hill and around the world, you are extraordinarily
respected for the job you do. And I particularly would like to
thank you for your leadership in the critical areas of
stability in the Middle East, preventing a nuclear-armed Iran,
human rights, and in particular your continued strong advocacy
for foreign assistance.
I would like to talk first about Syria. And rather than
continue the discussion that you have had already on what
happens, how what is happening in Syria now ultimately ends, I
want to talk about what is happening right at this moment. And
in particular, just today it was reported that 23 people were
killed when Syrian troops ambushed a group trying to smuggle
Western journalists into the country. I don't know whether the
body of Marie Colvin, the American who wrote for the Sunday
Times of London, whether that body has been recovered. If you
have information, I would welcome that. The same with the
Frenchman, Remi Ochlik.
The fact is that, even as we talk about the big picture in
Syria, the humanitarian situation deteriorates daily. Food and
medicine are not being delivered to civilians. It is a tragic
situation for the people of Syria. And I would like you to
address that, and specifically what you can do and what we can
do to alleviate those concerns now, and to convince the
Russians and the Chinese to, notwithstanding their views on the
Assad regime, to at least support a humanitarian cease-fire and
put pressure on Assad to permit a humanitarian cease-fire, so
that the people of Syria can at least receive the basic
foodstuffs and medicine that they desperately need.
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, I share your concern
and your outrage. Every day that goes by just compounds the
crimes against humanity committed by this regime and their
security forces. When we met in Tunisia last Friday, we made
three commitments. First, increased humanitarian aid. I
announced a $10-million commitment to assistance projects.
Secondly, to keep working with the opposition, so that they get
stronger, more effective, and that they are inclusive, so they
truly represent all Syrians. And thirdly, to keep pressing for
a political resolution.
And the Arab League plan, which called for Assad to step
aside, is the plan that people feel most comfortable pushing.
You know, the fact is, access is a terrible problem. There
is not even a willingness on the part of the Assad regime to
let the Syrian Red Crescent in to pick up bodies, to deliver
medical supplies and provisions. And they effectively not only
block such aid, but they target those who are trying to provide
it. So we see a brutal use of violence against the people of
Syria and everyone trying to help them.
So we are looking with our allies, particularly in the
neighborhood, those who have borders, how do we get this aid
in? How do we protect people who are trying to put it in? And
we are going to continue to do everything we can, not only to
help get that aid in but pressure the Assad regime. And we are
working actively to persuade the Russians and the Chinese, and
at the very least they ought to support humanitarian
assistance. Put aside the political disagreement we have about
supporting a leader who has murdered so many of his people with
artillery. Let us focus on how we help the Syrian people. So
that is our goal right now.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that. Switching gears in the
remaining time I have, it had been, I believe, misreported that
what was going to be the largest joint military exercise
between the United States and Israel had been cancelled because
of the decision made by the administration. It was later
reported that it was a decision made by the Israelis. If you
could speak to the reason for that cancellation, what will come
next, and whether in terms of security cooperation, that type
of joint military exercise--why it is important and whether it
is consistent with other joint military exercises like that
that we have engaged in.
Secretary Clinton. Well of course, you know, DoD is the
agency to whom such a question should be directed. But I
believe it is either in the process or has already been
rescheduled. We have upped our security assistance to Israel.
As I said earlier, Prime Minister Netanyahu calls our bilateral
security commitment from the Obama administration
``unprecedented,'' and those include realistic and ongoing
military exercises, which we think are very important.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that. And Madam Chairman, if I may
just finally, if I could, Madam Secretary, please just
encourage you to continue press for information about my
constituent, Robert Levinson. It is of great importance in my
community, and I hope that you will continue to press.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Mr. Fortenberry
is recognized.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Madam Chair. And Madam
Secretary, welcome. Let me start with a question about Egypt.
In 1979, as a young person, I entered the Sinai Desert, in the
place where there was fighting between Israel and Egypt in
1973. And on a twisted pile of rubble and concrete were
scrawled the words, ``Here was the war, here is the peace.''
I was there in a jubilant time, where there was a
celebratory atmosphere of the newfound relationship between the
United States and Egypt. The United States had successfully
brokered that treaty, and the courage of President Sadat and
Prime Minister Begin to extend their hands in friendship has
left us with a stable foundation for peace for the last 30
years between those two countries.
Now, with the latest event that has occurred, with the
change of governing structures and a great deal of uncertainty,
and an unclear commitment to that path of peace, given the deal
that we put together and the amount of aid that we have given
both to Israel, but to Egypt as well, and with the effrontery
of the Egyptian authorities holding, arresting Americans who
are simply there to help Egyptians, what is the
administration's position on potentially suspending the aid
package?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, first of all, in all
the discussions that we have had and that we are aware of that
Egyptian authorities have had with other countries, they remain
committed to the Camp David Accords, which we think is in
Egypt's interests and certainly in Israel's interests.
So we are mindful of the importance of ensuring the
continuity of that peace and stability, and we don't want to
pre-judge what the new government will do. Because I think it
is fair to note, there is no government yet. They are in the
process of putting in place a government, and the people who
are still there but not elected or appointed by the new
authorities can't really make decisions yet. There is no
President or Executive authority yet chosen.
So I counsel patience, because we first have to get to know
who the government is. And we are working very hard, through
many different channels, to develop relationships with the
people who will be in the new Parliament, for example. So right
now, I can report to you that there is an ongoing commitment to
preserve the Camp David Accords. You know, we are having some
difficult bumps right now. We are hoping to resolve the NGO
situation very soon. Then, I think, we have to take stock of
where we are and make a decision based on the facts.
Mr. Fortenberry. Well, given certain tensions in the past
with our Egyptian relationship, I have always argued publicly
that it was better to grab the hand of friendship then grab it
tighter to work through that. Now, it gets a lot more delicate
now when there is an unclear pathway to potentially upholding
these agreements that have worked so well, not only for the
Israelis but the Egyptians. And for decades, I am afraid that
the international community has taken that Camp David Accord
really for granted, but it is an important pathway for peace.
Let me turn quickly to the President's Lord's Resistance
Army Comprehensive Strategy. We voted unanimously in last
year's State Department Authorization Act to allow for the
deployment of military advisors in the region to bring Joseph
Kony to justice. I am concerned, though, that multilateral
interest is potentially dissipating now. I think cooperation
among governments in the region is critical in this regard. Can
you comment on this?
Secretary Clinton. Well first, I thank you for authorizing,
encouraging, such a comprehensive U.S. strategy to bring this
murderer to justice. As you know, small teams of U.S. military
advisors were deployed in December and January to forward
locations in the LRA-affected areas. The advisors are working
to create more cooperation among regional militaries and
enhance their capacity.
Although there are approximately only 100, we think they
are force adders to what is already going on, and we have a
clear goal, which is to enable local forces to end the reign of
terror. And we think that this small number of U.S. advisors
can play an outsize role in bringing about that conclusion.
Mr. Fortenberry. Regional governments must be able to step
in and assume the challenge moving forward.
Secretary Clinton. Yes. And starting with regional
militaries, but including regional governments.
Mr. Fortenberry. Let me turn quickly, before the time is
up, to urge you as well--and I think this came up earlier--to
speak on behalf of Pastor Youcef Nadarkhani, who is guilty of
the crime in Iran for witnessing to his faith. Now, the last
time you were here you talked very forthrightly about your
desire, yet struggles, to talk about the need for religious
freedom as new democratic ideals arise in----
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. I will let you finish that thought,
Mr. Fortenberry, but we are out of time. Go ahead.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Madam Chair. Going back to my
train of thought, I will try--but to continue to raise his
issue as an example of how religious freedom is a natural right
that is consistent with the ideals of all of humanity. So I
just urge you to not only try to save his life, but point to
that as to how governments who are looking for more just human
rights, or better human rights conditions and more just forms
of governance, must treat the issue of religious freedom.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. Mr. Cardoza is
recognized.
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you,
Secretary Clinton. It is great to have you here again. This
will be my last year in Congress, and I hear rumors that it may
be your last year as Secretary of State. I just want to take
this opportunity to thank you for your tremendous service to
our country in so many different ways.
Madam Secretary, I want to raise the issue of our ally,
Portugal. I represent a number of Portuguese-American
residents, and I share that heritage. And there are a number of
issues with regard to the Azores and visas and consulates that
I am very concerned about.
The consulate in Ponta Delgada is being rumored to be on
the list for closure. It is one of the original consulates of
our nation, and it is something that I would ask that you do
everything within your power to preserve. Certainly this is a
budget discussion today, and so it is appropriate to discuss it
in the budget.
The second question that I would have is that there are
questions of visas, that members--citizens of Portugal would
have to go to France in order to obtain certain kinds of
immigration visas or green cards to the United States. I
understand the number may only be 150, but the relationship
that we have with Portugal is so important. When the Gulf War
first started, the original summit was in the Azores, and
Portugal was the host country. There may not be a better friend
to the United States anywhere in the world. And I would just
like to have you discuss that, if you can.
And finally, I will share with you that I was somewhat
dismayed a while back when the President indicated in the
negotiation strategy of a reversion back to the '67 lines in
Israel as part of where he thought it might end up. And maybe
you can clarify that for me and for everyone, because that is
something that I happen to have been in the country when these
statements were made, and I am not sure that the '67 lines are
defensible, or the correct--there may be adjusted lines, and so
I would just like to hear the administration's position again
on that.
Secretary Clinton. Well, first with respect to Portugal, I
share your view that Portugal is a wonderful friend, and not
only a good partner in NATO and in so many other areas, but the
source of a lot of Portuguese-Americans, culture, food, so much
else. I will have to take those questions for the record,
Congressman, because I want to look into the two areas that you
raised, but I want to assure you that we highly value our
relationship with Portugal and will be very careful in making
any decisions that would affect the free flow of people and
trade.
Secondly, I think if you look at the President's speeches,
first last May at the State Department and secondly before
AIPAC, there is a very clear set of understandings that the
President lays out. And there was no reference to going back to
the exact borders. I mean, it would be based on negotiation
between Israel and the Palestinians, and it is anticipated that
there would be a certain set of decisions that would have to
take into account what has happened in the years since.
But certainly from our perspective, looking at those
speeches and looking at the reaction in Israel, which was very
positive, to both of them together--and we obviously are
pursuing with Israel and the Palestinians an effort to get the
negotiations restarted. Because there is no shortcut. We
support the two-state solution. We want to see it negotiated by
the parties themselves.
And it has turned out to be quite challenging to do that
for a variety of reasons, but our position remains the same,
that any final status issue ultimately has to be decided by the
parties. We and others can put forth suggestions,
recommendations, and ideas about what would work, but it is a
negotiation, and the negotiation has to be resolved by the two
parties most affected.
Mr. Cardoza. I totally agree with you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you for that reclarification, and I appreciate it. I
would just like to make a notation on my original point about
the Azores. There is a base there that is of strategic
importance to us. It is really more important to bring up with
the Secretary of Defense, but I will share it since I have this
opportunity today.
Our base at Terceira in the Azores is critical, and is
being--the totality of things that are coming to pass, the
potential closing of Ponta Delgada, the visa question, and the
potential closing of the base at Terceira--is having a view
within that sphere that we don't care any longer. And I raise
the issues in combination because I think it will strain
relations.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Cardoza. Mr.
McCaul, the vice chair of the Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Madam Chair. Welcome, Madam
Secretary. Recently I led a delegation to Pakistan, Afghanistan
and Iraq, and it was very, very interesting. And we had a sit-
down meeting with President Zardari, a very frank discussion.
He looked at us in the eye and said he had no knowledge
that bin Laden was in his country. But we do know it is
probably likely that lower-level officials knew of his presence
in Pakistan. Then we had Dr. Afridi, who helped us over there,
and now he is in prison for treason, as was pointed out
earlier. They gave the Chinese access to the helicopter that
was left behind at the compound.
And then, finally, the Haqqani Network. We talked about the
Haqqani Network, and I asked for his support, as you have very
strongly in the past asked for his support to go after the
Haqqani Network. And he said he doesn't play--he goes after all
terrorist organizations, not just the Haqqani. However, last
year we had the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Admiral Mike
Mullen testify that, with ISI support, Haqqani operatives
planned and conducted a truck bomb attack, as well as an
assault on our Embassy. We also have credible evidence that
they were behind the June 28th attack against the
Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, and a host of other smaller
but effective operations.
In short, he said the Haqqani Network acts as an arm of
Pakistan's Interservices Intelligence Agency, which takes me to
my next question. We are giving all this foreign aid to a
country that is complicit in working with the terrorists who
are killing Americans. I understand all the implications.
Zardari referred to our relationship as like a bad marriage,
but divorce is not an option.
But when it comes to the funding, we are looking at
crafting legislation that would essentially require the State
Department to certify that they are not working with these
networks, including Haqqani. And if that cannot be certified,
then the foreign aid will be cut off. I would like to get your
thoughts on that legislation.
Secretary Clinton. Well, I think, Congressman, what
President Zardari told you on behalf of the civilian leadership
of the Government of Pakistan is true. He has been a good
partner in going after terrorism that threatens his country and
Afghanistan and our troops. We have no evidence of any high-
level official knowing about bin Laden, but like you I have to
assume that lower-level people had to have known something. But
we haven't proven that. It can be asserted, but not yet proven.
So this is a complicated, difficult relationship, and what
we are doing now is making it very clear what our expectations
have to be going forward. And there is no doubt in my mind that
certain elements of the Pakistani Government are more
ambivalent about cracking down on terrorism than other
elements.
You know, when I sit across from the Foreign Minister, or
talk to the Ambassador, or talk to the Prime Minister and
others, I think they are very sincere. They know that the
scourge of terrorism is killing Pakistanis. Zardari knows that
terrorists killed his wife. And yet there have been
relationships between terrorist groups and the military, and
the intelligence services, for many decades.
And what is unique now is that this democratically elected
government has survived longer than any other democratically
elected government. For the first time in the Parliament, you
have questions being asked of the military and the ISI. You
have the Supreme Court asking questions about the actions of
the military and the ISI. So you see the strains and stresses
of trying to have a civilian government in a democracy assert
control over all elements of the government.
And we want to continue to support the democratic trend
inside Pakistan. So walking this line, trying to make sure what
the levers we can pull are, where we can really put pressure,
is basically how I spend a lot of my time. And I take seriously
the underlying thrust of your question, and I will carefully
evaluate all factors when it comes time to make a decision.
Mr. McCaul. Let me just say thank you for--you have been
very strong about the Haqqani Network. I think Zardari is
sincere in his efforts, but I don't think he has a lot of
control over his own military and the ISI, and I think that is
part of the problem.
And so I would urge you to continue your efforts to get
them to fight with us against these terrorists, rather than be
complicit with them.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. Mr. Cicilline is
recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And welcome,
Madam Secretary. It is wonderful to have you back before the
committee. And thank you for the thoughtfulness of your budget
proposal, both in its fiscal responsibility and in its
diplomatic priorities. So I thank you for that, and thank and
acknowledge all the men and women who serve under your
leadership at the State Department. You have helped, really, to
restore America's position in the world, as our ranking member
said, ``as a partner for peace and democracy,'' and we are all
grateful and thank you for your service.
And we have had a lot of discussions today about various
parts of the world that are of great concern, and particularly
unsettled, areas of great violence. And I would like to really
focus my inquiry on two areas really closer to home. And the
first is--and I will just articulate the questions, then give
you the balance of my time.
The first is really about the sort of events in the Middle
East in general--in Syria, in Iran, in that region of the
world--and its impact on our gas prices here in the United
States. And I know that we--in my home state we have seen a
tremendous increase in gas prices, almost 40 cents from a year
ago today.
And I am wondering if you can speak to your perspective on
how a variety of international events that you are closely
monitoring might have an impact on fuel prices in the near
term, and also what we are doing, both diplomatically and in
terms of development efforts, in the long term to ensure that
gas prices are stabilized, or that at least in the long term
they are mitigated.
Because I think we hear a lot about how this unrest is
contributing to our rising gas prices, and some of us also know
that a big part of it is speculation and gouging, and we are
going to take up some legislation, hopefully, to address that.
But I think that events around the world are certainly
impacting it, and I would love to hear your perspective on
that.
And the second issue I would ask you to speak to is
something I hear a lot about back at home. As you know, Rhode
Island is a huge manufacturing state, and we are really engaged
in this whole make it in America agenda, to rebuild and
reinvigorate American manufacturing. And one of the challenges
we face and I hear from Rhode Island manufacturers is about the
Chinese and their behavior as trading partners, and their
manipulation of currency, and their refusal to protect
intellectual property, and the challenges of their policies of
indigenous innovation and technology transfers. And so I would
like to hear you speak to some of the State Department's
efforts diplomatically to help really even the playing field,
so that we can really rebuild American manufacturing in our
country.
And again, thank you. And I will finally associate myself
with Congressman Cardoza's remarks on the Azores and the
importance of both of those issues. And I will submit a written
question related to our efforts to ensure that the Turks
respect the Christians, and are respecting the churches and
religious freedom in that country, which I will follow up with.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Secretary Clinton. Thank you, Congressman. With respect to
gas prices, I think there is room for considering ways to rein
in speculation and gouging, yes. Are there events that are
happening in the world that raise questions? Yes. But to the
extent that it justifies or can explain the increase in the gas
prices? I don't believe so. So therefore, I have long thought
that there has to be some market mechanism that can be explored
to try to break speculation that is unrelated.
Now, if the Iranians close the Strait of Hormuz, that would
be a real event and we would have to deal with it. And we have
said we would deal with it, but that would cause the market to
obviously react. But right now, there is talk in the air about
all kind of things, but there is no event. So I do think it is
worth exploring the legislation that you reference.
With respect to manufacturing, this administration has
brought more trade actions against China, against unfair trade
practices, against the theft of intellectual property, against
the use of indigenous innovation, and we will continue to do
so. Because we don't fear a level playing field.
I have great confidence in the workers and businesses of
Rhode Island to be competitive with anybody. But if a big thumb
is on the scale, whether it is currency manipulation or
indigenous innovation, or the unfortunate theft of intellectual
property, that makes competition one-sided. And so this
administration has taken a very aggressive approach on the
defensive side. On the offensive side, I just hosted a big
conference at the State Department where we had all the
American chambers from around the world come in to talk about
how we could do a better job helping American businesses, how
we could really knock down those barriers, cut through that red
tape.
And so we want to be deeply involved with our 1,000
economic officers around the world in helping to open markets
and create jobs here at home. We consider that part of what we
call economic statecraft, and I am very committed to it.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. Judge Poe is
recognized.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some questions
regarding beef trade with Taiwan, U.S. rice given a fair shot
in Iraq, and also some questions about Pakistan. I ask
unanimous consent to submit those for the record.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Mr. Poe. Thank you for being here. I know you have to
leave. I want to talk about something that we have always
talked about when we discuss things, and it is the folks that
live in Camp Ashraf. They are being moved. Some are being moved
to Camp Liberty. Camp Liberty now is in a situation where there
is not enough water, the sewage is a tremendous problem, there
is no electricity, people there are not allowed to see their
family members. They are not allowed to see lawyers.
Some have compared Camp Liberty to a prison. Rudy Giuliani
said, ``It's not a prison, it's a concentration camp.'' So
people are not being moved from Camp Ashraf to Camp Liberty,
and of course the goal--and it is my goal, just like it is, I
hope, yours, to get those people out of Iraq and get them
somewhere in the world where they can be safe, and they can be
free, and they can reunite with their families.
We have two situations going on. We have the designation as
an FTO. It is still an issue. It has been going on a long time.
I have worked with your department, trying to find out, on a
consistent basis, is there new evidence? Is there more evidence
why they should stay on the FTO? Good evidence, evidence one
way or the other, just what it is.
I have been to every briefing that Homeland Security and
that your office has sponsored regarding the designation and
why they are on it. And I am not convinced they ought to stay
on it, and we continue to wait, now so much so that even, I
think, yesterday a lawsuit was filed again to get the State
Department to pick a horse and ride it, as I like to say.
And meanwhile, during this time, there have been two
situations in Camp Ashraf where people have died, and others
have been wounded by--regardless of whose fault, that has
occurred. And so there are no more people moving to Camp
Liberty, and to my knowledge, as of today, no one has left Camp
Liberty to go somewhere else in the world.
And so as sincere as I can possibly be, I would like to
know from you a couple of things. First, is the United States
prepared to take any people from Camp Liberty? Does the FTO
designation that they still have affect that in any way?
And I would like to preface that question with one other
situation. The last time I was in Iraq, I met with Maliki, and
we asked him if we could go and visit the folks in Camp Ashraf
and see for ourself what it was like. And he said absolutely
not, but the one thing he told all of us, ``The reason they are
in Camp Ashraf is because your country designates them as an
FTO organization, and we treat them like a foreign terrorist
organization.''
So he dumped it back on our designation as the reason he
was treating them the way he was treating them. He apparently
got so irritated with us for even asking the question, we
learned when we left his office that we had been evicted from
the country. He asked us to leave. Of course, we did what we
needed to do.
So it is a serious matter, and earlier you mentioned that
the FTO designation is tied to Camp Ashraf, and their being a
paramilitary group. They don't have any weapons there. So can
you tell us where we are, and if we are going to see some
resolution about getting this designation removed, getting the
people in Camp Liberty humane conditions, and moving the
process to countries, including the United States, so these
people can leave the area, which everybody wants to do?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, I appreciate your
deep concern. I share it, because we are trying to work to
resolve a complex situation, avoid bloodshed and violence, and
have the people from Camp Ashraf move to Camp Korea, and have
them processed as soon as the United Nations can process them.
There were a lot of--I would have preferred having them
processed at Ashraf.
That turned out to be impractical for a lot of reasons, and
therefore the move now should open up an accelerated process
for these interviews to be held and decisions made. And you
know, we are working around the clock. We are seeing
improvements in the infrastructure. We have to close Camp
Ashraf in order to move this process forward, and it will be a
key factor in any decision regarding the foreign terrorist
organization status.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. And Mr. Connolly,
I am going to ask your forgiveness, because according to the
procedures that we set forth, even though you have been a good
soldier and you have sat here the whole time, Mr. Murphy played
it well and came here, and he is next on the queue to ask the
question. So I don't--it is the last question. Do you want to
share it?
Mr. Murphy. I will share. I will ask a quick one.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. A quick one, and then Mr. Connolly,
too. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you very much. Madam Secretary, thank you
very much for being here with us today, and I will be brief to
allow Mr. Connolly to jump in as well before you leave. You
have been generous with your time. I am one of a large number
of folks here who are skeptical about our current timetable for
a withdrawal from Afghanistan. I am frankly surprised we
haven't talked more about Afghanistan here today.
And part of that skepticism comes from the fact that I
would like to see us spending a lot more time on the diplomatic
and economic cooperation necessary to get Afghanistan to a
place in which they can succeed on their own. And so I had a
couple of questions related to that economic and diplomatic
cooperation, but I will ask one of them, and it is on the
economic side.
There are various numbers that come out suggesting that 80-
90, to perhaps even as high as 97 percent of the Afghan economy
is dependent right now on international aid. And I would love
to get an update to you as to how you see the timetable playing
out over the next 5 years to make sure that as we withdraw our
military contingent, that we leave behind a stable economy
there, and perhaps suggestions that you have for the United
States Congress as to things that we can do here to make sure
that we leave behind a stable economy. I would like to see us
pull out as quickly as possible on the military side, but I
recognize that we have got to make sure that we don't leave an
economy that collapses upon our withdrawal. And I think that
that is something that we have not talked enough about as a
Congress, and would love your thoughts on that.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Murphy. Mr. Connolly,
if you could ask the question?
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Welcome, Madam Secretary, and let me
join my colleagues in extending my great admiration for your
service to your country. You have been an extraordinary
Secretary of State, and I have known a lot of Secretaries of
State over the last 30 years, so I thank you for your service.
I wonder if you could just comment a little bit--and I
thank my colleague from Connecticut's courtesy--on our
diplomatic efforts to sort of try to change minds in Russia and
China with respect to the Syrian situation. I mean, it gets
worse by the day. They have provided a shield of protection
that has, at this point, proved not only counterproductive but,
frankly, lethal. And I would welcome your thoughts about how we
are engaging diplomatically and trying to turn that around.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for your courtesy as
well.
Secretary Clinton. Thank you both. Congressman Murphy, we
do have some very specific ideas and plans about what we could
do to assist Afghanistan being more integrated into the
regional economy, developing their own economic assets.
I would like to take it for the record to give you a
broader set of responses, because we see this, as you just
said, as a critical part to really support the transition of
our military troops out at the end of 2014. They do go hand in
hand, which is one of the reasons the transition period for a
military withdrawal was established. So we will follow up with
you.
And Congressman Connolly, we are doing everything we can
think of to influence the Russians and the Chinese.
Particularly the Russians. They are the ones with the very
deep, longstanding relationship with the Assad family, with
Syria. They continue to sell arms to the Syrian regime. So we
know that if we can persuade them to work with us, at least on
the humanitarian issue, they will have access to Assad that
hardly anybody else does have. Certainly nobody in the West.
So it is a very troubling and frustrating situation,
because the Russians continue to say, oh, they are all for
humanitarian aid, but then they don't produce any plan that
Assad will sign off on. And perhaps after their upcoming
election they will be able to focus on the serious humanitarian
situation that is causing so much loss of life and suffering
inside Syria.
But we are not waiting. We are trying to work out other
ways of getting humanitarian assistance into Syria, and also
support efforts on the borders. Because people are fleeing.
They are coming out in Lebanon, in Jordan, in Iraq, and
especially in Turkey. So we will be there to try to help the
people who are coming out as well.
This is a terrible crisis that demands the entire world's
attention, and I hope that Russia will come and work with us to
try to resolve it.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. And Madam
Secretary, if I could yield 1 minute to Mr. Johnson, who has
been so patiently waiting there, and I don't want to end the
meeting without him having an opportunity. Thank you, Mr.
Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you so much, Ms. Chairman. It is a real
quick question, Madam Secretary, and thank you for being here
today. With its growing economy and vast foreign reserves, it
would seem that Beijing has more than enough money to deal with
many of the issues that U.S. foreign aid supports, like its own
citizens' health issues. Borrowing money from the Chinese
Government to spend back in China on health programs there
seems a particularly bad use of U.S. Government funds,
especially as Americans struggle to cover their own rising
healthcare costs. Why are we proposing $2 million in support of
health programs in China, when the Chinese hold an estimated
$1.2 trillion of U.S. debt?
Secretary Clinton. Well, Congressman, the remaining aid
that we are asking for goes to what we consider transnational
issues in which we have a stake. It was United States aid and
leadership that finally helped China respond to their own HIV/
AIDS crisis, which does have a positive effect on the epidemic
far beyond their borders. When we look at communicable
diseases, when we look at the need to try to help democracy,
human rights, good governance groups--there are a lot of brave
lawyers in cities in China that are standing up against
coercive practices.
So I think I will take it for the record and give you a
breakdown of the kinds of things we have been doing, but I
share your general point that we are certainly not looking to
support the development of China's economy. They are doing that
well enough on their own. But there are certain key values that
we still believe we can further within an aid relationship with
China.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, and thank you to Mr.
Duncan, Mr. Bilirakis, and Mr. Wilson. You are on my dance
card, and you will come up first next time.
Madam Secretary, before we adjourn, I would like to note
that since you have announced publicly that you do not intend
to serve beyond the end of this term, this is your final
appearance to testify on the budget before our committee. I
would like to thank you again so deeply for making yourself
available to answer our questions, today and during the past 3
years. And I hope that we have the opportunity to host you
again for other testimony prior to the conclusion of your
exemplary service. I thank you, mi amiga.
Secretary Clinton. Thank you.
Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. The meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:06 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
Notice deg.

\\

t
s\

\
