- THE RISING TERRORIST THREAT AND THE UNFULFILLED 9/11 RECOMMENDATION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE RISING TERRORIST THREAT AND THE UNFULFILLED 9/11 RECOMMENDATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 23, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-79

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

91-931 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Paul C. Broun, Georgia               Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    Brian Higgins, New York
Chair                            Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania         William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Ron Barber, Arizona
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Dondald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Jason Chaffetz, Utah                 Beto O'Rourke, Texas
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi       Filemon Vela, Texas
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Eric Swalwell, California
Richard Hudson, North Carolina       Vacancy
Steve Daines, Montana                Vacancy
Susan W. Brooks, Indiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
Mark Sanford, South Carolina
Curtis Clawson, Florida
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan O'Hara, Acting Chief Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Mr. Thomas H. Kean, Jr., Co-Chair, Homeland Security Project,
Bipartisan Policy Center and Former Chair, National Commission
on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Ms. Jamie S. Gorelick, Former Commissioner, National Commission
on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8

For the Record

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
DHS Jurisdiction Chart.........................................    19

THE RISING TERRORIST THREAT AND THE UNFULFILLED 9/11 RECOMMENDATION

----------

Wednesday, July 23, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:11 a.m., in Room
311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Michael T. McCaul
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McCaul, King, Rogers, Broun,
Meehan, Marino, Palazzo, Barletta, Daines, Brooks, Thompson,
Jackson Lee, Clarke, Barber, Payne, O'Rourke, and Vela.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. The committee is meeting today to examine key
issues contained in the Bipartisan Policy Center's research
report marking the 10th anniversary of the release of the
original 9/11 Commission report. I now recognize myself for an
opening statement.
Ten years after the 9/11 Commission provided
recommendations to prevent other terrorist attacks on the
United States soil, the terror threat from abroad remains real,
and we will continue to be challenged identifying home-grown
terrorists.
The current instability in the Middle East, the web of al-
Qaeda affiliates, and the rapid advance of extremist ISIS
militants are fueling the rise of new safe havens where
terrorists live, train, and plot future attacks.
In a recently-released anniversary report, the former
members of the commission reflect on the progress made and
provide recommendations on how to further enhance the security
of the United States. Specifically, the new report concludes
that some recommendations from the commission remain
unfulfilled, and one in particular has been largely ignored:
Reforming Congressional jurisdiction over the Department of
Homeland Security.
In 2004, the 9/11 Commission recognized the importance of
eliminating terrorist safe havens. The report stated,
``Terrorists should no longer find safe havens where their
organizations can grow and flourish. Our efforts should be
accompanied by a preventative strategy that is as much, or
more, political as is military.''
Those words were written a decade ago, yet safe havens for
terrorists not only still exist, they have expanded and beyond
the regions where the 9/11 attacks originated.
For instance, ISIS, an organization too extreme for al-
Qaeda, has made alarming territorial gains in both Syria and
Iraq, establishing the largest terrorist safe haven since 9/11.
The group's leader, al-Baghdadi, has declared himself head of a
new Muslim caliphate. ISIS has the ambition and now the
funding, weapons, and manpower to launch attacks against United
States' interests abroad and possibly into the homeland.
Furthermore, foreign fighters with valid travel documents
are flooding into the region, many from Western countries,
including the United States. Like ISIS, al-Nusra, the Syrian
al-Qaeda affiliate, has established training camps catering not
only to local extremists, but fighters coming from abroad.
These camps serve as training grounds for many, including the
American teenager from Florida who is believed to have carried
out a suicide bomb attack in May. Although he carried out his
attack in Syria, he could have instead attempted to travel back
into the United States following his training.
Self-radicalized terrorists like Nidal Hassan, who fatally
shot 13 people at Fort Hood in 2009, and Tamerlan Tsarnaev, one
of the perpetrators of the Boston Marathon bombings, were
allegedly influenced or used such extremist propaganda, rich
with content from jihadi fighting. The threats to the homeland
extend beyond the traditional battlefield also into the cyber
realm.
American companies, universities, defense capabilities, and
critical infrastructure are all under cyber attack. Most
concerning, however, is that the threat is outpacing our
readiness to combat it. One expert described our cyber
preparedness as being at ``September 10 levels.'' My concern is
that history will repeat itself when it comes to cyber and we
will not, as a Nation, acknowledge the gravity of the threat
until it is too late.
Another unfulfilled commission recommendation also
threatens American security. The continued fragmentation of
Congressional oversight of the Department of Homeland Security
makes us less agile in the face of these growing threats. DHS
is forced to expend scarce resources reporting to far too many
Congressional committees, resources that could be spent
protecting the American people. Ironically, this excess of
oversight actually leads to a lack of accountability because of
the mixed signals and conflicting demands of Congressional
committees.
In fiscal year 2013, according to the Department of
Homeland Security, the agency facilitated more than 1,650
briefings with Members of Congress or their staff, provided 161
witnesses who testified at 105 hearings, and engaged with
nearly all Members of Congress and dozens, if not 100
committees. This cost taxpayers tens of millions of dollars and
cost DHS 66 work years in man-hours.
To address these flaws, the 9/11 Commission Report
recommended that Congress ``create a single, principal point of
oversight and review for homeland security.'' This critical
step has yet to be taken, and it is cited in the commission's
latest report.
Just as the National Security Act of 1947 reorganized the
United States Government's military and intelligence agencies
into a unified Federal structure, the Homeland Security Act of
2002 unified several agencies into a single organization to
coordinate and unify National homeland security efforts. While
these changes were accepted by the administration, Congress, in
many cases, is still working under pre-9/11 authorities.
Congress needs to create clear jurisdictional lines to
ensure that DHS receives strong, centralized oversight and can
focus its efforts on its mission to protect the United States.
These steps are necessary to ensure the safety and security of
the homeland.
In the mean time, my committee will spend significant time
the remainder of this year and in the next Congress authorizing
key DHS components. Moreover, in partnership with the other
committees of jurisdiction, I intend to lead the first-ever DHS
authorization through regular order.
We are fortunate today to have the chairman of the 9/11
Commission, along with the former commissioner, Jamie Gorelick,
here today to offer their insights and perspectives. I hope our
hearing will help us create actionable solutions that can
address these shortcomings sooner rather than later.
I would like the opportunity today to thank the 9/11
victims' families who are with us here today. Through their
persistent efforts, the 9/11 Commission was established to
investigate that horrific attack on U.S. soil that we will
always remember and never forget. We thank them for their
continued commitment to secure the homeland.
[The statement of Chairman McCaul follows:]
Statement of Chairman Michael T. McCaul
July 23, 2014
Ten years after the 9/11 Commission provided recommendations to
prevent other terrorist attacks on United States soil the terror threat
from abroad remains real, and we will continue to be challenged in
identifying home-grown terrorists. The current instability in the
Middle East, the web of al-Qaeda affiliates and the rapid advance of
extremist ISIS militants are fueling the rise of new safe havens where
terrorists live, train, and plot future attacks.
In a recently-released anniversary report, the former members of
the Commission reflect on the progress made and provide recommendations
on how to further enhance the security of the United States.
Specifically, the new report concludes that some recommendations from
the Commission remain unfulfilled and one in particular has been
largely ignored--reforming Congressional jurisdiction over the
Department of Homeland Security.
In 2004, the 9/11 Commission recognized the importance of
eliminating terrorist safe havens. The report stated: ``Terrorists
should no longer find safe haven where their organizations can grow and
flourish . . . Our efforts should be accompanied by a preventative
strategy that is as much, or more, political as it is military.'' Those
words were written a decade ago--yet safe havens for terrorists not
only still exist, they have expanded well beyond the regions where the
9/11 attacks originated.
For instance, ISIS--an organization too extreme for al-Qaeda--has
made alarming territorial gains in both Syria and Iraq, establishing
the largest terrorist safe haven since 9/11. The group's leader, Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi, has declared himself head of a new Muslim caliphate.
ISIS has the ambition and now the funding, weapons, and manpower to
launch attacks against U.S. interests abroad and possibly the homeland.
Furthermore, foreign fighters with valid travel documents are
flooding into the region; many from Western countries including the
United States. Like ISIS, al-Nusra, the Syrian al-Qaeda affiliate, has
established training camps catering not only to local extremists but
fighters coming from abroad. These camps served as training grounds for
many including the American teenager from Florida who is believed to
have carried out a suicide bomb attack in May. Although he carried out
his attack in Syria, Abusahla could have instead attempted to travel
back to the United States following his training.
Self-radicalized terrorists like Nidal Hassan, who fatally shot 13
people at Fort Hood in 2009, and Tamerlan Tsarnaev, one of the
perpetrators of the Boston Marathon bombings, were allegedly influenced
or used such extremist propaganda, rich with content from jihadi
fighting.
The threats to the homeland extend beyond the traditional
battlefield into the cyber realm. American companies, universities,
defense capabilities, and critical infrastructure are all under cyber
attack. Most concerning, however, is that the threat is outpacing our
readiness to combat it. One expert described our cyber-preparedness as
being at ``September 10 levels.'' My concern is that history will
repeat itself when it comes to cyber and we will not, as a Nation,
acknowledge the gravity of the threat until it is too late.
Another unfulfilled Commission recommendation also threatens
American security. The continued fragmentation of Congressional
oversight of the Department of Homeland Security makes us less agile in
the face of these growing threats. DHS is forced to expend scarce
resources reporting to far too many Congressional committees--resources
that could be spent protecting the American people.
Ironically, this excess of oversight actually leads to a lack of
accountability because of the mixed signals and conflicting demands of
Congressional committees. In fiscal year 2013, according to the
Department of Homeland Security, the agency facilitated more than 1,650
briefings with Members of Congress or their staff, provided 161
witnesses who testified at 105 hearings, and engaged with nearly all
Members of Congress and dozens of committees. This cost taxpayers tens
of millions of dollars and cost DHS 66 work years in man-hours.
To address these flaws, 9/11 Commission Report recommended that
Congress ``create a single, principal point of oversight and review for
homeland security.'' This critical step has yet to be taken and is
cited in the Commission's latest report.
Just as the National Security Act of 1947 reorganized the United
States Government's military and intelligence agencies into a unified
Federal structure, the Homeland Security Act of 2002 unified several
agencies into a single organization to coordinate and unify National
homeland security efforts. While these changes were accepted by the
administration, Congress, in many cases, is still working under pre-9/
11 authorities.
Congress needs to create clear jurisdictional lines to ensure that
DHS receives strong, centralized oversight and can focus its efforts on
its mission to protect the United States. These steps are necessary to
ensure the safety and security of the homeland.
In the meantime, my committee will spend significant time the
remainder of this year and into the next Congress authorizing key DHS
components. Moreover in partnership with the other committees of
jurisdiction, I intend to lead the first ever DHS authorization through
regular order.
We are fortunate today to have the co-chair of the 9/11 Commission
Tom Kean, as well as former Commissioner Jamie Gorelick here to offer
their insights and perspectives. I hope our hearing will help us create
actionable solutions that can address these shortcomings sooner rather
than later.
I would like to take this opportunity to recognize the 9/11
victims' families who are with us today. Through their persistent
efforts, the 9/11 Commission was established to investigate that
horrific attack on U.S. soil. We thank them for their continued
commitment to secure the homeland.

Chairman McCaul. With that, the Chairman now recognizes the
Ranking Member, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank
you for holding today's hearing. I would also like to thank the
witnesses for their testimony.
Ten years ago, the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks
in the United States issued the official account of the
terrorist attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001. In that
report, the 9/11 Commission made a series of recommendations to
strengthen our counterterrorism efforts, foster information
sharing beyond traditional boundaries, and strengthen
Congressional oversight to improve the effectiveness of
homeland security measures.
While the Implementing 9/11 Commission Recommendations Act
addressed many of these recommendations, challenges still
remain. From the outset, the 9/11 Commission was tasked to make
recommendations to prevent another terrorist attack. In the 10
years since the report's release, we have seen the terrorist
threat change. The top leadership of al-Qaeda, the group that
claimed responsibility for the 9/11 attacks, has been
dismantled by the Obama administration.
Although al-Qaeda has been weakened, we remain vigilant
about persistent and emerging threats. We must closely monitor
the capabilities of al-Qaeda's affiliates who are thriving in
the untenable areas such as Iraq and Syria. Though many of
these groups' aspirations are localized to the countries in
which they operate, they do not espouse anti-American views
that are concerning.
We also must turn a blind eye to the threat of lone-wolf
actors in the United States. Some of these people are inspired
by al-Qaeda and domestic anti-Government and hate groups. From
counterterrorism efforts to succeed, we need to do a better job
of sharing information. That is the message from the 9/11
commissioners a decade ago, and that is their message today.
Last year's Boston Marathon bombing re-emphasized the need
for improvements in information sharing between both Federal
agencies and State and local authorities. The continued
evolution and escalation of al-Qaeda and its affiliates abroad
also underscores the need for strong intelligence and
information partnerships with our foreign allies. I fear that
some of our key relationships have been tested by high-profile
leaks about NSA programs and other counterterrorism efforts.
More needs to be done to fortify key information-sharing
relationships.
Also, I appreciate that the Bipartisan Policy Committee has
highlighted cybersecurity as an area of concern. As we become
more dependent on technology, opportunities for cyberterrorism
increase rapidly. Today, hostile nations, criminal groups, and
individuals seek to exploit information networks to further a
variety of individual, National, and ideological objectives. I
have been a major proponent of DHS's efforts to foster cyber
hygiene and timely information sharing, particularly among
critical infrastructure's owners and operators.
Though I know it is directly related to today's
proceedings, I do want to express, on the record, my hope that
bipartisan cybersecurity legislation that was approved by the
committee, Mr. Chairman, in February will be considered by the
House hopefully before August. We need to do more to create an
environment of vigilance that gives Americans confidence that
their personal data is private and secure, and allow the
Government to ensure the integrity of its information while
identifying and prosecuting cyber criminals when possible.
Further, as the Bipartisan Policy Committee also notes in
its report, the House, under both Democratic and Republican
majorities, has failed to consolidate authorizing and oversight
jurisdiction for each component of the Department of Homeland
Security into one Congressional committee. I agree with the 9/
11 commissioners that the fragmented oversight detracts from
the Department's National security mission. We have seen it
time and time again.
I am sure the Chairman would agree that this committee
should be the authorizing and oversight committee of the
Department of Homeland Security, but that comes with a price.
The price is asserting jurisdiction. I have been in the
Chairman's seat, tried to do it, and I welcome you to try to
get it done under your leadership.
It is disappointing that with 8 voting weeks left in
Congress, this committee is on track to receive its lowest
number of referrals since its inception. Looking forward, as we
continue to strengthen the Department of Homeland Security, we
must not forget the terrorist threat, but recognize it is
evolving.
Information sharing must be strengthened, and we must
foster greater cybersecurity protections, particularly on the
networks that are the backbone for critical infrastructure. I
look forward to working in a bipartisan manner to fulfill these
9/11 recommendations.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 23, 2014
Ten years ago, the ``National Commission on Terrorist Attacks in
the United States'' issued the official account of the terrorist
attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001. In that report, the 9/11
Commission made a series of recommendations to strengthen our
counterterrorism efforts, foster information sharing beyond traditional
boundaries, and strengthen Congressional oversight to improve the
effectiveness of homeland security measures.
While the ``Implementing 9/11 Commission Recommendations Act''
addressed many of these recommendations, challenges still remain. From
the outset, the 9/11 Commission was tasked to make recommendations to
prevent another terrorist attack. In the 10 years since the report's
release, we have seen the terrorist threat change. The top leadership
for al-Qaeda, the group that claimed responsibility for the 9/11
attacks, has been dismantled by the Obama administration. Although al-
Qaeda has been weakened exponentially, we remain vigilant about
persistent and emerging threats. We must closely monitor the
capabilities of al-Qaeda's affiliates who are thriving in unstable
areas such as Iraq and Syria. Though many of these groups' aspirations
are localized to the countries in which they operate, they do espouse
anti-American views that are concerning.
We also must not turn a blind eye to the threat of lone wolf actors
in the United States. Some of these people are inspired by al-Qaeda and
domestic anti-Government and hate groups. For counterterrorism efforts
to succeed, we need to do a better job of sharing information. That is
the message from the 9/11 commissioners a decade ago and that is their
message today. Last year's Boston Marathon Bombing reemphasized the
need for improvements in information sharing between both Federal
agencies and State and local authorities.
The continued evolution and escalation of al-Qaeda and its
affiliates abroad also underscores the need for strong intelligence and
information partnerships with our foreign allies. I fear that some of
our key relationships have been tested by high-profile leaks about NSA
programs and other counterterrorism efforts. More needs to be done to
fortify key information-sharing relationships.
Also, I appreciate that the Bipartisan Policy Committee has
highlighted cybersecurity as an area of concern. As we become more
dependent on technology, opportunities for cyberterrorism increase
rapidly. Today, hostile nations, criminal groups, and individuals seek
to exploit information networks to further a variety of individual,
National, and ideological objectives. I have been a major proponent of
DHS's efforts to foster cyber hygiene and timely information sharing,
particularly among critical infrastructure owners and operators.
Though I know it is directly related to today's proceedings, I do
want to express, on the record, my hope that bipartisan cybersecurity
legislation that was approved by the committee in February will be
considered by the House before August. We need to do more to create an
environment of vigilance that gives Americans confidence that their
personal data is private and secure, and allow the Government to ensure
the integrity of its information while identifying and prosecuting
cyber criminals when possible.
Further, as the Bipartisan Policy Committee also notes in its
report, the House, under both Democratic and Republican majorities, has
failed to consolidate authorizing and oversight jurisdiction for each
component of the Department of Homeland Security into one Congressional
committee. I agree with the 9/11 Commissioners that the fragmented
oversight detracts from the Department's National security mission. We
have seen it time and again.
I am sure the Chairman would agree that this committee should be
the authorizing and oversight committee of the Department of Homeland
Security, but that comes with a price. That price is asserting
jurisdiction. It is disappointing that with 8 voting weeks left this
Congress, this committee is on track to receive its lowest number of
referrals since its inception. Looking forward, as we continue to
strengthen the Department of Homeland Security, we must not forget the
terrorist threat, but recognize it is evolving.
Information sharing must be strengthened and we must foster greater
cybersecurity protections, particularly on the networks that are the
backbone for critical infrastructure. I look forward to working in a
bipartisan manner to fulfill these 9/11 recommendations.

Chairman McCaul. Thank the Ranking Member. I would like to
enter into the record reflections on the 10th anniversary of
the
9/11 Commission Report that just came out, and great work on
the part of the commission. Without objection, so ordered.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files and is
available at http://bipartisanpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/
default/files/files/%20BPC%209-11%20Com- mission.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are honored today to have two distinguished witnesses,
members of the 9/11 Commission. First, the Honorable Thomas
Kean is the co-chair of the Homeland Security Project at the
Bipartisan Policy Center. We had a great discussion there
yesterday, and I thank the two of you for that.
He is also the former chairman of the National Commission
on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States. The 9/11
Commission released its report in 2004, which has been an
integral part in shaping American National security. Prior to
chairing the 9/11 Commission, he served as Governor of New
Jersey and president of Drew University.
Sir, thank you for being here.
Next, we have the Honorable Jamie Gorelick. As a former
commissioner on the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks
Upon the United States, currently she is a partner at
WilmerHale, where she chairs the defense, National security,
and Government contracts practice group. She was one of the
longest-serving deputy attorneys general of the United States,
under which I was proud to serve as a low-level line Federal
prosecutor in the public integrity section. Prior to joining--I
don't know if she remembers me or not, but I certainly remember
her. Prior to joining the Department of Justice, Ms. Gorelick
served as the general counsel for the Department of Defense.
We thank both of you for being here. I now recognize
Governor Kean for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS H. KEAN, JR., CO-CHAIR, HOMELAND SECURITY
PROJECT, BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER AND FORMER CHAIR, NATIONAL
COMMISSION ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE UNITED STATES

Mr. Kean. Thank you. Well, thank you both for inviting us,
and thank the committee. This committee has done a great deal
already to keep our country safer, and we thank you for that
very much.
My friend and co-chairman Lee Hamilton hoped to be here
with us today, but he cannot be, unfortunately. He was unable
to come. So my colleague and friend, former 9/11 Commissioner
Jamie Gorelick, joins me in appearing before you today. We are
here, of course, to mark, for us, the 10th anniversary of the
9/11 Committee report, a document which, with your help, led to
major reforms in National security.
Last fall, we started among ourselves--many of us haven't
seen each other in 7, 8, 9 years--to consider how we might
observe the 10th anniversary of our report. What we decided was
we wanted to say something at that time which would help the
American public understand the terrorist threat we face today
and how that terrorist threat has changed over the last 10
years.
We also wanted to look back on how our own work 10 years
ago--and we think there are lessons to be learned in how we
have--how five Republicans and five Democrats happened to reach
bipartisan and unanimous agreement, especially because we share
the view that responding to the terrorist threat, taking the
important steps needed to protect the country, is a part of our
National security which simply must have a bipartisan approach.
To better inform ourselves, we reached out to many of our
country's foremost senior, current, and former National
security officials with responsibility for counterterrorism. We
included names of many of the officials in our report, and they
generously shared their time and did it with candor and
frankness. They answered all our questions with clarity. They
ducked none of them. We came away with the experience and
renewed admiration for the fact that this Government continues
to have a number of dedicated public servants in the security
area.
We held separate conversations, by the way, with each one
of these leaders, and yet we were struck by the fact that
across all of them, there was really a broad consensus and a
fear of the problems that were confronting us today and a worry
whether the American people really had a perception of how the
threat has changed and how serious that threat is today.
What we hope to succeed in doing in our paper is to amplify
for the public these common threads that these security
officials shared with us. I would like now to ask former
Commissioner Jamie Gorelick to summarize what we learned and
the key points in the paper.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Kean and Ms. Gorelick
follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Thomas H. Kean, Jr. and Jamie S. Gorelick
July 23, 2014
introduction
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, Members of the committee: We are
grateful for the opportunity to appear before you today. This committee
has been at the center of improving our country's defenses against
terrorist attacks. We are deeply grateful to you for your sustained
support of the 9/11 Commission's recommendations and your leadership in
reforming our National security institutions. Overseeing and guiding
the Department of Homeland Security, which is still a young and
evolving department, is one of the most important National security
duties of the Congress. Over the past decade, this committee has been a
steadfast champion of needed reform.
Today, we are appearing in our capacity as former 9/11
Commissioners. Governor Kean and Congressman Hamilton, the chair and
vice chair of the 9/11 Commission, now lead the Homeland Security
Project at the Bipartisan Policy Center. Drawing on a strong roster of
National security professionals, the Project's mission is to be a
bipartisan voice on homeland- and National-security issues. It works as
an independent group to monitor the implementation of the 9/11
Commission's recommendations and address other emerging threats to our
Nation.
On July 22, 2004, we issued The 9/11 Commission Report, the
official report of the devastating attacks of September 11, 2001. Ten
years later, the ten former members of the Commission reconvened, under
the auspices of the Bipartisan Policy Center, to take stock of the
terrorist threat and the country's readiness to face it.
continuing terrorist threat from al-qaeda and its affiliates
When we wrote our report 10 years ago, we were acutely mindful of
the responsibility we bore to the American people--and the families of
the victims--to provide the most complete account possible of the
events leading up to that terrible day. We used what we learned from
that awful history to make recommendations as to how to make America
safer. Today, we are pleased that most of those recommendations have
been enacted into law or adopted as policy.
A decade after releasing our report, we are struck by how
dramatically the world has changed. In the United States, Federal,
State, and local authorities have implemented major security reforms to
protect the country. Overseas, the United States and allies went on the
offensive against al-Qaeda and related terrorist organizations. Ten
years ago, many feared that al-Qaeda would launch more catastrophic
attacks on the United States. That has not happened. While home-grown
terrorists struck Fort Hood and the Boston Marathon, with tragic
results, and while major attempted attacks on aviation have been
disrupted, no attack on a scale approaching that of 9/11 has taken
place.
U.S. and allied efforts have badly hurt ``core'' al-Qaeda, the
organization that attacked us on 9/11. Al-Qaeda's leadership has been
seriously diminished, most notably by the killing of Usama bin Ladin.
The blows the United States has dealt those who struck us on 9/11 are a
credit to the ceaseless work of dedicated men and women in our military
and in our intelligence services, who often serve their country without
accolades or even public acknowledgement.
However, the threat from jihadist terrorism persists. While core
al-Qaeda has been damaged in recent years, its affiliates and
associated groups have dispersed throughout the greater Middle East.
Al-Qaeda spinoffs--some small, some worryingly large--now have a
presence in more theaters of operation than they did half a decade ago,
operating today in at least 16 countries.
In The 9/11 Commission Report, we said that one of the key lessons
of the 9/11 story was that there can be ``no sanctuaries'' for
terrorist groups. Geographic sanctuaries (like pre-9/11 Afghanistan)
enable terrorist groups to gather, indoctrinate and train recruits, and
they offer breathing space in which to develop complex plots (like the
9/11 attacks). The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (``ISIS'') now
controls vast swaths of territory in Iraq and Syria, creating a massive
terrorist sanctuary. Afghanistan could revert to that condition once
American troops depart at the end of 2014. The recent Taliban offensive
in Helmand Province illustrates that danger.
Meanwhile, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (``AQAP'') remains
interested in striking the United States. The Saudi-born Ibrahim al-
Asiri, AQAP's chief bomb maker, devised the underwear bomb worn by Umar
Farouk Abdulmuttalab. Al-Asiri remains at large and there are concerns
that he is gaining experience in the concealment and miniaturization of
bombs and manufacturing them from nonmetallic materials, making them
far harder to detect.
More than 10,000 foreign fighters have flooded into Syria. Once
there, these fighters have access to on-the-job training in military
operations, fashioning improvised explosive devices, and using assault
weapons. Many come from Western Europe, but more than 70 are believed
to be from the United States. One of these Americans, a Florida man in
his early 20s, recently blew himself up in a suicide attack in northern
Syria, the first instance of an American suicide bomber there. American
counterterrorism and homeland security officials and European allies
are deeply concerned that hardened fighters from Syria may redirect
their venom and battlefield experience toward the United States or
their European countries of origin. In at least one instance, this
appears already to have happened: The suspect in the deadly May 24
shooting attack on the Jewish Museum in Brussels had spent more than a
year in Syria, where he is believed to have joined up with jihadist
groups.
Federal Bureau of Investigation Director James Comey has described
the situation in Syria as, in several respects, ``an order of magnitude
worse'' than the terrorist training ground that existed in Afghanistan
before 9/11. It is unclear whether the United States and its allies
have sufficient resources in place to monitor foreign fighters'
activities in Syria (and neighboring Iraq) and to track their travel
back to their home countries.
The convulsions across the Muslim world, from the Sahel to
Pakistan, create opportunities for extremist groups to work their will.
Opportunities to exert power may, to some extent, keep terrorists
focused on their home regions. According to the State Department,
terrorist attacks rose 43 percent worldwide in 2013. These attacks
killed 17,891 and wounded 32,577. The Department reports that the vast
majority of these incidents were local or regional, not international,
in focus.
It does not follow, however, that terrorist groups have relaxed
their enmity toward the United States and its allies. The 2012 attack
on U.S. facilities in Benghazi, Libya, resulted in the deaths of four
Americans, including the American ambassador. In 2013, al-Shabaab
attacked the Westgate mall in Nairobi, Kenya, murdering more than 60
innocent people. These are reminders that dedicated terrorists can
successfully execute deadly attacks against targets associated with the
United States and the West.
Some National security officials believe that the forces of
Islamist extremism in the Middle East are stronger than in the last
decade. Partly, this is a consequence of the Arab Spring and the power
vacuums and ungoverned spaces that have sprung up in its wake. Partly,
it is the result of America's inability or reluctance to exert power
and influence in a number of places. Officials are also deeply
concerned about the region's seemingly endless supply of disaffected
young people vulnerable to being recruited as suicide bombers. We
explained in The 9/11 Commission Report that the ``United States finds
itself caught up in a clash within a civilization,'' which ``arises
from particular conditions in the Muslim world.'' This clash has only
intensified since then.
Our assessment is that the terrorist threat is evolving, not
defeated. Al-Qaeda's various spinoffs are, at the moment, enmeshed in
their own local conflicts, but hatred of the United States remains a
common thread. While some of these groups are not capable of striking
the U.S. homeland, they may seek to attack outposts of the U.S.
presence overseas, including diplomatic posts, military bases, or
softer targets such as American businesses in foreign countries.
Home-grown terrorism remains a serious concern as well. Purveyors
of hatred spread their radical ideology over the internet, attempting
to recruit new terrorists both abroad and in the United States. The
risk is not only that new terrorist cells are being created; on-line
propaganda can also influence ``lone wolf'' terrorists, who can be
extremely difficult for authorities to spot. The support of the
American Muslim community in opposing extremism, increased awareness by
the public at large, and a massive law enforcement effort have made the
United States a much harder target than it was on 9/11. But the tragedy
of the Boston Marathon bombing is a reminder of how dangerous home-
grown extremists can be, despite these advances.
In sum, the terrorist threat has evolved, but it is still very real
and very dangerous. The absence of another 9/11-style attack does not
mean the threat is gone: As 9/11 showed, a period of quiet can be
shattered in a moment by a devastating attack. The pressing question is
whether the United States is prepared to face the emergent threats of
today--and those it is likely to face in the years to come.
unfinished business
The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004
ushered in the most significant restructuring of the intelligence
community since 1947. Despite this progress, some recommendations from
The 9/11 Commission Report remain unimplemented.
First and foremost is reform of Congress's committee structure for
overseeing homeland security. Your committee is Congress's expert on
DHS and should be preeminent in terms of overseeing and legislating for
the Department. Our recommendation of 10 years ago remains urgent
today: ``Through not more than one authorizing committee . . . in each
house, Congress should be able to ask the Secretary of Homeland
Security whether he or she has the resources to provide reasonable
security against major terrorist acts within the United States and to
hold the Secretary accountable for the department's performance.''
Regrettably, an unwieldy hodgepodge of other committees still exercises
residual oversight and legislative jurisdiction over DHS. In 2004, we
remarked with astonishment and alarm that DHS reported to 88 committees
and subcommittees of Congress. Incredibly, DHS reports that that number
has since increased, to 92.
This is not an academic concern. In The 9/11 Commission Report, we
said that Congress, as a whole, adjusted slowly to the rise of
transnational terrorism as a threat to National security. In the years
before September 11, terrorism seldom registered as important, and
Congress did not reorganize itself after the end of the Cold War to
address new threats. Splintered committee jurisdiction resulted in
episodic and inadequate attention to terrorism and to the overarching
strategies needed to combat terrorist organizations. Put simply, when
everyone is responsible, no one is.
We knew that, of ``all our recommendations, strengthening
Congressional oversight may be among the most difficult.''
Unfortunately, we were right. While the Executive branch has, at
Congress's behest and urging, undergone historic change and
institutional reform, Congress has proved deeply resistant to reforming
its own structures for DHS oversight. In particular, it has delayed in
yielding to this committee preeminent authorizing jurisdiction and
oversight responsibility over all DHS components.
Again and again, past and present DHS senior managers have told us
that this fragmented Congressional oversight is counterproductive to
National security goals. DHS is still a young department, continually
learning and striving to improve. Congress should help guide senior
officials in managing the Department as a cohesive whole, rather than
as a collection of disparate parts. The proliferation of oversight
committees has the opposite effect. More than 90 different committees
and subcommittees cannot develop expertise about the Department as a
whole. Nor can committees that only oversee certain DHS components
understand the effect of what they do on the Department's overall
mission, or compare all of the competing priorities among which
Department leaders must choose. Emblematic of this inability is the
fact that Congress has not, since the Department's creation, enacted a
final comprehensive DHS authorization bill setting policy and spending
priorities for the Department.
Reporting to this vast array of committees also places an
extraordinary administrative burden on DHS, which must prepare reams of
written testimony and respond to countless questions for the record.
This burden distracts from other, higher-priority tasks.
Effective Congressional oversight is especially important in areas,
like homeland security, where much of the Government's activity
necessarily occurs out of public view. Unlike other areas of policy,
where the press and public can themselves monitor what their Government
is doing, the public must rely on Congress to be its eyes and ears with
respect to sensitive and Classified National security programs.
We have full confidence that this committee, and the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, have the
expertise and focus to best do that job for the American people. It is
long past time for other committees to step back and allow you to fully
take the reins for DHS. At the very minimum, the next Congress should
sharply reduce the number of committees and subcommittees with some
jurisdiction over the Department. The Department of Homeland Security
should receive the same streamlined oversight as the Department of
Defense.
These changes should take effect when the next Congress convenes
and the House and Senate adopt new rules in January. Planning should
begin now to make this possible.
The 9/11 Commission recommended creating a Director of National
Intelligence (DNI) to oversee National intelligence centers on specific
subjects of interest across the U.S. Government, and to manage the
National intelligence program and oversee the agencies that contribute
to it.
Congress created that office in the Intelligence Reform and
Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004. Despite differences of view 10 years
ago, senior leaders in the intelligence community today believe that
the Office of the DNI has found its role in the National security
apparatus. The DNI has been accepted as the manager of the community.
Joint duty is becoming more common: More than 10,000 intelligence
community civilian employees are certified as having done joint duty,
with 1,000 doing so each year.
Many senior officials told us that personal chemistry among the
leaders of the intelligence community and Pentagon is as important, if
not more important, than legislated authority for the overall smooth
and effective functioning of the National security system. It is not
just a law that makes an organization or system work--it is the people.
The current DNI's conception of his office has enabled him to
successfully manage the community and elicit cooperation from its
components. In particular, future DNIs should follow these key
policies: (1) Coordinating the work of the various intelligence
agencies, rather than replicating that work or turning ODNI itself into
an operational entity; (2) advancing interagency information sharing,
unified IT capabilities, joint duty, and other community-wide
initiatives; and (3) providing centralized budgetary planning to ensure
that the community as a whole possesses the most effective combination
of tools.
Today, the Office of the DNI continues to be hampered by Congress's
failure to update its practices to reflect post-9/11 reforms. One such
anachronism: Intelligence community funds are not conveyed in a single
appropriation. Instead, many community funds are buried in
appropriations for the Department of Defense (DOD), a vestige of by-
gone days when the top-line intelligence budget was Classified. With
that figure now a matter of public record, there is no longer any
reason to hide intelligence funds in the DOD budget.
A unified intelligence community budget, managed by the Director of
National Intelligence and overseen by a single subcommittee in each
house of Congress, would enable the DNI to manage community resources
without navigating a bureaucratic labyrinth. It would also help ensure
better oversight of the intelligence budget. Cohesive and comprehensive
oversight of all intelligence community funding would be easier if
appropriations for all 16 member agencies, plus ODNI, were conveyed in
a single bill.
We believe that there is today greater agreement on this point than
10 years ago. We were particularly struck by the statement of a former
senior leader of the Department of Defense that the DNI should have
full authority to manage the intelligence community's budget. To that
end, we reiterate our original recommendations: Congress should pass a
separate appropriations act for the National Intelligence Program. The
DNI should receive all funds appropriated in that bill and have full
authority to apportion them among community agencies and reprogram them
as needed to meet new priorities.
the importance of data collection and analysis
In The 9/11 Commission Report, we noted the importance of
intelligence collection and analysis in counterterrorism, and we
recommended reforms to improve both. Intelligence gathering is the
single most effective way to thwart terrorism--but identifying and
finding terrorists, who go to great lengths to cover their tracks, is a
very difficult task. Often no single report is definitive. Rather, it
is the accumulation and filtering of vast amounts of information,
zeroing in on what is relevant, that leads to intelligence
breakthroughs. This was true of the hunt for bin Ladin, which was
conducted over a decade and built on the efforts of hundreds, if not
thousands, of intelligence officers.
Data collection and analysis are vital tools for preventing
terrorist attacks. Terrorist networks rely on a variety of technologies
to communicate, to plan operations, and to recruit new personnel. The
Government currently makes use of powerful technology to collect and
analyze data from communications. Those capabilities will be enhanced
as technology advances in the years ahead. As these technical
capabilities advance, it will be even more important to define legal
parameters that limit these technologies' uses to true needs.
We believe these programs are worth preserving, albeit with
additional oversight. Every current or former senior official with whom
we spoke told us that the terrorist and cyber threats to the United
States are more dangerous today than they were a few years ago. And
senior officials explained to us, in clear terms, what authorities they
would need to address those threats. Their case is persuasive, and we
encountered general agreement about what needs to be done.
Senior leaders must now make this case to the public. The President
must lead the Government in an on-going effort to explain to the
American people--in specific terms, not generalities--why these
programs are critical to the Nation's security. If the American people
hear what we have heard in recent months, about the urgent threat and
the ways in which data collection is used to counter it, we believe
that they will be supportive. If these programs are as important as we
believe they are, it is worth making the effort to build a more solid
foundation in public opinion to ensure their preservation. While the
American public has become more skeptical, now is the time to engage
them in an honest, transparent discussion of these issues.
Greater oversight would also help bolster these programs'
legitimacy. It imperils public and political support for these programs
to limit Classified briefings on their details (and often existence) to
only eight leaders in Congress, the ``Gang of Eight.'' All Members of
the intelligence oversight committees in the House and Senate should be
briefed. The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, whose
creation was a 9/11 Commission recommendation, is finally functioning,
providing an array of well-informed voices on the civil-liberties
implications of sensitive National security programs.
information sharing
The 9/11 Commission Report said that the ``biggest impediment to
all-source analysis--to a greater likelihood of connecting the dots--is
the human or systemic resistance to sharing information.'' Before 9/11,
the Government had a weak system for processing and using the vast pool
of intelligence information it possessed. One striking example of this
inadequacy: In January 2000, the NSA acquired information that could
have helped identify one of the eventual hijackers, Nawaf al Hazmi.
This information was not shared with other agencies because no agency
made a specific request for it.
Such failures underscore that intelligence sharing among agencies
is critically important and will not happen without leadership driving
it.
The tone is set at the top. Information sharing has improved
significantly since 9/11. There is now a regularly-scheduled meeting on
threats convened by the President and attended by the heads of agencies
with responsibilities for counterterrorism. The President is directly
involved. This forum helps ensure the President is kept up-to-date on
threats to the country and what each agency is doing in response. The
President's active participation ensures that agencies collaborate
(rather than compete) and that they are focused on delivering their
best. The meeting also enables senior officials to share information
with each other. This valuable practice should be carried over into
future administrations.
A major step toward improved information sharing is underway in the
form of the Intelligence Community Information Technology Enterprise
(ICITE). In this system, the intelligence community will have a single
desktop for agencies in the community, providing a common computing
environment. Instead of each agency building its own software, which
was the practice in the past, the community is implementing an
architecture that will be used by all. Authorized users will be able to
use common email and related applications. The intelligence community
cloud will be privately hosted inside the intelligence community
itself, managed under the community's security standards and under the
community's security watch.
The National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC), also a 9/11 Commission
recommendation, is performing well. NCTC has helped make progress
toward instilling a ``need-to-share'' culture among agencies
responsible for counterterrorism, and we have heard that NCTC has
received exceptional cooperation from the key intelligence collectors
in the Government. In general, we believe that Government officials now
recognize that the Government cannot prevent terrorist attacks without
bringing together relevant information from many different sources and
agencies. Responsibility for making this a reality ultimately rests
with managers in each agency: The system must hold accountable every
manager with responsibility for sharing information.
One aspect of information sharing is lagging somewhat. ``Vertical''
sharing--sharing among Federal, State, local, and Tribal officials, as
well as the private sector--needs attention. Before 9/11, this form of
sharing was woefully inadequate. It has improved substantially since
then, but the process is still maturing. It is possible that if Boston
authorities had been advised of concerns about Boston Marathon bomber
Tamerlan Tsarnaev's interest in connecting with overseas extremist
elements, they could have kept a watchful eye on him.
We note, however, that this cannot be a one-way street. State and
local law enforcement can also be generators of useful information. The
9/11 hijackers had several encounters with local law enforcement during
their time in the United States. Tamerlan Tsarnaev also had several
run-ins with the law. At a minimum, State and local law enforcement
officials should be trained to recognize the precursors of
radicalization.
biometric exit tracking
The 9/11 Commission Report identified terrorists' travel and need
for identification documents as vulnerable points in their operations.
With the REAL ID Act gradually being implemented by the States, the
country is poised to fulfill our recommendation that the Federal
Government ``set standards for the issuance of birth certificates and
sources of identification, such as driver's licenses.''
But, as you know, another key recommendation, a biometric exit-
tracking system, has still not been implemented, and there is no finish
line in sight. Without reliable exit tracking, our Government does not
know when a foreign visitor admitted to the United States on a
temporary basis has overstayed his or her admission. Had this system
been in place before 9/11, we would have had a better chance of
detecting the plotters before they struck. Creating an exit-tracking
system is a difficult and expensive challenge, but there is no excuse
for the fact that 13 years after 9/11 we have neither this capability
in place nor a clear plan to get there.
the cyber threat
Our mandate as a commission was to recommend National security
reforms to prevent another 9/11. In our recent conversations with
senior National security leaders, however, we encountered another
concern over and over again: Intensifying attacks on the country's
information systems, in both the private and public sectors.
Over the past decade, cyber threats have grown in scale and
intensity, with major breaches at Government agencies and private
businesses. The threat emanates largely not from terrorist groups but
from traditional state actors such as China, Russia, and Iran. The U.S.
Government has confirmed that Chinese-government-backed hackers gained
access to more than 2 dozen of America's most advanced weapons systems,
including missiles, fighter jets, and advanced ships. In September
2013, Iran hacked into U.S. Navy computer systems. Iran has also been
behind cyber attacks on banks and oil companies operating in the Middle
East. The Shamoon virus, attributed by many to Iran, infected a key
state-owned oil company in Saudi Arabia and left 30,000 computers
inoperable.
Non-state actors are also causing increasing damage in the digital
world. Sophisticated computer hackers have infiltrated, exploited, and
disrupted military, Government, and private-sector systems. Denial-of-
service attacks have tied up companies' websites, inflicting serious
economic losses. A Russian teenage hacker may have been behind the
massive malware attack on the retailer Target, which compromised the
credit- and debit-card data of 40 million customers. Increasingly,
cyber attacks are targeting smartphones as well. Cyber attacks can
constitute another form of asymmetric terrorism. The Syrian Electronic
Army is a collection of computer hackers who are loyal to Bashar al-
Assad but who operate independently. It has targeted Syrian opposition
political groups as well as Western websites. This is the first
instance in the Arab world of an organization of civilian cyber experts
forming to target groups it deems to be enemies.
Security officials are concerned that terrorist groups' skills in
computer technology--and in particular in manipulating offensive cyber
capabilities--will increase in the years ahead. Terrorists may also
seek to acquire malicious software from adversary nations or from
hackers who are proficient at malware coding. This will make an already
unpredictable and dangerous cyber realm even more so.
The importance of the internet to American life and to societies
across the globe has expanded at a phenomenal rate. As the country
becomes ever more dependent on digital services for the functioning of
critical infrastructure, business, education, finance, communications,
and social connections, the internet's vulnerabilities are outpacing
the Nation's ability to secure it. Just as the United States needs to
protect its physical infrastructure, so too must we protect the cyber
domain.
A growing chorus of senior National security officials describes
the cyber domain as the battlefield of the future. Yet, in the words of
one former senior leader with whom we spoke, ``We are at September 10
levels in terms of cyber preparedness.'' That needs to change. One
lesson of the 9/11 story is that, as a Nation, Americans did not awaken
to the gravity of the terrorist threat until it was too late. We must
not repeat that mistake in the cyber realm.
Government officials should explain to the public--in clear,
specific terms--the severity of the cyber threat and what the stakes
are for our country. Public- and private-sector leaders should also
explain what private citizens and businesses can do to protect their
systems and data.
We support cybersecurity legislation that would enable private
companies to responsibly collaborate with the Government in countering
cyber threats. Companies should be able to share cyber threat
information with the Government without fear of liability.
The U.S. Government can and should do more to deter cyber attacks
from state adversaries. The administration should determine and
communicate through appropriate channels what the consequences of cyber
attacks against us will be, and then act on the basis of those
statements. And we should work with our allies to establish norms of
cyber space, clearly defining what is considered an attack by one
country on another.
The administration and Congress also need to clearly delineate the
respective responsibilities of the various agencies in the cyber realm.
DHS and other domestic agencies need to complement, rather than attempt
to replicate, the technical capabilities of NSA.
waning sense of urgency among the american people
One of America's most pressing challenges as a country is to resist
the natural urge to relax our guard after 13 years of a draining
counterterrorism struggle. In the absence of a major attack, it is
easier for some who did not lose loved ones to forget the trauma of 9/
11. Increased vigilance has helped us avoid another attack on that
scale, but vigilance inevitably wanes over time.
A complacent mindset lulled us into a false sense of security
before 9/11. The first World Trade Center bombing in 1993, the East
Africa embassy bombings in 1998, and the Cole attack in 2000 were
warnings of the virulence of the al-Qaeda threat. But the United States
did not do enough. In particular, the Government did not explain to the
American people the pattern that was emerging. Without appropriate
public understanding, there was insufficient political support for the
strenuous counterterrorism efforts that would have been necessary to
defeat al-Qaeda.
Avoiding complacency also means taking seriously small things that
could be warning signs of something larger beginning to take shape.
American officials knew suspicious men were attending flight schools,
but in the pre-9/11 mindset it was not considered urgent. Is the April
2013 rifle attack on an electrical substation in Metcalf, California, a
harbinger of a more concerted assault on the National electrical grid
or another component of critical infrastructure? What might we be
missing today that, 3 years from now, will prove to have been a signal,
a piece of a larger mosaic?
As we survey the changes in Government made during the last decade,
it is evident that the Government has come a long way. But the threat
remains very real, and the United States cannot lose focus now.
Terrorists can still hurt Americans, abroad and here at home.
To sustain public support for policies and resource levels,
National security leaders must communicate to the public--in specific
terms--what the threat is, how it is evolving, what measures are being
taken to address it, why those measures are necessary, and what
specific protections are in place to protect civil liberties. In this
era of heightened skepticism, generalities will not persuade the
public. Leaders should describe the threat and the capabilities they
need with as much granularity as they can safely offer.
conclusion
Over the last 13 years, we have damaged our enemy, but the ideology
of violent Islamist extremism is alive and attracting new adherents,
including right here in our own country.
Our terrorist adversaries and the tactics they employ are evolving
rapidly. We will see new attempts, and likely successful attacks. One
of our major deficiencies before the 9/11 attacks was that our National
security agencies were not adapting quickly enough to the new kind of
enemy that was emerging. We must not make that mistake again.
While over the past decade our Government's record in
counterterrorism has been good, the terrorist threat will be with us
far into the future, demanding that we be ever-vigilant.
Thank you for inviting us to testify, and for this committee's
long-standing leadership on these critical issues.

STATEMENT OF JAMIE S. GORELICK, FORMER COMMISSIONER, NATIONAL
COMMISSION ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE UNITED STATES

Ms. Gorelick. Thank you, Tom, and thank you to this
committee for this opportunity to appear before you today.
The report points out in general that the Government has
done a good job in keeping us safe over the last 10 years.
Obviously, we experienced tragedies like the Fort Hood
shootings, like the Boston Marathon bombings, but we haven't
experienced anything like the attack of 9/11 and its magnitude
and its seriousness.
Adding to that, our military and our intelligence
capacities have done great damage to core al-Qaeda,
particularly to al-Qaeda in Afghanistan, and notably we have
killed Osama bin Laden and taken out a good bit of the
leadership of core al-Qaeda.
These are very significant achievements. Maybe because of
them, we are concerned that the attention of the American
people may be drifting away from the threat of terrorism to
other problems. I mean, you don't need to watch television for
very long to see how many problems and challenges are facing
this country. Because we have been mostly safe, the American
public may be suffering from a waning sense of urgency, and
that may be one of the key observations that we made, that
there is not the sense of urgency that there was understandably
in the immediate aftermath of 9/11. We have to guard against
this sense of complacency, because the threat of terrorism
persists and, in many ways, is greater than it was after 9/11.
You have al-Qaeda spin-offs and a metastasis, if you will,
of terrorist threats. You have an extremist ideology in which
the hatred of the United States is a key part. The groups that
have that ideology have proliferated around the world, and al-
Qaeda spin-off groups now operate in at least 16 countries
around the world.
Of great concern--and I know this committee has looked at
this--is the fanatical Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, ISIS,
which has conquered much of the territory of western Iraq,
slaughtering thousands. That territory expands the sanctuary
for terrorists in much the same way that Afghanistan offered
sanctuary for al-Qaeda. This increases the threat to the United
States and to the West generally.
ISIS has existed for months and years, but its accelerated
advances in the recent months have made that area in Iraq and
Syria a much more dangerous place, and you can see that just in
the last several weeks. You have dozens of Americans, according
to the officials with whom we spoke, and maybe thousands of
Europeans, who have traveled to Iraq and Syria to join the
conflict. The danger is that they may redirect those
battlefield skills that they are developing there when they
return to our shores or to their home countries.
Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula also has very advanced
bomb-making skills. Those skills are being taught to a new
generation of extremists who are fighting in Syria and Iraq,
and this poses also a really serious threat to us, particularly
a threat to commercial aviation.
Then you have home-grown terrorists, what has been referred
to commonly as the lone wolves who have been radicalized over
the internet and pose a significant danger. You have, as the
Chairman mentioned, Major Hassan who carried out the Fort Hood
shootings. You have the Tsarnaev brothers who carried out the
Boston Marathon bombing.
We in our recommendations centered on how to protect the
country from terrorism. As Tom said, we had these
conversations, really, across the board with the people who
lead our National security agencies and those who previously
held those jobs. We were struck by the persistent concern over
cyber and our--and the cyber attacks that are coming both from
criminal elements and from foreign countries and from foreign
actors to threaten this country, whose National security, after
all, sits on a bed of privately-owned enterprise.
The vulnerability of our cyber system, the experience that
we have had with vast theft of our intellectual property over
the internet, both are really serious internet--really serious
National security challenges. The assessment of the people we
talked to was that our capacity to fight this threat is lagging
behind the threat itself.
We also address in our report--and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding it up--we hope that people will avail themselves of
it. It is a great deal shorter than our previous report, but we
hope no less helpful. We address the NSA's data collection.
In the last 10 years, the scale of data collection has
increased dramatically, but it is one of our very best tools in
fighting an asymmetric war. Obviously, one needs oversight. One
needs protection of civil liberties. But the tools are very,
very important. It is incumbent upon Government to explain to
the public and persuade the public that these tools are
necessary, and we feel that the leadership of this country has
failed in that regard, and that the public is more worried
about the Government than it is about terrorist enemies who
would do us harm.
As the Chairman and the Ranking Member have noted, the
Congress has not dealt effectively with the structure of
oversight of Homeland Security. The fact that when we made our
report calling for more unified oversight, there were 88
committees and now there are 92 committees of oversight is not
a good trend. I know you have this chart, but it is worrying
that this is what Congressional oversight looks like for the
Department of Homeland Security.
On the positive side, the director of National intelligence
and the National Counterterrorism Center, we feel, are working
very well. We are very pleased with those developments.
Information sharing has been much improved. However, the
information sharing from the Federal law enforcement agencies
to local law enforcement has not been as good as it should be.
As Tom noted, we reflected for a few minutes on how we came
to our unanimous conclusions a decade ago. We would just call
again on our National leaders for bipartisanship, particularly
in the area of our National security.
In many ways, we are safer today than we were a decade ago,
but the threat continues. We saw this as a generational
struggle, and that struggle goes on, and the greatest danger we
fear is that of complacency. We thank you for having this
hearing to address these important issues.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Ms. Gorelick. The Chairman
recognizes himself for questions.
I agree, complacency is a danger here, and let me just say
again how much I enjoyed our discussion yesterday at the
Bipartisan Policy Center. You touched on a lot of the key
points that we talked about. I think as we look at the threat,
it is evolving. The idea of a large-scale 9/11-style attack
probably most likely more difficult to pull off today because
we have put a lot of safeguards in place and we have been
successful at stopping many of these plots.
However, we did have the Boston bombing. We did have the
Fort Hood shooting. We do have al-Qaeda affiliates spreading
throughout northern Africa and the Middle East at a rate we
have never seen before, owning more territory than they ever
have with now-increasing capability and training and money and
funding.
So while there is a narrative that, well, bin Laden has
been killed and al-Qaeda is sort of on the run, and core al-
Qaeda has been decimated by drone strikes, I think that is a
dangerous narrative, as well, because I think the threat is not
getting less. It is getting probably greater. When that threat
grows overseas, so, too, does it to the homeland.
So my first question is, and particularly as we look at
ISIS, because I think the Secretary of Homeland Security--I
have had very good discussions about the threat coming out of
Iraq and Syria now--as being the No. 1 threat to the homeland,
and it may not--they are still trying to build bombs to blow up
airplanes. They are still a threat to the aviation sector,
AQAP, working with al-Nusra, ISIS, obviously, taking the
caliphate, talking about hitting the West at some point in
time.
This is more of a general question, but how do we protect
the United States from these threats?
Mr. Kean. Well, the threat is absolutely one of the most
serious facing us today. We said in our report 10 years ago
that if Iraq became a failed state, it went right to the top of
the list. Because, remember, when they planned 9/11, it took
them 3 or 4 years to do the plot, to do the training, and all
of that. We said in our report, they must never again have a
place to train and have that kind of security, because if they
do, they can again plan a massive assault, like 9/11 on the
United States, instead of these worrisome, but minor assaults.
So the idea of ISIS, if it becomes a haven for terrorists--
and the same thing, by the way, of Afghanistan after we leave
becomes a haven again--that is a great danger to the American
homeland. I think we should use every aspect of the United
States' power to prevent any terrorist haven from ever, ever
being allowed to exist again. There is no greater danger to the
American homeland than a haven for terrorists to plot and plan
over a number of years.
Chairman McCaul. I agree with that.
Ms. Gorelick.
Ms. Gorelick. I would add just two points to that. One is,
our greatest resource is intelligence, intelligence gathering
about who was there and what their intentions are as to the
United States. When you add that to steps taken to prevent
people from coming back to the United States or traveling
through Europe to the United States on passports that are good
for travel here, those are two pretty good protections.
We were speaking earlier about the visa waiver program. The
premises of it were that travel from Europe was basically not a
threat to the United States. But if people have gone to Iraq
and Syria and have gotten the kind of training that Governor
Kean has spoken about and can easily travel to the United
States after that, that is a threat to us.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you for that answer. I would like to
refer to a chart, and I had the opportunity to talk about this
yesterday, and I am going to continue to talk about this. I am
going to the Aspen Institute on Saturday. This will be a great
discussion. I think all Members of this committee should know
that this is a reality.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. This really defies the No. 1
recommendation of the 9/11 Commission. It was never carried out
by Congress. We had the Executive branch consolidate under DHS.
If the Congress still continues to silo over jurisdictional
battles over who has oversight over the Department of Homeland
Security and legislative matters, my concern is not that I am
trying to strengthen this committee. What I am concerned about
is what this does to the American people and the distraction
and detraction that it provides when you have the Secretary
having to report to almost 100 committees and subcommittees.
Almost 100 in the Congress.
Congress has not done its job in this regard. It takes away
from the primary focus on mission that the Department was
designed in the first place to do, and that is to protect the
American people. This is dysfunction. If you looked in the
dictionary and looked under dysfunctional, you would probably
see this map in the dictionary.
So my question to you is, as we try to move forward--and I
will leverage this commission, I will leverage the victims'
families to help us in this effort to change this process once
and for all--I know we have two prior Chairmen who tried to do
this sitting right here. Unfortunately, they were not
successful. I am going to do everything in my power to try to
change this.
So what would be your recommendation how to fix this?
Mr. Kean. Well, look, to begin with, people have got to
understand that dysfunctional oversight makes the people of
this country less safe, that it impedes the Department in doing
its job, that it hurts the Department leadership. We have had
four Secretaries now in our Department, two Republicans and two
Democrats. All four of them have told me personally and told
our group, nothing is more important than changing this and
trying to get the oversight right.
The fact they spend 25 percent of their time or more
testifying or appearing before a whole myriad of Congressional
committees when they should be back in their office protecting
the American people is crazy. If you had 100 bosses--think
about it. Whatever work you did, if you had 100 bosses, how
would you report to them? How would you get your job done? The
fact that the Department of Defense, which has this huge
responsibility, huge budget, has much less oversight than the
Department of Homeland Security, is crazy.
Now, there is nobody--nobody we have ever talked to who
doubts this is a problem. There is nobody we would ever talk to
who says there shouldn't be a solution to it and Congress
shouldn't reform itself in terms of oversight of the
Department, no public group, no private group, no Republican
group, no Democratic group. Heritage agrees. So does the
other--everybody who has looked at it says this is something
that ought to be done.
We have been talking about it for a number of years, as a
number of you have. You and I both know that the only time they
can get done really is at the beginning of the new Congress. It
has got--we have got to stop preparing for that now, if it is
going to be done.
All I can say is, all 10 of us feel so strongly about it,
the families of 9/11 feel so strongly about it, every public
group that looks at it feels so strongly about it, whatever we
can do to help you get this done, believe me, we will do.
Chairman McCaul. We appreciate your assistance in that.
Ms. Gorelick, do you have any final words?
Ms. Gorelick. No. That is well said, Tom.
Chairman McCaul. Yes, I think that is excellent. Thank you
so much for that.
The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I don't think there is any disagreement
with the statement you just made, Governor. It is clear in the
minds of everyone who is--as this Chairman said, that two
former Chairs agree wholeheartedly that jurisdiction is
important, and because we don't, as a country, we are less
safe. I look forward to working with this Chairman, as the
Ranking Member, to get as much of that chart reduced to reality
as possible.
So with that, there have been a couple of incidents that
come up. The Snowden incident, we learned some things from it.
But also, it has created some real harm with traditional
allies. How do you think we need to fix situations like that,
Governor, so that those countries that we rely on for
intelligence and information sharing, that we make sure that we
keep that?
Mr. Kean. What I believe in--my personal point of view--and
I think the point of view, really, of all of us on the
commission--is that we think there should be a greater degree
of openness with the American people. I believe personally that
everything has changed, in terms of the terror threat, the
technology, all of that. That requires a different response
from Government, but I believe the Government in a democracy
has a duty to the American people to say, all right, this is
the problem and these are the methods we are planning to use to
deal with this problem.
That involves, obviously, also talking about who gets
information and what their qualifications are, whether the
contractors that are hired by the Government are using the
proper means to make sure that only the people with a need to
know get only the information they need to know.
But in general, American people were surprised by this. I
know a lot because of our work on 9/11 and since, I was
surprised by it. Maybe some of you were surprised by it. I
don't know how deeply what we were doing was shared even with
this committee.
It is not enough in my opinion to share it with the Gang of
Eight. I think not everything--how we do everything, but the
idea of what we are trying to do and why we are trying to do
it, the more broadly we share that with the American people,
the more the American people will support us.
We need to share. We need to gather this information. We
know we have to do it in order to trap the kind of terrorists
that attacked this country. But if you do it as a surprise and
let it be leaked by a person like Snowden, then the American
people are blindsided. Then you have got all sorts of people
worried about why the Government is looking at them, why they
need this information, because they were surprised.
So my--you know, my recommendation is that, as widely as
possible, trust the American people. If they understand the
danger, they will understand the need for the solutions. But if
you don't trust the American people and try to do everything in
secret and then they find out about it, they are not going to
trust the American Government again.
So, anyway, my recommendation would be just getting new
problems out there, the terrorists are trying to attack us in
new ways, the cyber threat is very real, so the methodologies
we have to use to fight that threat have got to change, but we
are telling the American people what we are doing ahead of time
and why we are doing it.
Mr. Thompson. Well, and thank you, Governor. You talked
toward the end about the cyber threat. Ms. Gorelick, this
committee is trying to get some of its tentacles around this
issue. We have pushed legislation out.
What do you think DHS's role in the cybersecurity
discussion ought to be?
Ms. Gorelick. Thank you, Ranking Member Thompson, for that
question. This is an issue that I have been working on since
the early to mid-1990s. It is not a new problem. One of the
critical issues is the relationship between the resources that
we have on the intelligence and military side versus the
resources and responsibilities that we have domestically. Since
that time, of course, we have had the advent of the Department
of Homeland Security.
No. 1, I don't think the Department of Homeland Security
can replicate the resources at NSA. NSA is world-class. We
can't build two of them. So the question then becomes, what are
the authorities that the Department of Homeland Security itself
needs? I would ask the Secretary what authority he needs when
he is the one directing the activities of NSA domestically.
We did not discuss this as a commission, so I am just going
to give you my personal view. I think that the Department of
Homeland Security has to bring to bear the awareness that it
has of our domestic vulnerabilities and the relationships with
our domestic industry. But the resources have to remain in NSA.
Making sure that we have a well-oiled machine in that
regard is extremely, extremely important. I would run a
tabletop with the two parts of Government to make sure that
they are really working smoothly in that regard.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman recognizes Dr. Broun from
Georgia.
Mr. Broun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A lot has changed. A lot hasn't changed since y'all's
commission put out your report 10 years ago. I appreciate the
update from y'all's commission. I think it is extremely
important.
But I want to go to two issues that you did not talk about
during your original testimony. One of those is border
security, and the other one is the visa waiver that Ms.
Gorelick mentioned just briefly, which I blame four
administrations, frankly, for not securing the border. The four
administrations, two Republican and two Democrats now, have
refused to obey the law that was put on the books in 1986 under
the Reagan administration to deal with illegal aliens in this
country to secure our border.
Right now, we have a flood of illegal aliens coming into
this country. We see on the TV all these kids which is a flood
of these unaccompanied alien children, UACs, coming into this
country, but that is just a small segment of people who are
coming across our border. Would you all agree with me that it
is absolutely imperative for our own National security for us
to do everything that we can to make sure that anybody who
comes in this country is vetted and brought in this country
legally?
Mr. Kean. Yes.
Mr. Broun. What could we do to secure our border? What kind
of recommendations would you make? I think we ought to put the
National Guard on the borders, north and south, and do
everything we can to electronically monitor, to use drones, to
use every asset that we have to secure the borders. But I see
this as a huge National security issue, because there are a lot
of people coming across the border today that are OTMs, other
than Mexicans. We know they are coming from the Middle East,
they are coming from Africa, places like Somalia, where we have
a tremendous growth of groups that want to destroy our country.
Mr. Kean. Yes, as a group, we didn't talk about border
security. We have had recommendations, for instance, that REAL
ID, which is when somebody is in this country, they should have
an ID that can't be copied. States--we ask States be required
to do the driver's licenses so that they can't be duplicated so
easily for illegal purposes. That was one of the problems of 9/
11, that all these people who were in this country to do damage
to us had phony IDs that were duplicated.
Another thing we recommended is that even the people who
are allowed to come legally, we don't know when they leave. So,
for instance, the 9/11 hijackers overstayed their welcome. They
overstayed their visa times, and we didn't know it. We still
don't know it.
If somebody comes in, we know how to let them in, but we
don't know how long they stay. We don't know how many people
are here illegally because their visas have run out. That is a
couple of our recommendations that are still pending in the
area of security, of who is in this country.
But border security is something we--obviously, very
important, this committee has addressed it. People are talking
about it a lot. But it is not something that we talked about a
lot within our commission this time. We simply didn't have the
resources at the time to do the investigation.
Mr. Broun. I hope our current Congress and administration
will insist that we secure our border, because it is actually a
tremendous security problem. I want to go to something that Ms.
Gorelick mentioned earlier, and I think that I agree with what
she said, and that is about the Visa Waiver Program.
I think we have a marked change in the environment in
Europe and in countries that we allow visa waivers. We are
allowing people to come in this country under the Visa Waiver
Program. Would you both agree that we must change--or, I think,
end the Visa Waiver Program and stop the ability for people
coming in this country that want to do harm to Americans?
Ms. Gorelick. I don't know enough to say that it needs to
be stopped. We--as the Governor said--didn't have investigative
authority. We just were able to talk to individuals within the
Government and formerly within the Government who were kind
enough to share their time and their thoughts with us.
But it does strike us as a pertinent inquiry to ask whether
the premises of the original program are still correct and, if
they are not, whether there needs to be any adjustment to the
program. Because as I recall, the premises of the program were
that these Western countries, whose citizens we allow to come
into the United States with minimal procedures, were safe, they
had strong processes for themselves, protecting against
terrorism, and thus to enhance travel among those countries and
the United States. We would have a Visa Waiver Program.
Well, if you have people carrying passports, which allow
them simply to get on a plane and come to the United States,
who are fighting with ISIS in Iraq and Syria, perhaps the
premise of that program is no longer correct. I would ask the
question, because I think it is a pertinent one.
Mr. Broun. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time is expired, and
I think you all for being here. But until we secure our
borders, until we know who is here, and we start enforcing the
laws, nothing else matters, in my opinion, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Chairman recognizes Ms. Clarke from New
York.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both so much
for being here and sharing with us your wealth of knowledge.
I want to circle back to the questions around the sort of
breach of confidence in the American people with the unearthing
of the NSA scandals. I am sure you are familiar with the
controversy surrounding NSA's bulk collection and metadata
programs. The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board found
that these programs were illegal.
Could you give us a bit more of your thoughts, given the
uptick of lone wolf terrorist attacks? It seems as if it is
necessary for more funding and training to go into local law
enforcement and not to large-scale data programs. Why should
Congress rely on the NSA's metadata collection program as a way
to prevent a lone-wolf attack?
Ms. Gorelick. Sure. The data programs are, in my personal
view, and I think in the view of the commission, fundamental to
the safety of the United States. That is not to say that they
should not be subject to strict oversight to protect the civil
liberties of our citizens. They should be. The need for them
should, as Governor Kean has said, be explained to the American
people.
When you are carrying out an asymmetric war, where a lone
wolf can do tremendous damage, or 19 people can do horrendous
damage, one of the best tools that you have is the collection
of information. My worry about the Snowden revelations is that
they undermine the faith of the American people in our National
security activities.
I think those activities are important. I think the case
has to be made for them. I think that people need to be
reassured that some of the things that have been said about
them are not true, and to the extent that there remain worries,
there need to be safeguards put in place, but I personally--and
I think the commission feels this, as well--feel that it is
critically important that we maintain the ability to do
surveillance and analysis to track people who would do us harm.
Ms. Clarke. I think the--breaking down the whole metadata
into more simplistic terminology for Americans then makes a
distinction, because certainly we are concerned about our right
to privacy. But folks are not clear on what metadata actually
is. I think that that has caused a bit of the consternation
that we are all feeling.
Ms. Gorelick. If I might say one other thing about that,
the reluctance of the intelligence community to talk about
these programs actually did the programs a great deal of harm.
Because when the report first came out on the so-called PRISM
program, for example, it suggested that there was a big vacuum
cleaner at the back of Google and Facebook that took all
communications and fed it to the Federal Government. Well, that
is not true. But the truth of what the program is and is not
never caught up with the original stories.
Mr. Kean. I would say, we talked a little bit about the
public's fatigue in some ways with this issue and their lack of
attention these days. I think the two are tied together. I
think at the very highest levels of this Government, the public
has got to be informed of what the threat is today, not what it
was 10 years ago, what it is today and how serious that threat
is.
Then, along with that, they have got to be told what and
why we are doing to protect the American people, because there
is all sorts of confusion out there. I mean, this committee
knows, but the people don't. I mean, I get the darnedest
questions, and you probably do, too. People have no idea what
this is all about. They do think that people are following them
around with cameras or snooping on their phone messages or
emails. They are not.
Ms. Clarke. So----
Mr. Kean. We have got to tell the American people that, but
tell them what we are doing and why we are doing it, and it is
to protect them, because this is what the threat is. I just--I
think that is--at this point, it has got to come from the
highest levels.
Ms. Clarke. So just quickly--I have got 4 seconds--can DHS
play a greater role in the intelligence community?
Mr. Kean. Well, DHS has got a bit of a different role. It
has got to cooperate totally with the intelligence community.
It has got to be a seamless web. The importance of DHS to me is
that I think even if the threat is just a lone wolf, maybe even
if it is a bigger threat, it is probably not going to be
stopped by a member of the FBI. It is probably going to be
stopped by some local law enforcement or maybe even just a
private citizen.
I mean, it struck me that in that attempt to bomb Times
Square, Times Square, there are more police per square inch
than any place else in the world. Yet who was the one who
discovered it? It was a street vendor who reported it. When he
reported it, then the action went right back up. That is what
is going to happen again.
So people--DHS makes the connections with the local
community, and that has got to be seamless. That is--we are not
there yet. We are--thanks to our recommendations in part, the
vertical sharing of information is now pretty good, much better
than it was. But the horizontal is not as good as it ought to
be, and it has got to be a lot better to protect the American
people.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you. Yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Mr. Palazzo is recognized.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for being here. Enjoying hearing your testimony. I
want to elaborate on something the Chairman started off with in
his opening statements and I think followed up with some of his
questions, and it is about Congressional reform.
I think that is too important just to skip over really
briefly. I think it is--and so I would like to just go over
some of the statements that we have from the 9/11 Commission
recommendation. Congress should create a single, principal
point of oversight and review for homeland security.
Congressional oversight for intelligence and counterterrorism
is now dysfunctional.
Well, a lot of people think Congress is dysfunctional. I
think the more people that find out that this--that the
Department of Homeland Security has to report to over 119
committees, subcommittees, caucuses, and commissions, they are
going to realize the answer to why we are dysfunctional is
because we can't even, you know, focus on homeland security.
I have every confidence in the Chairman, in the Ranking
Member, that this--that homeland security affairs need to be
centralized in this committee and this committee alone.
Secretary Chertoff has stated that committees that have no
homeland security focus risk directing DHS agencies in a way
that conflicts with broader National security strategy. Of
course, you know, everybody on this committee I think agrees.
The most pressing is former Homeland Security Secretary Tom
Ridge stated, oversight is the duty of Congress. It is your
responsibility and is an absolute--absolutely necessary. But
the current number of Congressional committees with homeland
security jurisdiction is not oversight. It is overkill.
So I would like to open that, you know, Congressional
reform questioning back to you to--for you to be able to take
the time that you need to expand on it. How can we fix it?
Hopefully, going into the 114th Congress, leadership will
realize how important it is we got to pull, you know, whatever
the--and, also, I guess, whatever the obstacles are, we have to
eliminate them.
Maybe you could share your thoughts on what those obstacles
are, as well.
Mr. Kean. Well, we made 41 recommendations, broadly
supported by the American people as a whole and by this
Congress. Forty of them have been implemented in whole or in
part, 40 of them. One is outstanding, and only one. It stands
there glaring, really, as the one thing that hasn't been done
to protect the American people, and it is the United States
Congress.
The Congress was wonderful. You know, the Congress got
together and reorganized the intelligence department, passed a
whole series of laws, worked--except for the one affecting
Congress.
I haven't found anybody outside of Congress or, frankly,
inside of Congress who disagrees with the recommendation. I
haven't found anybody standing up and saying, yeah, there
should be 90 committees. I mean, there is no argument there. No
single person anywhere that I have found in leadership, out of
leadership that has said that is not the right thing to do.
But they don't do it. That is what is so frustrating to us
and frustrating to everybody who has looked at it. I say, when
people from the right, people from the left, people from the
center all say the same thing is important to preserve National
security in this country, they expect it to be done. Ten years,
got worse.
Ms. Gorelick. What you could have happen is the next
disaster. After the next disaster, someone will ask, who in
Congress was in charge? Who was performing the oversight? As
much as the title of this committee would suggest that it is,
the reality that you will have is that dozens of committees
are. Everyone knows that when everyone is in charge, no one is.
But it would be too bad if it takes another disaster to make
that point.
Mr. Palazzo. Well, that was well said. I do hope leadership
gets a copy of the testimony here today, Mr. Chairman, that we
can hopefully change that going into the 114th Congress. Real
quick. Cyber attacks, some people say that is America's biggest
National security threat. Your testimony highlights that we are
at pre-9/11 mindset when it comes to cybersecurity. What is
your assessment of the U.S. Government, and particularly DHS,
evolving capabilities to mitigate against and attack against
Government computer networks, but also maybe private-sector
assets, such as our grid, our satellites, and other things?
Mr. Kean. We talked to every leader, I think, in this
Government with major responsibilities for National security,
plus a number of those who are no longer in Government but
still involved. Every single one of them said we are not doing
what we should be doing to protect ourselves against
cybersecurity. Because this stealing of information is so
invisible to the American public, they don't realize what a
disaster it is. They don't understand that we are losing the
capacity to develop some weapons systems or they are being
stolen by other countries. They don't know that some of our
technology which could create great jobs in this country and
are important for our defense is being stolen today as we sit
here, because it is silent.
I think Government, businesses don't always like to admit
they have been robbed in a cyber way. So we don't read about
it, and the public isn't really informed on it. But I think the
leaders we talk to, I think that was probably their biggest
concern that we were way behind in putting together an approach
to cyber, and in a number of ways, No. 1 in the Government
itself and, No. 2, the Congress had not yet been able to get
together on a cyber bill.
Ms. Gorelick. I would add two things. One is, you asked
both about the defense of Governmental computers and also about
the private sector. I think the Government is doing much better
at protecting itself and its own systems than it is helping the
private sector protect itself. I think, I think we think--our
vulnerability in the latter area is greater.
Now, this is hard, because having the Department of
Defense, for example, defending a telephone system, a power
grid, a transportation system, a banking system in a way that
it would defend itself has all kinds of complexities to it. It
is hard.
I will just say one thing. I did a mock tabletop that was
on CNN. It was organized by former Secretary Chertoff. He
played the role of the National security adviser, and he asked
me to play the role of the attorney general. I asked him ahead
of time whether--you know, if he could tell me what legal
issues he thought would emerge so that I could prepare, and he
said, oh, don't worry about it. This is not so much about legal
issues.
As the hypothetical unfolded in this exercise, everyone,
before they acted, would ask me, as the mock attorney general,
can I do this? I think that the issue of what the authorities
of our Government agencies are to come to the aid of a system
under attack is still a very much live question and may be one
of the hardest in this country, because we are uncomfortable
with having our National security apparatus operating in the
private sector.
But if you think about what the real threats are, an enemy
who would shut down our power grid, for example, those are real
threats to which I don't believe we have great answers at the
moment. I would press our leaders on this, and I would ask the
hard questions. I think you are right to focus on this.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. Chairman recognizes Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Governor Kean, Ms.
Gorelick, thank you for your public service, your testimony
today. So much of what you advised us on in your initial report
and in this reprise this year resonate, obviously, with this
committee, most importantly the concentration of jurisdiction,
responsibility, and oversight. That makes so much common sense,
it is hard to argue with. I don't know why we haven't been able
to do it, but, you know, we will add my efforts to the cause to
ensure that it happens.
I wanted to--because the issue of border security was
raised, I wanted to touch upon it, welcome your comments on it,
should you like to. If not, I would also like to ask you about
your recommendations related to the authorization and use of
military force.
But when it comes to border security, I want to make sure
that we don't conflate problems and mislead and misdirect the
public and policymakers. By any measure today, the Southern
Border is as secure as it has ever been. If you look at
apprehensions, on the eve of 9/11, in 2000, we had 1.6 million
apprehensions at our Southern Border. Last year, it was
420,000. This year, given the spike in refugees and asylum-
seekers from Central America, it may come close to 500,000, but
it is still a fraction of what it was 15 years ago on the eve
of 9/11.
I represent El Paso, Texas. The committee is sick of
hearing me say this, but I want to make sure I get it out in
front of you. It is the safest city of America 4 years in a
row, despite being the largest binational community in the
world, conjoined with Ciudad Juaarez in Mexico.
The National Guard, drones, border fencing, none of those
would have stopped the 9/11 terrorists. As you have said in
your answer to my colleague earlier, that was really an issue
of visa overstays and ensuring that we understand who is in
this country, how long they are here, what they are doing, and
when they depart. So I wanted to kind-of clear the record on
whether or not the border is secure.
On the issue of the authorization and use of military
force, I would love to understand more specifically what you
are thinking about. You know, I--along with my constituents--
are wary with the number of years that we have been at war, the
lives lost, the treasure spent, and the inconclusive results,
whether you look at Iraq, whether you look at Afghanistan, what
did we purchase with those lives and that money?
Yet you can't ignore the threat that ISIL poses to us,
should they gain control of the levers of a state, a
functioning state, and be able to issue passports, be able to
print currency, have those protections that statehood offers.
What is your advice on how we move forward with this
authorization? What would you recommend to us to ensure that we
are safeguarding the homeland's interests and yet not
committing ourselves to perpetual war?
Mr. Kean. What is difficult is that the administration in
action is relying on a resolution that was passed for a
specific purpose a long time ago. It has never been revisited.
I am a historian by training. I believe very, very strongly
that the Congress has a very important role when it comes to
whether or not this country should commit troops. It should
never give up that role. It should fight for it.
I worry very much that, as long as we just let that
resolution sit out there and let this administration--future
administration use that instead of coming to an understanding
of what Congress's role and what the administration role is and
doing it openly, that we are going to get ourselves in trouble.
It is a hard one. It is very, very hard. I understand why
people feel they would rather not deal with it. But when you
commit American forces and American lives, very, very important
that Congress has got to have a role that everybody
understands. I don't think they do right now.
Mr. O'Rourke. Jamie.
Ms. Gorelick. I would just add a couple of thoughts. One is
that I don't think the current actions of the Executive branch
are legally vulnerable for relying on the current
authorization. But it is better policy for there to be a debate
about what we should and should not be doing as a country.
Congress, as Tom says, has a very important role here. The
debate, if you have it, will be a hard one, because there will
be people who say, enough is enough, we don't want to do
anything, we are done. There will be people who say, the threat
is very real, we can't unilaterally back off from the fight,
and here are the authorities that we need. It is a hard
argument. It will be a tough argument. But it is an argument
that should be had. It might actually help to explain to the
American people what the current threat is.
Our view is that it is sort of in many ways out of sight,
out of mind. Given that we are sending troops to be in harm's
way, given that our intelligence community resources are
putting themselves, those people in harm's way, it would be a
very helpful discussion for Congress to have.
Mr. O'Rourke. Great. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman recognizes Mrs. Brooks.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, it was
wonderful to visit with you right before the hearing. So thank
you so very much for being here.
In your report, you did talk about something that I want to
shift gears a little bit, the possibility of a major biological
attack that in terms of the numbers killed and the
psychological impact that it would have, that it would be so
devastating.
I chair the Emergency Preparedness, Response, and
Communications Subcommittee, and we have had a couple of
hearings on--and actual briefings on the threat of a biological
attack. We believe that that is a very real possibility. We
also know and heard from testimony from Dr. Bob Cadlick and Tom
Ingelsby that the threat is very real. We had a hearing on
that.
But the administration has eliminated the position of
special assistant to the president and senior director for
biodefense policy, a position that did exist in the Bush
administration. I am wondering your thoughts on whether or not
there is sufficient attention and focus on the possibility of a
biological attack, again, one of those types of attacks that I
think the American people truly have no real understanding of.
Are we doing--what should we be doing to better educate the
public and even Members of Congress and the country about what
that means, what we should be doing, the importance of tools
like BioWatch, and the importance of those investments?
Anything--and particularly after we have seen what has happened
in Syria, with Assad, and now that we know we have so many
Westerners, you know, possibly, you know, in Iraq and Syria.
You know, what kind of concern and attention should we be
giving to biological?
Mr. Kean. Biological--to deal with some of these things
without scaring the American people to death is sometimes
difficult. But we always said about biological the same thing
we said about nuclear, really. We didn't think it was the most
likely, but the results if it was successful would be so
devastating that we had to do everything in our power on the
preventative side from educating the American people, which I
don't think we are doing sufficiently in that area, to doing
whatever we can do in Government to prepare, both
unfortunately, to prepare in two ways. One is around educate
the American people to prevent it. The other is, God forbid it
should ever happen, are we prepared medically to deal with the
after-effects? Are we doing enough? Probably not.
But it is a difficult, difficult subject to deal with, with
the American people, I think, anyway.
Ms. Gorelick. A low-probability, high-consequence event,
very much worried us in our first report. We remain concerned
about it and very much appreciate, Congresswoman Brooks, that
you are spending so much time on this, as are others, the
Center for Biosecurity and others.
We don't know--we did not have the resources to look into
whether the Executive branch is properly organized on this. We
do know that there are a lot of people who are looking at it.
It is my impression that on the resilience that Tom referred
to, the preparedness for an event, we are in much better shape.
You could see that in part in how well-organized the medical
community was in Boston in the aftermath of the marathon
bombing to respond. I think the medical community has actually
made great strides.
But what we are doing to prevent such an event, what our
surveillance is of pathogens and the like, we just don't know,
but it remains with us a very persistent worry.
Mrs. Brooks. The only other question I would like to ask is
what your observations are about--and, again, this is what our
committee is focused on--our interoperable communications
issues. With FirstNet standing up and finally getting started,
any closing--and my time I have remaining--any thoughts you
would like to talk about, the level of interoperable
communication success or lack thereof?
Mr. Kean. It was one of our biggest frustrations that that
recommendation took so long. People, as you know, died on 9/11
because policemen couldn't talk to firemen. People died in
Katrina because people in helicopters couldn't talk to people
in boats because these things weren't--and I know we have now
got something finally in place, but I would suggest the
function of this committee and the Congress is to monitor that
very, very carefully and make sure it is being carried out not
just in certain regions, but all over the country in a way that
first responders, emergency management can talk to each other,
because that is--that saves lives, not just in terrorist
attacks, but in hurricanes and floods and all sorts of other
emergencies.
I would just--that is--we haven't got the power to do it as
citizens, but as a committee, I would ask you please to monitor
that as carefully as possible and make sure it is done the way
it was supposed to be done.
Ms. Gorelick. I would second that.
Mrs. Brooks. Well, thank you. Pleased to share, we are
having a hearing, Ranking Member Payne and I are having a
hearing on--in early September after the recess on FirstNet and
its progress and where we need to go. So thank you. Thanks for
all you have done for the country. Yield back.
Chairman McCaul. It is a good transition to Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the Ranking Member.
It is a real honor and a privilege to have one of the greater
Governors that the State of New Jersey ever had the fortune of
serving the State, contributed in many ways to our State and to
our Nation.
I think the statute of limitations has run out, so I can
say that I voted for Governor Kean in his second term.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Payne. I am not supposed to say that, but it is a
testimony to his dedication and commitment to all the citizens
of the State of New Jersey and for this country, so we thank
you.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
Mr. Payne. Defending our homeland relies on, you know,
effective information sharing, as we were just talking about,
because various intelligence agencies and also from our
international partners. Since 9/11, how has information sharing
improved in the intelligence community? Where is there
significant room for improvement? Can DHS play a greater role
in the intelligence community?
Mr. Kean. Well, information sharing is a lot better, a lot
better, particularly across agencies. As you know, some of us
believe that 9/11 might have been prevented if the intelligence
agencies had shared information they had, because it would have
resulted in the apprehension of at least some of the terrorists
and that might have disrupted the plot. So it is very, very
important.
We believe since this Congress established the DNI, and the
DNI is still a very new part of Government, but what we gain
from talking to people across a wide variety of Government
agencies is the confidence that DNI is finally working, that it
seems to be coordinating the way we intended when we wrote the
report and the Congress intended when they passed the bill and
that it is coming into its own. That was very, very
encouraging.
I would say the problem on sharing, I think--and this is
homeland security--is vertical sharing, whether or not people
in the Federal Government trust people at the local level,
because they have to. That is--if there isn't that shared
trust, if the State policemen, the local policemen, the local
agencies aren't sharing information with the Federal Government
back and forth on a matter of trust, then we are not going to
ever protect ourselves properly.
So is the sharing much better? Yes. Is the sharing
vertically, particularly with the local level what it should
be? No. I think Homeland Security has got to continually work
on that.
Mr. Payne. Ms. Gorelick.
Ms. Gorelick. I would just add a couple of things. As
Governor Kean said, the director of national intelligence has
done a very good job of deciding the rules of the road with
respect to sharing. The National Counterterrorism Center has
become the fulcrum that one wants to see. So we have broken
down silos across the Government.
There has to be wide sharing of information of
counterterrorism information, and it has to move very quickly.
The challenge is to make sure that people who don't need to
know certain facts, certain information don't get that, and
that is the next stage of development that has to occur here,
because otherwise you get a Snowden or a Bradley Manning, which
is a terrible threat to our National security to have somebody
who doesn't need to know taking that information and
proliferating it.
So we are very pleased with what we have seen in the
progress that the DNI has made and the NCTC. We think there is
yet progress to be made in informing State and local police and
other first responders in communities so that they can be of
help, as well.
Mr. Payne. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I will
yield back. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Barletta is recognized.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, the 9/11 Commission Report makes several
connections between enforcement of our immigration laws and
National security. Page 98 of the report describes how
terrorists would inevitably benefit from any form of legal
status. Terrorists fear deportation, and they don't care about
American citizenship. They simply need to find a legal way to
remain in the United States.
Another section of the 9/11 Commission report describes the
importance of enforcing the immigration laws Congress has
already passed, such as the establishment of an exit system to
track visa overstays. The report describes how INS, now CPB,
initiated but failed to bring to completion two efforts that
would have provided inspectors with information relevant to
counterterrorism, a proposed system to track foreign student
visa compliance, and a program to establish a way of tracking
travelers' entry to and exit from the United States.
The report urged full implementation of a biometric exit
system. The report also describes how border security should
not be seen as a bargaining chip in immigration reform, but
rather a significant National security concern. The report
states, indeed, after 19 hijackers demonstrated the relative
ease of obtaining a United States visa and gaining admission
into the United States, border security still is not considered
a cornerstone of National security policy. We believe that it
must be made one.
The 9/11 Commission further noted on page 390 of its report
that all but one of the 9/11 hijackers acquired some form of
United States identification document, some by fraud. As a
result, the commission recorded that the Federal Government
should set standards for the issuance of birth certificates and
sources of identification, such as driver's license.
Now, Governor Kean, why do you think the Department of
Homeland Security continues to drag its feet in completing the
biometric exit system? What kinds of threats continue to slip
through the crack as a result?
Mr. Kean. Well, part of it, frankly, is just enforcing the
laws we have. Sixteen of the 19 terrorists came in with some
form of phony visa or phony identification. Then, of course, as
you say, they easily got driver's licenses and credit cards and
all of that, and they were roaming around this country, even
though some of them were wanted in other parts of the world. A
lot of that has been corrected.
We believe still, very strongly, in the biometric system.
My understanding is, the resistance has come from certain
States. There are a number of States who have done it. A number
of the driver's licenses we now carry are biometrically done
and would stand up against any kind of scrutiny, but certain
States have not yet, I don't think, done it yet, and I would
encourage us to make them comply with the law like they are
supposed to do it.
So it is a--and everything we said in the report I think we
still stand by today. We are not where we should be still. We
have done a lot. Most of our recommendations have been
fulfilled in part or in full, which you mentioned some of them
that haven't been and we still stand by them.
Mr. Barletta. Yes, I quote the 9/11 Commission Report
often, because it was passed by Congress, signed by the
President, is law, but yet we continue to ignore it, whether it
is the States offering driver's license to people who are
undocumented, and undocumented means we don't know who they
are. They don't have documentations.
Mr. Kean. Yes.
Mr. Barletta. So we are issuing a legal form for people to
exist here in the United States without really knowing who they
are. Even when we talk about immigration reform, again, that
violates the concept of that report, because of the fraudulent
documents, and we don't know who we are allowing to stay here.
Without border security first--you know, any State that has an
international airport is a border State, in my opinion, because
people can easily--and nearly 50 percent of the people that are
here illegally didn't cross the border. They come on a visa.
Mr. Kean. Yes, and we would also, again, recommend you look
at this--you look at finding a way to track people who overstay
the visas, because that is what the terrorists did.
Mr. Barletta. Or method of entry for people that want to
hurt us.
Mr. Kean. We had no idea that they were still here, because
we have no way of seeing how long people stay in this country.
Mr. Barletta. So a true border security bill won't be a
true border security bill unless we implement a biometric entry
and exit so that we know everyone that--whether they are coming
or going in the country, because just simply at our physical
borders, north and south, isn't enough.
Mr. Kean. It is not enough. You are right.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman recognizes Mr. Barber.
Mr. Barber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses, not only for your testimony
today, but also for the important patriotic duty that you
performed as members of the commission and now to give us an
update on progress on the 10th anniversary of your initial
findings and report.
I want to talk about a few issues that we have discussed in
part, but a couple we haven't. First of all, when the Chairman
showed the chart illustrating the lines of responsibility that
subcommittees and committees have over Department of Homeland
Security, it was for me the first graphic depiction of what we
have been talking about since I got here in 2012.
Unbelievable. I saw that in the Times on Sunday and I
thought, somebody is trying to make a point, and they made it
really well, because look at this chart. We have to get to the
bottom of this. Congress--this Congress, obviously, won't do
it. No time left. But I believe it is an essential priority and
charge of--when the Congress comes back into session in 2014.
Do you have any estimate at all--does anybody have an
estimate of the number of hours that the Department of Homeland
Security must put in to answering the questions from over 100
different organizations, entities, and committees? Do you know
that?
Mr. Kean. Somebody talked about it today, didn't they?
Ms. Gorelick. Well, we know the number of hearings and the
number of responses. I think actually the Chairman had that in
his opening statement.
But I think it is both the amount of time and effort that
the leadership of the Department of Homeland Security is
putting in, but it is also the lack of an appropriate
counterparty. When I was deputy attorney general, I knew very
well what the Chairman and Ranking Member in the House and the
Senate of my authorizing committees thought about what I was
doing. If I didn't know, I knew who to call.
If I had to have that same interaction with even five
committees, it would have been disabling. As Governor Kean said
earlier, anyone who has had more than one boss knows that that
is disabling. It is the lack of cohesion in the interaction
with the Executive branch that undermines agility. If we have
learned anything since 9/11, it is the need for agility.
Mr. Barber. I agree with you. I think the Department cannot
be as nimble as it needs to be to meet the homeland security
issues that are coming up every day in new ways. This
committee, I think, has done an incredibly good job of coming
together in a very bipartisan way. Since I have been here, we
have had markups with 100 percent unanimity amongst the
committee Members. We are really focused.
Pretty much like on the other committee I am on, the
Department of Homeland Security's committee, Homeland--the
House Armed Services Committee, has the same attitude, the same
knowledge, the same focus on making sure DOD is accountable.
This Congress cannot perform its duties of oversight with all
of these jurisdictions in place, and I hope that the new
Congress will take this up as a priority.
I want to talk a little bit about border security. My
colleague, Mr. O'Rourke, did indicate that some areas of the
border, particularly the area that he represents, are certainly
more secure than they have ever been. I accept that. But there
are gaps.
One of those gaps, unfortunately, is in a district that I
represent, where 83 miles of border with Mexico is not secure.
Other than--the ports of entry are pretty well-staffed, but
when you get out into the rugged areas where the ranchlands
are, it is wide-open territory.
I believe that not only is it wide-open territory for the
cartels, who are smuggling people and drugs, it is a
potentially wide open territory for potential terrorist
movement across our Southern Border with whatever devices they
want to harm the country. Would you comment on that aspect of
border security? I will just give you one statistic about my
district, the sector that is in my district: 47 percent of the
drugs that are seized in this country are seized in the Tucson
sector, 47 percent. Thirty-five percent of the illegal
immigrants are seized or apprehended in my district.
It seems to me that is wide open for terrorist activity.
Would you comment on how we might address that issue, since
clearly we have to defend the homeland against that
possibility?
Ms. Gorelick. You know, this is--we are private citizens
and had no investigative resources, so we did not study the
issue of the relationship between the border today and the
potential for a terrorist threat. We did spend, as Governor
Kean has said, a lot of time in our original report on the
importance of securing our borders and ensuring that we know
who is in this country.
But beyond that, we did the work that 10 people with a
little bit of funding and a willingness of people in the
National security community to talk to us can do. So I don't
know that we can give you a current assessment ourselves.
Mr. Kean. We had--all of our staff was volunteer. We, of
course, are all volunteers. We didn't have either the security
clearances or the money and staff to do the kind of work which
I think you would have liked to do, to answer your question.
Mr. Barber. Well, I certainly want to thank the witnesses.
I am over my time, but you have done an incredible job serving
this country today and in your original work on the commission.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman recognizes Mr. Marino.
Mr. Marino. No questions.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman recognizes Mr. Meehan.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Governor, for being here. I am Pat Meehan from
Pennsylvania and Somers Point, so I am grateful for your--and
Deputy Gorelick, thank you again. As an alumnus of the Justice
Department, I appreciate the service of both of you and
continuing to follow this 10 years later.
I just want to attach myself for a minute for the record,
but I think your supporting the concept of what my friend, the
gentleman, Mr. Barber, just explored, I note your report calls
it the most important unfulfilled recommendation of the 9/11
Commission is the Congressional oversight issue that was just
identified. I think we need to take it to heart. The fragmented
oversight is an impediment to the Department's successful
development, but it has also made Americans less safe.
This is a critically important thing. I thank you for your
testimony. I am not going to ask you to expound on it further,
but I hope we can take your testimony and invoke the importance
of that with my colleagues to revisit this issue.
In the moments that I do have, one of the issues that you
also both identified in the report is the emerging threat,
which wasn't at the heart of 9/11, and it is the cyber domain
and the recognition that our policies are not keeping pace with
the breathtaking, rapid advances in technology.
You look for a number of things to be done. Perhaps you can
tell me in your words what you think the most important things
we ought to be doing and how we ought to be doing a better job
communicating with citizens out there about the nature of the
threat, what they can do to help us make ourselves more secure
from what could be a remarkably devastating impact of a cyber
attack.
Mr. Kean. Jamie has talked about this, I think very
articulately, but it is a silent threat as far as most of the
public is concerned. They just don't see it. I mean, somebody
says, well, we lost some information that the Department of
Defense had to a cyber attack. Somebody got some information.
Or this Boeing was doing a new invention of some sort or a new
technology, and somebody in China got it, and you sort of read
that in the newspaper and you read something else.
But it is not real to people, because it is quiet. Partly
because Government--neither Government nor the private sector
likes to admit they have had things stolen and they don't have
them anymore. So the public is not as aware as it ought to be
of the cyber threat and why it is important.
I think Jamie hit it right when she said, you know, getting
the Government to combine with the private sector, most of the
infrastructure is in the private sector. It is not in the
Government. We have to protect the Government, obviously, but
we have also got to protect the private sector, because it is
not only technological future, but it is our economic future.
If we allow the innovation that this country has always been
known for to be stolen from us, we are allowing this country to
undergo great harm.
So I think when Jamie says getting the Government to really
work with the private sector and help the private sector and
get the private sector to trust Government so their expertise
can be put together to protect not just the Government, but
also the private sector, is absolutely what should be done.
Ms. Gorelick. There is a woodenness in the interaction
between the private sector and the Government on this issue
that is not optimal. There is a--there are real inhibitions to
the private sector sharing a vulnerability with the Government.
There are liabilities that attach. There are huge inhibitions
to the Government protecting not just its own computers, but
the privately-held computers on which our security rests. These
are tough, tough issues because we are not used to having our
military operate domestically, which is really underlying this
entire debate.
The resources to help the private sector fight back rest in
our military. We don't usually deploy our military to help a
domestic entity defend itself. That is at the crux of the
problem. These are tough issues.
I would try to get underneath them to understand them, to
see if we are matching up what we ask of our Government with
what the threat is, because one of the things we said in our
original report was that the most--one of the most natural
things to do is to define away the hard part of your job. NORAD
gave to the FAA the hard part of its job. NORAD said, our
Defense Department said we will take care of the threat up
until the U.S. border. You take care of the threat inside the
United States.
So nobody with any actual force and power, because the FAA
doesn't have an Air Force, had the job of thinking about and
preparing for and addressing someone hijacking a plane
domestically. So it was a gap. If you had said to our Defense
Department, ``We want you to defend the United States not only
against a plane coming across from Russia, but somebody
hijacking a plane in the United States,'' we would have had a
robust plan. We had no such plan.
I think we are in the equivalent place today, where we are
so worried about using our military capabilities in aid of a
domestic vulnerability that we are not doing what we need to
do. We are putting our heads in the sand. I think we heard that
from pretty much every member of the National security
community with whom we spoke.
Mr. Meehan. Where do you go? Where do you go with
authorizing private companies to take some action on their own
that would be responsive what are cyber intrusions into their
own databases?
Ms. Gorelick. Congressman Meehan, that is a very good
question. So if I own an ISP or I own a telephone company today
and I am attacked, I am probably experiencing that attack
through two other private systems. Can I go through those
private systems to counterattack? No. I am disabled. That is a
really important problem, an inhibition to keeping us safer.
I think there are hard issues, to be sure. There are hard
issues. But having no solution is not the right solution.
Mr. Meehan. Well, I thank you for your testimony on this. I
think we could spend an entire hearing focused on that issue
and others. I think that it is important that you do know,
consistent with this report, and your recommendations, we have
gotten out of the full committee in a bipartisan fashion very
substantive cyber legislation that we hope may actually get
onto the floor in the coming weeks that begins to create the
relationship, working with FBI, NSA, and others, putting the
DHS as the civilian interface with the private sector, working
on issues of liability that would enhance the willingness and
readiness to collaborate and communicate in a timely manner on
the threats that they are facing, because as the Governor said,
90 percent of the assets are in private hands.
It is a different situation than we have ever faced before.
We think this is an important next step, but only a next step
on what needs to be a continuing emphasis. Thank you for your
great work and your very important testimony that helps us
create a record that allows us to continue to move from this to
the kind of constructive reform and expansion of the
responsibilities that we have got to deal with on here. Thank
you so much for your service.
Chairman McCaul. Let me thank you for your leadership on
the cybersecurity bill that hopefully will get passed next week
on the floor.
Let me thank the two of you, Governor and Ms. Gorelick, for
your service, and all members of the 9/11 Commission for your
great work on this report and service to the American people to
protect them. I think Congress could be doing a better job in
reorganizing itself to protect the American people, rather than
squabble over jurisdictional lines. I think every Member of
Congress is responsible if something does happen, will be
responsible if we don't fix this problem.
Ultimately, while Chairmen will fight and never give up
jurisdiction, I have found as a Chairman, it is really up to
leadership to make that call. It is up to our leadership to
step forward and take responsibility to do what is right for
the American people.
So, again, thank you for being here today. With that, this
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
