- A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 13, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

81-461 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2250  Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Paul C. Broun, Georgia               Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    Brian Higgins, New York
Chair                            Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania         William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Ron Barber, Arizona
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Dondald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Jason Chaffetz, Utah                 Beto O'Rourke, Texas
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi       Tulsi Gabbard, Hawaii
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Filemon Vela, Texas
Chris Stewart, Utah                  Steven A. Horsford, Nevada
Keith J. Rothfus, Pennsylvania       Eric Swalwell, California
Richard Hudson, North Carolina
Steve Daines, Montana
Susan W. Brooks, Indiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
Greg Hill, Chief of Staff
Michael Geffroy, Deputy Chief of Staff/Chief Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Admiral Thad W. Allen (Ret.), Senior Vice President, Booz Allen
Hamilton:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Shawn Henry, President, Crowdstrike Services:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    18
Mr. Michael E. Leiter, Former Director of the National
Counterterrorism Center:
Oral Statement.................................................    20
Prepared Statement.............................................    22
Mr. David M. Walker, Founder and CEO, The Comeback America
Initiative:
Oral Statement.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    28
Mr. Clark Kent Ervin, Partner, Patton Boggs, LLP:
Oral Statement.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    32

For the Record

The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Letter From Hon. Janet Napolitano to Ranking Member Bennie G.
Thompson.....................................................    36
The Honorable Beto O'Rourke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas:
Article........................................................    51
Politico Article...............................................    52

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THREATS TO THE HOMELAND

----------

Wednesday, February 13, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:09 a.m., in Room
311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Michael T. McCaul
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McCaul, King, Miller, Meehan,
Duncan, Marino, Palazzo, Barletta, Stewart, Rothfus, Hudson,
Daines, Brooks, Perry, Thompson, Jackson Lee, Keating, Payne,
O'Rourke, Gabbard, Vela, Horsford, and Swalwell.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. The committee is meeting today to hear testimony
on the evolving homeland threat landscape. I now recognize
myself for an opening statement.
Let me first say what an honor it is to be elected by my
peers to serve as the Chairman of this powerful committee, and
at the same time, would like to recognize the man who sat in
this chair for 7 years, Peter King, who--just let me thank you
for your great service and dedication to the cause of
protecting the American people. I sure do appreciate that.
Mr. King. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Also, as I look at the pictures on the
wall of New York, your hometown, Mr. Chairman, I know we plan
to visit there the following week. We are kind of reminded of
the unfortunate catalyst for the creation of this committee.
They will remain on the wall to remind us constantly that our
promise is ``never again.''
After 9/11, President Bush declared, ``We are fighting a
new kind of war against determined enemies. And public servants
long into the future will bear the responsibility to defend
Americans against terror.''
Over a decade later, we now know these words remain true.
The threats we face have adapted and the Department of Homeland
Security's mission and capability have yet to be solidified.
The Members of this committee are some of the public servants
the President spoke about. It is our duty to continue to
improve DHS and defend our freedom, security, and way of life.
Essential to defending our homeland is securing our
borders. Coming from Texas, I am particularly concerned with
conditions on our Southwest Border. We are and will remain a
Nation of immigrants and no one denies our immigration system
is broken and needs to be reformed.
However, as immigration reform takes center stage, we
cannot repeat the mistakes of the past. The 1986 immigration
reform did not stop the flow of illegal immigrants and we
cannot support reforms today unless they hinge on gaining
effective control of our borders.
Until the administration creates a comprehensive National
strategy to secure our borders that includes a reasonable
definition of operational control that we can measure, then we
cannot quantify success or failure. My overriding goal is to
prevent repeating this debate 10 years from now.
All Americans, whether an immigrant or citizen born here,
require a secure border that prevents drugs, weapons, and
violence from damaging our communities.
Drug cartels fight for primacy on our Southern Border,
sending narcotics into our homes. Smugglers weaken our economic
competitiveness at our ports of entry while terrorists still
seek entry into the United States undetected.
Increasingly, DHS has the opportunity to use existing
technologies returning from the theaters of war that make
securing our border cheaper and easier than ever before.
Consequently, as we embark on an immigration reform debate, we
must be mindful that the first step is to control our border,
and I will be introducing legislation soon to accomplish that
goal.
I have developed a framework for legislation to compel the
Department and its components to create and implement a
strategy to control our borders that includes measurable
progress. I am working with outside groups and my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle and in both chambers to be sure the
strategy is workable and has the support that it needs.
If fully implemented, the ability exists to gain effective
control of our borders within 3 years. The strategy must meet
three key criteria. It must ascertain situational awareness of
our borders, it must create metrics to measure progress based
on outcomes, and it must integrate the Department of Homeland
Security components that presently overlap or contradict.
This task is long overdue and the time to achieve this goal
is now. As the committee moves forward, we build upon the
success of the vice chair of this committee, Mrs. Miller, who
is Chair of the Subcommittee on Border and Maritime Security.
She has been a real leader on these issues not only for
this committee but for the entire House, and I am glad to have
her as a partner, and this committee appreciates the path that
she has paved in pushing for a stronger, smarter, border
security strategy.
Other threats to our Nation do not cross our physical
borders. They instead invade our digital networks. DHS is
tasked with securing our civilian Federal networks and equally
important, protecting our critical infrastructures.
DHS is responsible for coordinating the National
protection, prevention, mitigation of, and recovery from cyber
incidents. DHS is also charged with disseminating domestic
cyber threat and vulnerability analysis and investigating cyber
crimes within their jurisdiction.
As these threats increase, and they are, it is essential
that the Federal Government has the capability and capacity to
defend against a cyber attack that could have devastating
consequences on our economy and our way of life.
I do not need to stress the importance of this mission
because China is hacking into major American publications and
to military secrets, and Iran allegedly targeted our financial
institutions in Aramco and the Saudi peninsula just recently.
These are just some of the latest in a series of
increasingly regular attacks against the homeland and reports
this week also claim that China is currently targeting U.S.
trade secrets valued at tens of billions of dollars.
My visit to the NSA and with General Alexander, the
director of NSA, was sobering to say the least. DHS has been
building its capability to protect us from cyber attacks and it
will be the priority of this committee to help them improve
their efforts through legislation. A whole-of-Government cyber
strategy that is responsive to the threat landscape is
necessary and will require insight into the most dangerous
cyber actors.
This committee has a major role in crafting such a
strategy. In the next hearing before this committee we will
focus on the President's Executive Order on cybersecurity.
As we work to meet these challenges, we will never forget
the present threat of terrorism. While our military efforts
have scattered and disseminated the core of al-Qaeda's
operations and leadership, terrorist franchises such as those
that attacked the BP facility in Algeria last month have found
new safe havens allowing them to reconstitute.
One of my constituents, Fred Buttaccio from Katy, Texas was
killed during this terrorist takeover of the facility. I
attended his funeral and presented an American flag to his
widow.
Scattered across the map are increasing numbers of
organizations sympathetic to al-Qaeda's message reaching out to
al-Qaeda operatives in joining their global jihad. Iran
continues to expand its sphere of influence, strategically
advancing its position in the Western Hemisphere.
To face these challenges, DHS must improve. Unorganized
financial management drains resources from necessary work while
structural waste and duplication shut down solutions.
To take a recent example, the Department decided to remove
174 full-body scanners from airports across the country because
they cannot adapt to new imaging requirements, and one report
alleges these scanners cost $150,000 for each unit. This faulty
procurement process has set our travel security back while also
angering ordinary passengers.
This committee will work towards building a better
Department so that it can rise to meet a new decade and
evolving threats head-on. Looking on to the 113th Congress, we
will not turn our back on that goal, and I appreciate these
witnesses coming here today to help us better understand the
threats against us and what needs to be done to meet them.
In closing, I would like to reiterate what we said at our
last organizational meeting that Mr. Thompson, the Ranking
Member, we look forward to working with you in a bipartisan way
to accomplish our shared goal of protecting the homeland.
[The statement of Chairman McCaul follows:]
Statement of Chairman Michael T. McCaul
February 13, 2013
In the years I have sat in this hearing room, upon the walls have
hung a series of pictures taken on that day, almost 12 years ago, which
served as the unfortunate catalyst for the creation of this committee.
Today those images remain to remind us of the purpose we serve here--to
remind us of our promise, ``never again.''
After 9/11 President Bush declared:

``We're fighting a new kind of war against determined enemies. And
public servants long into the future will bear the responsibility to
defend Americans against terror.''

Over a decade later, we now know those words remain true. The threats
we face have adapted, and the Department of Homeland Security's mission
and capability have yet to be solidified. The Members of this committee
are some of the ``public servants'' the President spoke about. It is
our duty to continue to improve DHS, and defend our ``freedom,
security, and way of life.''
Essential to defending our homeland is securing our borders. Coming
from Texas, I am particularly concerned with conditions on our
Southwest Border. We are, and will remain, a nation of immigrants, and
no one denies that our immigration system is broken. However, as
immigration reform takes center stage, we cannot repeat the mistakes of
the past. The 1986 immigration reform did not stop the flow of illegal
immigrants and we cannot support reforms today unless they hinge on
gaining effective control of our borders. Until the administration
creates a comprehensive National strategy to secure our borders--that
includes a reasonable definition of operational control we can
measure--we cannot quantify success or failure. My overriding goal is
to prevent repeating this debate 10 years from now.
All Americans--whether an immigrant or citizen born here--require a
secure border that prevents drugs, weapons, and violence from damaging
our communities. Drug cartels fight for primacy on our Southern Border,
sending narcotics into our homes; smugglers weaken our economic
competitiveness at our ports of entry; while terrorists still seek
entry into the United States undetected. Increasingly, DHS has the
opportunity to use existing technologies returning from theaters of war
that make securing our border cheaper and easier than ever before.
Consequently, as we embark on immigration reform we must be mindful
that the first step is to control our border--and I will be introducing
legislation to accomplish that goal.
I have developed a framework for legislation to compel the
Department, and its components, to create and implement a strategy to
control our borders that includes measurable progress, and I am working
with outside groups and my colleagues on both sides of the aisle and in
both chambers to be sure the strategy is workable and has the support
it needs.
If fully implemented, the ability exists to gain effective control
of our borders within 3 years. The strategy must meet three key
criteria. It must ascertain situational awareness of our borders. It
must create metrics to measure progress based on outcomes. It must
integrate Department of Homeland Security components that presently
overlap or contradict.
Other threats to our Nation do not cross our physical borders--they
instead invade our digital networks. DHS is tasked with securing our
civilian Federal networks and--equally important--protecting our
critical infrastructure. DHS is responsible for coordinating the
National protection, prevention, mitigation of, and recovery from cyber
incidents. DHS is also charged with disseminating domestic cyber threat
and vulnerability analysis and investigating cyber crimes within their
jurisdiction. As these threats increase, it is essential the Federal
Government has the capability and capacity to defend against a cyber
attack that could have devastating consequences on our economy and way
of life.
I do not need to stress the importance of this mission because
China is hacking major American publications and military secrets, and
Iran is allegedly targeting our major financial institutions. These are
just the latest in a series of increasingly regular attacks against the
homeland. Reports this week also claim that China is currently
targeting U.S. trade secrets valued at tens of billions of dollars.
DHS has been building its capability to protect us from cyber
attacks, and it will be a priority of this committee to help them
improve their efforts through legislation. A whole-of-Government cyber-
strategy that is responsive to the threat landscape is necessary, and
will require insight into the most dangerous cyber actors. This
committee has a major role in crafting such a strategy, and the next
hearing before this committee will focus on the President's Executive
Order 13636* on cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Executive Order 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure
Cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we work to meet these challenges, we will not forget the present
threat of terrorism. While our military efforts have scattered and
decimated the core of al-Qaeda's operations and leadership, terrorist
franchises such as those that attacked the BP facility in Algeria last
month have found new safe havens allowing them to reconstitute. One of
my constituents, Frederick Buttaccio, from Katy, Texas was killed
during the terrorist takeover of this facility.
Scattered across the map are an increasing number of organizations
sympathetic to al-Qaeda's message, reaching out to al-Qaeda operatives,
and joining their global jihad. Iran continues to expand its sphere of
influence, strategically advancing its position in the Western
hemisphere.
To face these challenges, DHS must improve. Unorganized financial
management drains resources from necessary work, while structural waste
and duplication slow down solutions. To take a recent example, the
Department has decided to remove 174 full-body scanners from airports
across the country because they cannot adapt to new imaging
requirements. One report alleges these scanners cost $150,000 for each
unit. This faulty procurement has set our travel security back, while
also angering passengers.
This committee will work toward building a better Department, so
that it can rise to meet a new decade, and evolving threats, head-on.
Looking ahead to the 113th Congress, we will not turn our back on that
goal, and I appreciate these witnesses coming here today to help us
better understand the threats against us--and what needs to be done to
meet them.
Before closing, I would again like to reiterate what I said at our
organizational meeting last month--Mr. Thompson, we look forward to
working with you to accomplish our shared goal of protecting the
homeland.
______

Attachment.--Framework for Operational Control of America's Borders
We cannot repeat the mistakes of the past by failing to ensure
border security is a primary component to reforming our immigration
system. The committee is currently consulting with outside policy and
operations experts to introduce legislation to compel DHS to establish
a comprehensive National Strategy to secure our borders. We can no
longer supply resources on an ad-hoc basis and expect to make lasting
progress. The committee will hold a series of hearings to examine the
current border landscape, and what must be done to achieve full
awareness of who and what is crossing our borders. I look forward to
working with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle in both chambers,
and with the Department, to ensure the development and implementation
of a National Strategy is achieved.
There are myriad National and departmental policies addressing
counternarcotics, terrorism, and transnational criminal organizations,
all of which touch on border security, yet still there is no clearly
articulated, centralized National strategy with a sole focus on
securing the border. DHS must create a holistic strategy that looks at
the overall picture of the border and applies resources based on threat
levels and anticipated changes in migration.
Four Guiding Principles for Legislation Establishing a National
Strategy.--Gain situational awareness using advanced technologies, to
formulate useable metrics, while eliminating agency overlap (SAFE).
1. Situational Awareness.--In order to allocate resources
appropriately, we must have situational awareness--an overall
idea of what must go where. We cannot continue to throw scarce
resources at isolated problems, only to see them shift. DHS
must present to Congress a long-term analysis of where the
United States is vulnerable based off of a holistic picture of
our borders.
2. Advanced Technologies.--The administration must work to
incorporate existing technology such as Department of Defense
Sensor Surveillance equipment used in Iraq and Afghanistan in
order to gain comprehensive visibility of the border landscape.
Using proven, effective technologies to enhance our border
security efforts will save taxpayer dollars and make our
citizens safer.
3. Formulate Metrics.--In 2010, Secretary Napolitano stopped using
the metric of ``operational control.'' At that time, DHS
claimed to have only 44% of the border under operational
control. We can no longer base our security solely on only
apprehensions, without knowing the total number of individuals
who cross undetected. Nor can we base success on the number of
resources allocated to different sectors or components. Gaining
situational awareness will allow DHS to create a new metric to
define progress--based off of the number of apprehensions
relative to the total number of illegal crossings. Only when we
have the full picture can we gauge our own progress, and we
must base progress on outcomes, instead of resources.
4. Eliminate Overlap.--The Department of Homeland Security must
present to Congress its plan to better integrate its agencies
to combat all of the threats we face on our borders. DHS's
subordinate components should not unnecessarily duplicate each
other's efforts--they should instead work in complementary
fashion to ensure our National security.

Mr. McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Member,
Mr. Thompson from Mississippi.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Chairman McCaul, for
holding this hearing today. Likewise, I look forward to working
with you on many of the items you outlined in your opening
statement.
However, today we will hear from witnesses who will provide
an overview of some of the areas you have identified as
priorities. I look forward to their testimony and thank each of
them before appearing today.
Before we hear their testimony, I think it is important to
point out that as Members of Congress, each of us has a
responsibility to ensure that the Department is able to
adequately perform its mission of protecting the Nation from
and responding to terrorist attacks, man-made catastrophes, and
natural disasters.
As Members of this committee, each of us has a
responsibility to assure the success of the homeland security
mission. That mission cannot be achieved without appropriate
funding, vigorous oversight, and targeted legislation.
We cannot play our part in ensuring the success of the
homeland security mission if we are not willing to use the full
weight of the committee structure, both subcommittee and the
full committee, to pursue a well-crafted agenda.
That agenda should result in bringing our bills to the
floor and assuring that our oversight yields effective
outcomes. Our energies will be wasted and our opportunities
will be squandered if we do not work towards the goal of making
the people of this Nation safer.
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I commend you for issuing a
statement of priorities in the hope that the work of this
committee and each of its subcommittees will remain focused on
those objectives and our mission during this session of
Congress.
One of your priorities is border security. Since 2004, we
have doubled the number of Border Patrol agents and more than
doubled the number of unauthorized aliens removed from this
country. In our examination of border security, we cannot be
limited by calling for more of the same.
DHS currently lacks a border security strategy that
coordinates CBP, ICE, and the Coast Guard. We must continue to
press DHS for such a strategy. Without it, we cannot be certain
that our border control resources are strategic and well-
coordinated.
Another priority is cybersecurity. As you know, today the
administration released an Executive Order on cybersecurity. It
is my understanding that the strategy calls for strong privacy
and civil liberties protection and recognizes the necessity and
necessary leadership of the Department of Homeland Security in
establishing a volunteer program to promote the adoption of a
cybersecurity framework.
This strategy sounds a great deal like the PRECISE Act, a
bill this committee marked up last Congress but was prevented
from moving to the floor by the Majority leadership. As we
review cybersecurity, I hope we can try once again to take the
PRECISE Act to the floor of the House.
Third, I appreciate your identification of the management
and administrative functions of the Department as one of your
priorities. As you may know, since the inception of the
Department, I have worked to bring accountability and
transparency to the personnel in contracting practices.
The Department cannot succeed unless every component is
brought into an organizational structure that gives
headquarters command and control over the most basic personnel
rules and contracting procedures. Without centralized authority
and accountability, we should not be surprised by stories of
waste, fraud, and abuse.
Fourth, I look forward to working with you to explore the
terrorist threat, no matter where that threat originates. We
must not take a myopic approach. We must protect this country
from all enemies, foreign and domestic. Our view of the
terrorist threat must include domestic terrorism. The focus on
domestic terrorism was noticeably absent in the last Congress.
Finally, I noticed that disaster response and recovery was
not included in your list of priorities. I would urge you to
add this important area.
No corner of this Nation is safe from the devastation of a
natural disaster. Our people must know that we will not forget
them and are committed to improving the systems that must serve
them in their most dire moment whether it is Hattiesburg,
Mississippi, or New York City, New York.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you and
thank you for holding this hearing.
With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
Today we will hear from witnesses who will provide an overview of
some the areas you have identified as priorities. I look forward to
their testimony and thank each of them for appearing today. Before we
hear the testimony, it is important to point out that as Members of
Congress, each of us has a responsibility to ensure that the Department
is able to adequately perform its mission of protecting this Nation
from and responding to terrorist attacks, man-made catastrophes, and
natural disasters.
As Members of this committee, each of us has a responsibility to
assure the success of the homeland security mission. That mission
cannot be achieved without appropriate funding, vigorous oversight, and
targeted legislation. We cannot play our part in assuring the success
of the homeland security mission if we are not willing to use the full
weight of the committee structure--both subcommittees and the full
committee--to pursue a well-crafted agenda. That agenda should result
in bringing our bills to the floor and assuring that our oversight
yields effective outcomes. Our energies will be wasted and our
opportunities will be squandered if we do not work toward the goal of
making the people of this Nation safer.
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I commend you, for issuing a statement of
priorities and hope that the work of this committee and each of its
subcommittees will remain focused on those objectives and our mission
during this session of Congress.
One of your priorities is border security. Since 2004, we have
doubled the number of Border Patrol agents and more than doubled the
number of unauthorized aliens removed from this country. In our
examination of border security, we cannot be limited by calling for
more of the same. DHS currently lacks a border security strategy that
coordinates CPB, ICE, and Coast Guard. We must continue to press DHS
for such a strategy. Without it, we cannot be certain that our border
control resources are strategic and well-coordinated.
Another priority is cybersecurity. As you know, today, the
administration released an Executive Order on cybersecurity. It is my
understanding that the strategy calls for strong privacy and civil
liberties protections and recognizes the necessary leadership of the
Department of Homeland Security in establishing a voluntary program to
promote the adoption of a Cybersecurity Framework. This strategy sounds
a great deal like the PRECISE Act, a bill this committee marked up last
Congress but was prevented from moving to the Floor by the Majority
leadership. As we review cybersecurity, I hope we can try once again to
take the PRECISE Act to the floor of the House.
Third, I appreciate your identification of the management and
administrative functions of the Department as one of your priorities.
As you may know, since the inception of the Department, I have worked
to bring accountability and transparency to their personnel and
contracting practices. The Department cannot succeed unless every
component is brought into an organizational structure that gives
headquarters command and control over the most basic personnel rules
and contracting procedures. Without such centralized authority and
accountability, we should not be surprised by stories of waste, fraud,
and abuse.
Fourth, I look forward to working with you to explore the terrorist
threat, no matter where that threat originates. We must not take a
myopic approach. We must protect this country from all enemies--foreign
and domestic. Our view of the terrorist threat must include domestic
terrorism. The focus on domestic terrorism was notably absent in the
last Congress.
Finally, I noticed that disaster response and recovery was not
included in your list of priorities. I would urge you to add this
important area. No corner of this Nation is safe from the devastation
of a natural disaster. Our people must know that we will not forget
them and are committed to improving the systems that must serve them in
their most dire moment--whether in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, or New
York City, New York.

Chairman McCaul. I thank you the Ranking Member. Let me
just comment, us both being from Gulf Coast States that I join
with you in your commitment to disaster response, and I look
forward to a Congress where I believe we can work in a
bipartisan way to get things done.
I have met with Senator Carper and Coburn who Chair and the
Ranking Member of the Homeland Security Committee in the
Senate. Hopefully we can work in a bicameral way to get
something done and passed and signed into one.
So with that, I am pleased to have five distinguished
witnesses before us today on this important topic. The first--
and actually, all of you are no strangers to this committee.
Admiral Thad Allen is the senior vice president at Booz
Allen Hamilton. He completed his distinguished career in the
United States Coast Guard as its 23rd Commandant. In 2010,
President Obama selected Admiral Allen to serve as the national
incident commander for the unified response to the Deepwater
Horizon oil spill in the Gulf Coast of Mexico. Prior to his
assignment as Commandant, Admiral Allen served as Coast Guard
chief of staff.
Mr. Shawn Henry is a retired executive assistant director
of the FBI's Cyber Division. He is credited with boosting the
FBI's computer crime and cybersecurity investigative
capabilities. He oversaw computer crime investigation spanning
the globe including denial-of-service attacks, bank and
corporate breaches, and state-sponsored intrusions. He is
currently the president of CrowdStrike Services.
The Honorable Michael Leiter served under two presidents as
the director of the National Counterterrorism Center until--
from June 2008 to July 2011. He remains a highly respected
voice on terrorism threats and National security.
Currently, Mr. Leiter is the senior counsel to the chief
executive officer of Palantir Technologies. In addition, he
serves as the national security and counterterrorism analyst
for NBC news.
The Honorable David Walker is the founder and CEO of the
Comeback America Initiative. In this capacity, he leads CAI's
efforts to promote fiscal responsibility. Prior to assuming his
current position, Mr. Walker served as the 7th comptroller
general of the United States and head of the U.S. Government
Accountability Office for nearly 10 years.
I must commend you, you were one of the first to identify
really that the debt problem that we have in the United States
is truly a National security issue, and for that, we are very
grateful.
Mr. Clarke Kent Ervin; no stranger to this committee; no
stranger to me. We worked together under attorney general, now
Senator John Cornyn. He is a member of the Homeland Security
Defense Technology Transfer and International Practice Groups
at Patton Boggs Law Firm in Washington, DC.
He previously served as first inspector general for the
Department of Homeland Security under President Bush. He has
been a member of the Homeland Security Secretary Janet
Napolitano's Homeland Security Advisory Council since 2009.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record. The Chairman now recognizes Admiral Allen for 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ADMIRAL THAD W. ALLEN (RET.), SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT, BOOZ ALLEN HAMILTON

Admiral Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to be here this morning.
Mr. Thompson, it is good to see you again.
It is good to appear before the committee.
This morning I would like to talk about one specific aspect
of homeland security understanding there is a broad set of
challenges as you have articulated. We have got a distinguished
panel that is going to address things like cybersecurity, which
is a very important issue for all of us to think about.
I would like to talk a little bit about the borders and
maybe take a different approach on how we think about the
borders in advance considering strategy and also the upcoming
second Quadrennial Homeland Security Review.
Being from Tucson, Arizona and being raised in the
Southwest and having operated for 39 years in the Coast Guard
and as part of the Department of Homeland Security since its
inception, I think it is important to understand that when we
talk about the border we tend to think about the border from
where we see it and where we sit.
It is much different at a port of entry and between ports
of entry. The maritime domain is a band of various bands of
jurisdiction. We have air and space and obviously cyber as
well.
I think as we move forward, know that we have passed the
10-year mark of homeland security, we need to stop thinking
about border function as an aggregation of the authorities and
the jurisdictions of the components that were brought into the
Department whether it was the former INS inspection function or
the customs inspection function and start to think about it as
a system of responsibilities that we as a sovereign nation
carry out.
There are geographical and physical aspects to the border
and we understand those very, very well and they are drawn on
maps, but a lot of the trade and security practices in and
around the border actually take place without any human
intervention.
You can have cargo leave Europe, pass into the United
States, the documentation associated with that and the shippers
are evaluated, algorithms are checked, and if there is any
suspect cargo, that is pulled aside and is checked.
Absent that, the fees are transferred, tariffs are paid,
and you have a light bulb moved from Romania to Omaha. I think
looking forward in the Department we need to start thinking
about the virtual aspects of the border together with the
geographical and physical aspects and not take it as a
collection of authorities and jurisdictions of the components.
We need to understand what it is we want to do as a Nation
at the border, how to carry out our sovereign responsibility to
manage borders in a global commons and understand the
interaction of what happens with trade and security.
Operational control of the border is something that has
been discussed for a number of years. The fact of the matter
is, that varies on where you are at on the border.
Operational control of the border is a very different at
Otay Mesa and Juarez than it is in Ojinaga and the big, big
bang country of Texas and I think we need to understand that
any particular stretch of the border there are different ways
to look at what constitutes border security and what is the
best way to establish operational control, and I think we need
a consensus on how to move forward.
As we transition from the air domains, the sea domains, and
the land domains, there needs to be better integration between
TSA, the Coast Guard, CBP, and within CBP between the field
operations inspection function and the Border Patrol function
between the ports of entry.
This includes increased data sharing. You mentioned
situational awareness. We need to create a common operating
picture that can be shared across those domains and increase
the interoperability between the agencies that have authorities
and jurisdictions out there.
We need to look at things like preclearance for TSA and CBP
and expand that wherever we can. It is better to address those
threats before they even get near the United States. That is
part of managing the borders as well.
I think if we can come up with a system of systems that
constitutes what our strategy and our strategic intent is, our
vision for the future of the country in carrying out to those
sovereign responsibilities, we should pull ourselves towards
that future and not try and incrementally change what was put
together in 2003 under the exigencies of the Homeland Security
Act passage, which 10 years later we have not materially
changed either organizationally in terms of authorities and
jurisdictions or capabilities.
My recommendation to the committee would be to pursue
strategic change in the context of the Quadrennial Homeland
Security Review that will be conducted in the next year and the
better we can integrate the development of strategy and
implementation of change in homeland security through that
vehicle, it will be consistent with the Homeland Security Act
and in my view, should drive resource and budget allocation
decisions.
I would be happy to answer any questions, sir.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Allen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Thad W. Allen
13 February 2013
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
committee, I am pleased to have been invited to testify on this
important topic and I thank you for the opportunity.
A Retrospective
Mr. Chairman, the 1st of March will mark the Tenth Anniversary of
stand-up of the Department of Homeland Security. The Department was
officially created on the 24th of January 2003, but the operating
components from other departments were not moved to DHS until 1 March
2003 when the Department became operational. From the signing of the
Homeland Security Act on 25 November 2012 to the actual operation of
the Department on 1 March barely 3 months passed. I am not here to
dwell on the past but it is important to understand the circumstances
under which the Department was created.
While this could be considered Government at light speed, little
time was available for deliberate planning and thoughtful consideration
of available alternatives. The situation was complicated by the fact
that the law was passed between legislative sessions and in the middle
of a fiscal year. Other than Secretary Ridge, early leadership
positions were filled by senior officials serving in Government.
Confirmation was not required to be ``acting.'' Funding was provided
through the reprogramming of current funds from across Government for
Departmental elements that did not have existing appropriations from
their legacy departments.
Operating funds for components that were transferred were
identified quickly and shifted to new accounts in the Department to
meet the deadline. Because of the wide range of transparency and
accuracy of the appropriation structure and funds management systems of
the legacy departments some of the new operational components faced a
number of immediate challenges. Estimating the cost of salaries for
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) or Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) required the combination of different work forces,
with different grade structures, different career ladders, and
different work rules.
Basic mission support functions of the Department such as financial
accounting, human resource management, real property management,
information resource management, procurement, and logistics were
retained largely at the component level in legacy systems that varied
widely. Funding for those functions was retained at the component level
as well. In those cases where new entities were created (i.e.
Departmental-level management and operations, the Under Secretary for
Science and Technology, the Under Secretary for Intelligence and
Analysis, the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office) support systems had to
be created rapidly to meet immediate demands of mission execution.
Finally, components and Departmental offices that did not preexist the
legislation were located in available space around the Washington, DC
area and the Secretary and number of new functions were located at the
Nebraska Avenue Complex in Northwest Washington.
At the time of this transition I was serving as the Coast Guard
Chief of Staff and was assigned as the Coast Guard executive to
overseas the Service's relocation from the Department of Transportation
to the new Department. We began planning for eventual relocation as
soon as the administration submitted legislation to the Congress. I
also assigned personnel to the Transition Planning Office (TPO) that
was created in the Office of Management and Budget by Executive Order
to prepare for the transition. A considerable challenge during this
period was the fact that the TPO was part of the Executive Office of
the President and there were legal limitations on how much of their
work could be shared externally. As a result much of that effort was
redone or duplicated when the Department was created.
As I noted earlier, my intent is not to dwell on the past but to
frame the degree of difficulty facing the leaders attempting to stand
up the Department from the outset. Many of these issues persist today,
10 years later. Despite several attempts to centralize and consolidate
functions such as financial accounting and human resource management,
most support functions remain located in Departmental components and
the funding to support those functions remains in their appropriations.
Because of dissimilarities between appropriations structures of
components transferred from legacy departments there is a lack of
uniformity, comparability, and transparency in budget presentations
across the Department. As a result it is difficult to clearly
differentiate, for example, between personnel costs, operations and
maintenance costs, information technology costs, and capital
investment. Finally, the 5-year Future Years Homeland Security Plan
(FYHSP) required by the Homeland Security Act has never been
effectively implemented as a long-rang planning, programming, and
budgeting framework inhibiting effective planning and execution of
multi-year acquisitions and investments.
In the Washington Area the Department remains a disjointed
collection of facilities and the future of the relocation to the St.
Elizabeth's campus remains in serious doubt. As the Chief of Staff of
the Coast Guard and Commandant I committed the Coast Guard to the move
to St. Elizabeth and only asked that we be collocated with our
Secretary and not be there alone. The Coast Guard will move to St.
Elizabeth's this year . . . alone. One of the great opportunity costs
that will occur if colocation does not happen will be the failure to
create a fully functioning National Operations Center for the
Department that could serve at the integrating node for Departmental-
wide operations and establish the competency and credibility of the
Department to coordinate homeland security-related events and responses
across Government as envisioned by the Homeland Security Act. As with
the mission support functions discussed earlier, the Department has
struggled to evolve an operational planning and mission execution
coordination capability. As a result, the most robust command-and-
control functions and capabilities in the Department reside at the
component level with the current NOC serving as a collator of
information and reporting conduit for the Secretary.
The combination of these factors, in my view, has severely
constrained the ability of the Department to mature as an enterprise.
And while there is significant potential for increased efficiencies and
effectiveness, the real cause for action remains the creation of unity
of effort that enables better mission performance. In this regard there
is no higher priority than removing barriers to information sharing
within the Department and improved operational planning and execution.
Effective internal management and effective mission execution require
the same commitment to shared services, information systems
consolidation, the reduction in proprietary technologies and software,
and the employment of emerging cloud technologies.
Mr. Chairman, this summary represents my personal views of the more
important factors that influenced the creation and the first 10 years
of the Department's operations. It is not all-inclusive but is intended
to be thematic and provide a basis for discussion regarding the future.
Looking to the future the discussion should begin with the Department's
mission and the need to create unity of effort internally and across
the homeland security enterprise. I made similar comments before the
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs last year.
The Future
The Quadrennial Homeland Security Review was envisioned as a
vehicle to consider the Department's future. The first review completed
in 2010 described the following DHS missions:

Preventing Terrorism and Enhancing Security;

Securing and Managing Our Borders;

Enforcing and Administering our Immigration Laws;

Safeguarding and Securing Cyberspace;

Insuring Resiliency to Disasters.
An additional area of specific focus was the maturation of the
homeland security ``enterprise'' which extends beyond the Department
itself to all elements of society that participate in and contribute to
the security of the homeland.
The QHSR outcomes were consistent with the fiscal year 2010 budget
that was submitted in early 2009 following the change of
administrations. That request laid out the following mission priorities
for the Department:

Guarding Against Terrorism;

Securing Our Borders;

Smart and Tough Enforcement of Immigration Laws and
Improving Immigration Services;

Preparing For, Responding To, and Recovering From Natural
Disasters;

Unifying and Maturing DHS.
The fiscal year 2010 budget priorities and the follow-on QHSR
mission priorities have served as the basis for annual appropriations
requests for 4 consecutive fiscal years.
I participated in the first review prior to my retirement and we
are approaching the second review mandated by the Homeland Security
Act. This review presents an opportunity to assess the past 10 years
and rethink assumptions related to how the broad spectrum of DHS
authorities, jurisdictions, capabilities, and competencies should be
applied most effectively and efficiently against the risks we are
likely to encounter . . . and how to adapt to those that cannot be
predicted. This will require a rethinking of what have become
traditional concepts associated with homeland security over the last 10
years.
Confronting Complexity and Leading Unity of Effort
Last year in an issue of Public Administration Review (PAR), the
journal of the American Society for Public Administration (ASPA), I
wrote an editorial piece entitled ``Confronting Complexity and Leading
Unity of Effort.'' I proposed that the major emerging challenge of
public administration and governing is the increased level of
complexity we confront in mission operations, execution of Government
programs, and managing non-routine and crisis events. Driving this
complexity are rapid changes in technology, the emergence of a global
community, and the ever-expanding human-built environment that
intersects with the natural environment in new, more extreme ways.
The results are more vexing issues or wicked problems we must
contend with and a greater frequency of high-consequence events. On the
other hand advances in computation make it possible to know more and
understand more. At the same time structural changes in our economy
associated with the transition from a rural agrarian society to a post-
industrial service/information economy has changed how public programs
and services are delivered. No single Department, agency, or bureau has
the authorizing legislation, appropriation, capability, competency, or
capacity to address this complexity alone. The result is that most
Government programs or services are ``co-produced'' by multiple
agencies. Many involve the private/non-governmental sector, and, in
some cases, international partners. Collaboration, cooperation, the
ability to build networks, and partner are emerging as critical
organizational and leadership skills. Homeland security is a complex
``system of systems'' that interrelates and interacts with virtually
every department of Government at all levels and the private sector as
well. It is integral to the larger National security system. We need
the capabilities, capacities, and competency to create unity of effort
within the Department and across the homeland security enterprise.
mission execution and mission support
As we look forward to the next decade I would propose we consider
two basic simple concepts: Mission execution and mission support.
Mission execution is deciding what to do and how to do it. Mission
support enables mission execution.
Mission Execution . . . Doing the Right Things Right
As a precursor to the next QHSR there should be a baseline
assessment of the current legal authorities, regulatory
responsibilities, treaty obligations, and current policy direction
(i.e. HSPD/NSPD). I do not believe there has been sufficient visibility
provided on the broad spectrum of authorities and responsibilities that
moved to the Department with the components in 2003, many of which are
non-discretionary. Given the rush to enact the legislation in 2002 it
makes sense to conduct a comprehensive review to validate the current
mission sets as established in law.
The next step, in my view, would be to examine the aggregated
mission set in the context of the threat environment without regard to
current stove-piped component activities . . . to see the Department's
mission space as a system of systems. In the case of border security/
management, for example, a system-of-systems approach would allow a
more expansive description of the activities required to meet our
sovereign responsibilities.
Instead of narrowly focusing on specific activities such as
``operational control of the border'' we need to shift our thinking to
the broader concept of the management of border functions in a global
commons. The border has a physical and geographical dimension related
to the air, land, and sea domains. It also has a virtual, information-
based dimension related to the processing of advance notice of
arrivals, analysis data related to cargoes, passengers, and
conveyances, and the facilitation of trade. These latter functions do
not occur at a physical border but are a requirement of managing the
border in the current global economic system.
The air and maritime domains are different as well. We prescreen
passengers at foreign airports and the maritime domain is a collection
of jurisdictional bands that extend from the territorial sea to the
limits of the exclusive economic zone and beyond.
The key concept here is to envision the border as an aggregation of
functions across physical and virtual domains instead of the isolated
and separate authorities, jurisdictions, capabilities, and competencies
of individual components. Further, there are other Governmental
stakeholders whose interests are represented at the border by DHS
components (i.e. Department of Agriculture, DOT/Federal Motor Carriers
regarding trucking regulations, NOAA/National Marine Fisheries Service
regarding the regulation of commercial fishing).
A natural outcome of this process is a cause for action to remove
organizational barriers to unity of effort, the consolidation of
information systems to improve situational awareness and queuing of
resources, and integrated/unified operational planning and coordination
among components. The additional benefits accrued in increased
efficiency and effectiveness become essential in the constrained budget
environment. The overarching goal should always be to act with
strategic intent through unity of effort.
A similar approach could be taken in considering the other missions
described in the QHSR. Instead of focusing on ``insuring resiliency to
disasters'' we should focus on the creation and sustainment of National
resiliency that is informed by the collective threat/risks presented by
both the natural and human-built environments. The latter is a more
expansive concept than ``infrastructure'' and the overall concept
subsumes the term ``disaster'' into larger problem set that we will
face. This strategic approach would allow integration of activities and
synergies between activities that are currently stovepiped within FEMA,
NPPD, and other components. It also allows cybersecurity to be seen as
an activity that touches virtually every player in the homeland
security enterprise.
In regard to terrorism and law enforcement operations we should
understand that terrorism is, in effect, political criminality and as a
continuing criminal enterprise it requires financial resources
generated largely through illicit means. All terrorists have to
communicate, travel, and spend money, as do all individuals and groups
engaged in criminal activities. To be effective in a rapidly-changing
threat environment where our adversaries can quickly adapt, we must
look at cross-cutting capabilities that allow enterprise-wide success
against transnational organized criminal organizations, illicit
trafficking, and the movement of funds gained through these activities.
As with the ``border'' we must challenge our existing paradigm
regarding ``case-based'' investigative activities. In my view, the
concept of a law enforcement case has been overtaken by the need to
understand criminal and terrorist networks as the target. It takes a
network to defeat a network. That in turn demands even greater
information sharing and exploitation of advances in computation and
cloud-based analytics. The traditional concerns of the law enforcement
community regarding confidentiality of sources, attribution, and
prosecution can and must be addressed, but these are not technology
issues . . . they are cultural, leadership, and policy issues.
Mr. Chairman, this is not an exhaustive list of proposed missions
or changes to missions for the Department. It is an illustrative way to
rethink the missions of the Department given the experience gained in
the last 10 years. It presumes the first principals of: (1) A clear,
collective strategic intent communicated through the QHSR, budget,
policy decisions, and daily activities, and (2) an unyielding
commitment to unity of effort that is supported by an integrated
planning and execution process based on transparency and exploitation
of information to execute the mission.
Mission Support . . . Enabling Mission Execution
Mr. Chairman, in my first 2 years as Commandant I conducted an
exhaustive series of visits to my field commands to explain my cause
for action to transform our Service. In those field visits I explained
that when you go to work in the Coast Guard every day you do one of two
things: You either execute the mission or you support the mission. I
then said if you cannot explain which one of these jobs you are doing,
then we have done one of two things wrong . . . we haven't explained
your job properly or we don't need your job. This obviously got a lot
of attention.
In the rush to establish the Department and in the inelegant way
the legacy funding and support structures were thrown together in 2003,
it was difficult to link mission execution and mission support across
the Department. To this day, most resources and program management of
support functions rest in the components. As a result normal mission
support functions such as shared services, working capital funds, core
financial accounting, human resources, property management, and
integrated life cycle-based capital investment have been vexing
challenges.
There has been hesitancy by components to relinquish control and
resources to a Department that appears to be still a work in progress.
The structure of Department and component appropriations does not
provide any easy mechanism for Departmental integration of support
functions. As a result information sharing is not optimized and
potential efficiencies and effectiveness in service delivery are not
being realized. As I noted earlier, a huge barrier to breaking this
deadlock is the lack of uniformity in appropriations structures and
budget presentation. This problem has been compounded by the failure to
implement a 5-year Future Years Homeland Security Plan and associated
Capital Investment Plan to allow predictability and consistency across
fiscal years.
Mr. Chairman, having laid out this problem, I see three possible
ways forward. The desirable course of action would be to build the
trust and transparency necessary for the Department and components to
collective agree to rationalize the mission support structure and come
to agreements on shared services. The existing barriers are
considerable but the first principals of mission execution apply here
as well . . . unambiguous, clearly communicated strategic intent and
unity of effort supported by transparency and knowledge-based
decisions. A less palatable course of action is top-down directed
action that is enforced through the budget process. The least desirable
course of action is externally-mandated change. Unfortunately, the
current fiscal impasse and the need to potentially meet sequester
targets while facing the very real prospect of operating under a
continuing resolution for the entire fiscal year 2013 represents the
confluence of all of these factors and a fiscal perfect storm. There is
a case to act now. We should understand that a required first step that
lies within the capability of the Department would be to require
standardized budget presentations that can serve as the basis for
proposed appropriations restructuring to clearly identify the sources
and uses of funds and to separate at a minimum personnel costs,
operating and maintenance costs, information technology costs, capital
investment, and facility costs.
Creating and Acting with Strategic Intent
Mr. Chairman, I have attempted to keep this testimony at a
strategic level and focus on thinking about the challenges in terms
that transcend individual components, programs, or even the Department
itself. I have spoken in the last year to the Department of Homeland
Security Fellows and the first DHS Capstone course for new executives.
I have shared many of the thoughts provided today over the last 10
years to many similar groups. Recently, I have changed my message.
After going over the conditions under which the Department was formed
and the many challenges that still remain after 10 years, I was very
frank with both groups. Regardless of the conditions under which the
Department was created and notwithstanding the barriers that have
existed for 10 years, at some point the public has a right to expect
that the Department will act on its own to address these issues.
Something has to give. In my view, it is the responsibility of the
career employees and leaders in the Department to collectively
recognize and act to meet the promise of the Homeland Security Act.
That is done through a shared vision translated into strategic intent
that is implemented in daily activities from the NAC to the border
through the trust and shared values that undergird unity of effort. It
is that simple; it is that complex.
I understand the committee is considering whether the Department
should develop a comprehensive border strategy that would encompass all
components and entities with border equities, including State and local
law enforcement. I also understand there is concern about performance
metrics associated with carrying out such a strategy. There are also
potential opportunities related to the equipment being returned from
military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Finally, we are witnessing
a transition of leadership in Mexico as we continue to jointly address
the threat of drug and other illicit trafficking as a major hemispheric
threat.
In considering the strategic course of action going forward
regarding the management of the border in a global commons or any of
the diverse missions of the Department of Homeland Security, we should
remember then General Eisenhower's admonition that ``Plans are nothing;
planning is everything.'' I have been involved in strategic planning
for decades I can attest to their value. Done correctly that value is
derived from a planning process that forces critical thinking,
challenges existing assumptions, creates shared knowledge and
understanding, and promotes a shared vision. Accordingly, I would be
more concerned about the process of developing a strategy than the
strategy itself. It is far more important to agree on the basic terms
of reference that describe the current and likely future operating
environment and to understand the collective capabilities,
competencies, authorities, and jurisdictions that reside in the
Department as they relate to that environment and the threats
presented.
I believe the Homeland Security Act envisioned that process to be
the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review. Accordingly, the committee
may want to consider how that process that is already mandated in law
might become the vehicle to create strategic intent. Intent that
unifies Departmental action, drives resource allocation, integrates
mission support activities, removes barriers to information sharing and
creates knowledge.
Strategic Intent and the Border
I am often asked, in the wake of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill,
``Is it safe to drill offshore?'' My answer to that question is
relevant to any consideration of how we carry out the sovereign
responsibilities of a Nation in managing our border. My answer is that
there is no risk-free way to extract hydrocarbons from the earth. The
real question is: ``What is the acceptable level of risk associated
with those activities in light of the fact that it will take a
generation to develop alternate fuels?'' Likewise, there is no risk-
free way to manage a border short of shutting it down. Discussions
about operational control of the border and border security too often
focus on specific geographical and physical challenges related to
managing the land border. While those challenges exist, they cannot
become the sole focus of a strategy that does not account of all
domains (air, land, sea, space, and cyber) and the risks and
opportunities that the border represents. As I mentioned earlier we
need to think of the border as a set of functions. We need to think
about what is the acceptable level of risk associated with those
functions. We cannot neglect trade and become fixated on driving risk
to zero; it cannot be done.
Whether it is TSA considering options for passenger and cargo
screening, the Coast Guard considering the trade-offs between fisheries
and drug enforcement, ICE considering resource allocation to protect
intellectual property or remove dangerous aliens, NPPD considering how
to deal with cyber threats to infrastructure, or USCIS deciding how
immigration reform would drive demand for their services, the real
issue is the identification and management of risk. Those decision are
made daily now from the Port of Entry at Nogales to the Bering Sea,
from TSA and CBP pre-clearance operations in Dublin to Secret Service
protection of the President, and from a disaster declaration following
a tornado in Mississippi to the detection of malware in our networks.
The question is: How are they linked? Are those actions based on a
shared vision that make it clear to every individual in the Department
what their role is in executing or supporting the mission?
A strategy for the border or any DHS mission ideally would merely
be the codification of strategic intent for record purposes to support
enterprise decisions. The creation of self-directed employees that
understand their role in Departmental outcomes on a daily basis in a
way that drives their behavior should be the goal. If a border strategy
is desired, I believe it must be preceded by a far deeper introspective
process that addresses how the Department understands itself and its
missions as a unified, single enterprise.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Admiral Allen.
Mr. Henry, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHAWN HENRY, PRESIDENT, CROWDSTRIKE SERVICES

Mr. Henry. Good morning Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here with you this
morning to talk to you about the cyber threat that we face as a
Nation and some of the significant economic and National
security challenges that we are at risk against. I appreciate
the level of attention that the committee is affording this
issue.
I know I have spoken of cyber threat for so long, but I
think it is just so important and it can't be overemphasized.
So I need to state it again emphatically that there are foreign
adversaries that have targeted every major organization in this
country. In each of your districts, major companies that have
been breached and there has been a tremendous impact on the
economy there and on their ability to be competitive in a
global society.
They have stolen untold billions of dollars of intellectual
property, research and development, and corporate strategies
and secrets and the volume and sophistication of these cyber
threats is only increasing and I don't see that that is going
to change in the current environment.
Over time, a cyber adversary with motivation, time, and
resources will breach every network that is connected or every
computer system that is directly accessible to the internet.
I stated publicly that it is necessary for network
administrators to assume they have already been breached rather
than waiting for the intrusion detection systems to tell them.
Many have absolutely no knowledge that this is occurring
and they don't know that adversaries remain resident on their
network many times for months or even years before they are
ever identified, if at all.
While I was executive assistant director at the FBI, my
agents went out routinely, dozens of times every month, and
told companies that they had been breached and they had no idea
that that had occurred meaning that all of their proprietary
data, their communications, their financial statements had been
completely accessible to the adversary with unfettered access
on that network.
Organizations therefore, must aggressively, constantly look
on their network for the adversary and hunt for those
adversaries. Alarmingly and increasingly, attackers are moving
beyond mere theft of information and they are moving into the
actual manipulation or the destruction of data and with the
depth and breadth of access that they have that is not a hard
or difficult task to accomplish.
Those with malicious intent can take devastating actions,
and it is difficult to say with confidence that our critical
infrastructure will be available when we most need it.
There needs to be a paradigm shift in the way we address
these issues. Vulnerability mitigation is the current
cybersecurity approach in the private sector, and it has been
the focus for more than 20 years. We continuously focus on
hardening the networks through ``Defense-in-Depth'', using
firewalls and anti-virus, looking at patching vulnerabilities,
and employing intrusion detection systems.
This approach generally stops those actors who do not care
who they are trying to breach, like the opportunistic burglar
who goes from house to house shaking the doorknob.
One mistake, however, is that we are using the same
approach against the most sophisticated state-funded actors who
actually have specific targets in mind. They have got
intelligence requirements and they are looking for very
specific information and they will get that information. Again,
over time, they will breach those networks.
Unlike the thief of opportunity, they are seeking the Hope
Diamond, something very, very specific, and those advanced and
well-funded adversaries will make sure that they achieve their
goal.
While we must continue to improve our defenses, we must
continue to build and have defense-in-depth. We need to focus
our efforts on the threat. Employing a threat mitigation
strategy requires an increased ability to detect and identify
our adversaries and penalize them, not merely defend against
them.
It is the identical strategy that we use and employ in the
physical world every single day to thwart criminals,
terrorists, and spies.
Achieving these goals in the cyber environment will require
unprecedented coordination between private industry--which as a
whole has network ownership and the ability to achieve these
goals--and the Government, which is primarily authorized to
investigate and penalize them.
Inevitably we must bring the private sector and the
Government together to achieve the goal of threat deterrence.
The vast majority of the intelligence that will lead to
information and identification of the adversaries resides on
private-sector networks; they are, in essence, ``crime
scenes,'' and the evidence and artifacts are resident on those
networks.
That intelligence can't be shared periodically through
human interaction, but it needs to be shared among all victims
immediately at network speed.
The Department of Homeland Security may be able to share
with vulnerability reduction strategies and guidelines with the
private sector and likewise they are responsible for
consequence management after a breach.
Additionally, though, under a threat mitigation model, DHS
is a potential intermediary between other Government agencies
and the private sector where they can collect intelligence
which leads to identification and attribution of the adversary.
Likewise, the Government has intelligence collection that
will make the private sector infinitely more resilient and they
need to share that information aggressively.
I know how the intelligence is collected and I recognize
there needs to be a protection of sources and methods, but
there is a lot more that the Government is able to do.
Any intelligence sharing between Government and private
sector must be done in a way that is respectful of and
consistent with privacy of our citizens, and we must start by
opening the debate on the limitations of the existing
defensive-only security model and the necessity of a threat
deterrence model.
I look forward to working with the committee and Congress
as a whole to determine a successful course forward for the
Nation that allows us to reap the positive benefits and the
economic benefits of the internet while minimizing the risk
posed by those who seek to do us irreparable harm, and I
encourage our further collaboration.
I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Henry follows:]
Prepared Statement of Shawn Henry
February 13, 2013
Good afternoon Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and
Members of the committee. Thank you for having me here today to discuss
the cyber threats facing our Nation, how these threats impact our
Government and private-sector networks, and the significant risk posed
to our economic and National security. I sincerely believe this is one
of the most critical issues facing our Nation, and I appreciate the
level of attention this committee is affording it.
the cybersecurity threat
We have spoken of the cyber threats for far too long, but it is too
important and cannot be overemphasized. So I'll state it again,
emphatically . . . foreign adversaries have targeted every major
organization in this country, and have stolen untold billions of
dollars of intellectual property, research and development, and
corporate strategies and secrets. The volume and sophistication of
cyber attacks has increased dramatically over the past 5 years, and in
the current environment it will continue to grow.
Given enough time, motivation, and funding, a determined adversary
will penetrate any system that is accessible directly from the
internet. Even systems not touching the network are susceptible to
attack via means other than remote access, including the trusted
insider using devices such as USB thumb drives, and the supply chain.
I have stated publicly that it is necessary for network
administrators to assume they have already been breached rather than
waiting for their intrusion detection systems to alert them to an
infiltration. Many have absolutely no knowledge that an adversary was,
or remains resident on, their network, often times for weeks, months,
or even years. While I was EAD at the FBI, our agents regularly knocked
on the door of victim companies and told them their network had been
intruded upon and their corporate secrets stolen, because we found
their proprietary data resident on a server in the course of another
investigation. We were routinely telling organizations they were
victims, and these victims ranged in size and industry, and cut across
all critical sectors. Organizations must, therefore, actively and
constantly hunt for the adversary on their network.
Alarmingly and increasingly, attackers are moving beyond mere
exfiltration or theft of data. With the breadth and depth of access
they have, adversaries can and have manipulated, disrupted, or
destroyed data and infrastructure. Those with malicious intent can take
devastating actions, and it is difficult to say with confidence that
our critical infrastructure--the backbone of our country's economic
prosperity, National security, and public health--will remain unscathed
and always be available when needed.
a paradigm shift in strategy
My colleagues at CrowdStrike, George Kurtz and Dmitri Alperovitch,
have talked about the deterrence of threat actors for years. Steven
Chabinsky, my colleague at the FBI for 17 years, and currently with me
at CrowdStrike as SVP of Legal Affairs, also discusses the paradigm
shift necessary in cybersecurity strategy.
Vulnerability mitigation is the current cybersecurity approach in
the private sector, and has been for the past 20 years. We continuously
focus on hardening our networks by ``Defense-in-Depth'', using
firewalls, anti-virus software, patching vulnerabilities, and employing
intrusion prevention systems. This approach generally stops those
actors who do not care who their specific targets are, but are simply
like burglars who are willing to rob anybody's house and take anybody's
jewelry.
Our mistake, however, is that we are using the same approach
against Advanced Persistent Threat actors who actually have specific
targets in mind, and are not going to stop until they have reached
their goals. These modern-day cyber burglars are targeting the
equivalent of the Hope Diamond, quite specifically, not fungible
engagement rings. For our most advanced and well-funded adversaries,
there are no substitutes for their targets, regardless of how many, and
they will continue their onslaught until they achieve success.
Ironically, our own defensive efforts have actually made the
problem worse, by encouraging our adversaries to outperform us, while
we outspend them. Although many are not prepared to consider this
possibility, the result of our failure to distinguish between the
novice and the professional adversary has been a proliferation of more
capable malware, created by nation-state adversaries and organized
crime groups, and an escalation of their activities in order to defeat
our defenses.
what does this mean?
Employing a threat mitigation strategy requires an increased
ability to detect and identify our adversaries, and to penalize them.
This is the identical strategy we employ in the physical world every
single day to thwart criminals, spies, and terrorists.
Achieving these goals in the cyber environment, however, will
require unprecedented coordination between private industry--which as a
whole has the ownership and ability to achieve these goals, and
governments, which are primarily authorized to investigate and penalize
them.
Inevitably we must bring the private sector and the Government
together to achieve the goal of threat deterrence. The vast majority of
the intelligence that will lead to identification of the adversaries
resides on private-sector networks; they are, in essence, ``crime
scenes'', and the evidence and artifacts of the breach are resident on
those networks. That threat intelligence, too, can't be shared
periodically via e-mail at human speed; it needs to be shared among all
victims, in real-time, at network speed. The private sector, then, can
fill tactical gaps that the Government is blind to. This can be done
while respecting privacy, a critical and absolutely necessary element
of intelligence sharing.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) naturally has the
responsibility for developing and promulgating necessary vulnerability
reduction strategies and guidelines. Likewise, they are responsible for
consequence management after a breach. Additionally, though, with a
threat mitigation model, DHS is a potential intermediary between other
Government agencies and the private sector to facilitate the analysis
and dissemination of ``big data''--collected intelligence--leading to
identification and attribution of adversaries.
Likewise, the Government has intelligence collection on the threat
actors that is different from, and additive to, that collected by the
private sector. Knowing what I do about that intelligence, and how it's
collected, I am certain the Government can share much more data with
industry than is currently shared today. That intelligence will add
infinite value, and it can be packaged and shared with the private
sector without threatening the integrity of the sources and methods
through which it's collected. Again, privacy is and must remain a key
tenet of any intelligence sharing strategy.
When the adversary is identified, the Government can then use its
resources and actions--whether it's law enforcement, the intelligence
community, diplomatic, or financial--to mitigate the threat posed by
these sophisticated opponents. The consistent threat posed by
adversaries will subside only when the cost to operate outweighs any
potential gain.
conclusion
We face significant challenges in our efforts to combat the cyber
threat. I am optimistic that by strengthening partnerships, effectively
sharing intelligence, and successfully identifying our adversaries, we
can best protect businesses and critical infrastructure from grave
damage.
We must start, however, by opening the debate on the limitations of
the existing defensive-only security model and the necessity of a
threat deterrence model. Further, we need a public discussion of how
Government and industry can jointly work together to achieve a safer
cyber environment by shining a light on our adversaries instead of
consistently telling victims to ``just do more.''
I look forward to assisting the committee, and Congress as a whole,
to determine a successful course forward for the Nation that allows us
to reap the positive economic and social benefits of the internet while
minimizing the risk posed by those who seek to do us irreparable harm.
I encourage our further collaboration, and I'm happy to answer any
questions.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Henry.
Mr. Leiter is now recognized.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL E. LEITER, FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL
COUNTERTERRORISM CENTER

Mr. Leiter. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, it is
a pleasure to be back in front of the committee and I will take
the liberty of speaking on behalf of all of my co-witnesses; it
is especially nice to be up here as a former Government
official.
I am extremely happy that this committee is looking at all
homeland threats because I think with that change in the
counterterrorism threat or terror threats that we have seen
over the past several years and the very stark fiscal landscape
we face, this is a very appropriate time to do so.
With the death of Osama bin Laden and the weakness of al-
Qaeda in Pakistan, we see the lowest level of sophisticated
threat to the homeland from Pakistan that we have seen since
2001, and that is a very, very good news story thanks to the
work of the men and women of the U.S. Government and our
allies.
That being said, as the Chairman noted, the splintering of
al-Qaeda into a more distributed group with rising dangers in
Yemen, North Africa, East Africa, Europe, and the homeland does
pose new challenges.
In my view, the al-Qaeda affiliate in Yemen, AQAP, still
continues to pose the most serious, sophisticated threat that
we face. As we saw in 2009, 2010, and 2012, the organization
remains committed to sophisticated IED attacks against the
United States and the homeland.
East Africa is surprisingly a brighter spot, something I
thought I might never say about Somalia, but in fact, U.S.
efforts and Kenyan partnership has reduced that threat and most
importantly to this committee, fewer Americans traveling to the
region to fight in the jihad than we have seen for years.
On the other hand, North Africa of course is proven some
serious darkness over the past several months especially, but I
do want to say this carefully, but while the attacks in
Benghazi and the BP oil facility are absolutely tragic, in my
view, the major change in the region is not a massive increase
in the popularity of AQIM, but rather the huge shift that
occurred in the region with the fall of the government in
Libya, the availability of weapons, the loss of partner
security services in the region, and the coup d'etat in Mali.
All of that have combined to create a safe haven which is
in fact dangerous but I think still does not rise to the level
of seriousness that that we have previously seen in Pakistan or
we see today in Yemen.
I especially commend the committee for looking into the
threat of Hezbollah and Iran, which has often been overlooked
over the past 10 years. I think with growing tension between
the United States, Israel, and Iran, Hezbollah has proved
increasingly active over the past several years, most notably
the Bulgarian recognition that Hezbollah targeted and killed
six tourists last year and many other failed Hezbollah attacks.
The Hezbollah's and the Iranian Quds Force growing presence
in Venezuela and elsewhere in the world could prove a serious
problem for the United States and our allies were there to be a
conflict with Iran.
I would also add that Iranian aggressive cyber attacks
against Saudi Aramco and RasGas, destructive cyber attacks,
could also portend for a combined physical and cyber attack by
Iran, were certain red lines crossed.
With that as a threat landscape and looking ahead, let me
offer some quick views as to things that we have to guard
against now 12 years after 9/11.
The first is what I term terrorism fatigue and although
this committee does not experience it, many in the United
States, and I fear many in Congress do. After hearing about
terrorism for 10 or 12 years, people simply don't want to talk
about it anymore and there are two specific threats associated
with this.
First, with all of our counterterrorism successes that we
have had over the past 12 years, which really are incredible, I
fear that any small attack, no matter how small can result in
political finger-pointing and a real crucification of our
counterterrorism professionals, and although we of course have
to look at how we can do this job better, we have to guard
against ex-poste investigations that lack a serious
appreciation for the ex-ante difficulties of counterterrorism
work.
Second, I believe this terrorism fatigue can lead to
dangerous lethargy within the Executive branch. I saw over and
over again how hard and quickly the Executive branch could work
immediately after an attack and then as the months, weeks and
months passed by, I saw the impetus for rapid and important
change start to drop away. So I hope this committee can hold
the Executive branch's feet to the fire on these topics.
Second, weapons of mass destruction. Although this remains
a very low likelihood event and we have done very well in
combating terrorist acquisition of WMD, the high consequences
of such an attack especially biological or radiological or God
forbid, improvised nuclear devices, cannot be forgotten and
these require long-term investments.
Third, our counterterrorism partnerships. I won't go into
detail here but suffice to say with the Arab awakening we have
lost some of our most critical partners in the counterterrorism
fight and that has significantly increased the risk to the
homeland in my view.
Fourth, and this became a high-profile issue over the past
several weeks, I believe we have to stay on the offense on all
fronts. Perhaps unsurprisingly given my service in the Obama
and Bush administrations, I am quite supportive of the policy
outlined in the Department of Justice white paper. I am equally
supportive of the President's call for greater transparency,
and I would urge this committee to work with the intelligence
committee to make sure you have the transparency into these
programs.
But ultimately I believe that these offensive measures
combined with other measures, because this is only one tool,
are absolutely critical to homeland security.
Last but not least, and a good transition to the good
Honorable David Walker. We have spent close to $100 billion a
year on counterterrorism. This is the time to rationalize that
and figure out how we can get the most bang for our buck to
make sure that the American people are safe.
I think the committee and look forward to working with the
Congress in the future.
[The statement of Mr. Leiter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael E. Leiter
February 13, 2013
overview
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to testify on my perspectives--
which I hope are at least partially ``new''--on threats to homeland
security. Although the membership on this committee has changed over
the years, this body has always been at the forefront of understanding
threats and shaping our Government's response to them. On behalf of
those who continue to serve in homeland security and intelligence
organizations, I want to thank the committee for its continuing
oversight and support.
As the 113th Congress considers the current threat landscape, I
believe you are correct to reevaluate broadly the state of terrorism
and our associated response. Although the growing presence of al-Qaeda-
associated elements in North Africa and Syria highlight how the threat
of terrorism continues, we have made remarkable strides against the
threat of catastrophic attacks like what we experienced on 9/11.
Combined with a fiscal reality that precludes the sort of spending we
have maintained since that tragic event, this is a historic moment to
rationalize and calibrate our response to terrorism, cyber threats, and
other related threats to the homeland.
the threat landscape
Today al-Qaeda and its allies in Pakistan are at their weakest
point since 9/11. The death of Osama bin Ladin and the continued
decimation of senior ranks has made the organization a shadow of its
former self. Ayman al Zawahiri is not bin Ladin and although the
organization still attempts to provide strategic guidance and global
propaganda, its influence continues to wane. Whether this trajectory
can be maintained with a significant decrease of the U.S. presence in
Afghanistan in the coming years will be, in my view, the single biggest
determinant of al-Qaeda Core's relevance for the coming decade.
The degradation of al-Qaeda's ``higher headquarters'' and
relatively well-coordinated command and control has allowed its
affiliates and its message to splinter, posing new dangers and
challenges. Al-Qaeda affiliates or those inspired by its message have
worrisome presences in Yemen, East Africa, North Africa, Syria, Western
Europe, and of course to a lesser degree the United States.
Beginning with Yemen, in my view al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
(AQAP)--as I stated 2 years ago--continues to pose the most
sophisticated and deadly threat to the U.S. homeland from an overseas
affiliate. The death of operational commander Anwar al-Awlaki
significantly reduced AQAP's ability to attract and motivate English
speakers, but its operational efforts continue with lesser abatement.
As we saw in 2009, 2010, and 2012, AQAP has remained committed--and
able--to pursue complex attacks involving innovative improvised
explosives devices. Although some of the organization's safe haven has
been diminished because of Yemeni and U.S. efforts, the inability of
the government of Yemen to bring true control to wide swaths of the
country suggests that the group will pose a threat for the foreseeable
future and (unlike many other affiliates) it clearly remains focused on
transnational attacks.
East Africa, surprisingly to many, is a brighter spot in our
efforts. Although al-Shabaab remains a force and poses significant
risks in the region--most especially in Kenya and to the fledgling
government in Somalia--its risk to the homeland is markedly less today
than just 2 years ago. Kenya's offensive in the region shattered much
of al-Shabaab's power base and most importantly for this committee the
attractiveness of Somalia to Americans and other Westerners is
radically less than was the case. The relative flood of Americans has
turned into a trickle, thus significantly reducing the threat of
trained terrorists returning to our shores.
As the world witnessed over the past 6 months, however, al-Qaeda in
the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) has shifted the focus in Africa as the
organization has made gains in Mali, Libya, and the rural areas of
Algeria. But while the attacks in Benghazi and on the Algerian oil
facility are of course tragic, in my view the major change to the
region is not a massive increase in AQIM's attractiveness, but rather
the huge shift that occurred with the virtual elimination of Libya's
security services, the associated flood of weapons in the region, and
the coup d'etat in Mali.
AQIM has thus far proven a less tactically proficient and more
regionally-focused criminal organization than other al-Qaeda
affiliates. Although we cannot blindly hope this remains the case, we
should also not read too much into recent events. Regional capacity-
building, targeted offensive measures, and forceful engagement with
governments like France, Algeria, and Libya that have a huge vested
interest in the region should remain at the forefront of our strategy.
And we must roundly condemn those who against every lesson of the past
several years might be willing to pay ransoms to AQIM and its
affiliates.
One notable area of concern that we must forcefully combat in the
region--and one which the United States is uniquely able to address
given our global footprint--is the cross-fertilization across the
African continent that has recently accelerated. Coordination amongst
al-Shabaab, AQIM, Boko Haram, and others is particularly problematic as
it allows each organization to leverage the others' strengths. We must
use our intelligence capabilities to define these networks and then
assist in disrupting them. And our screening of travelers to the United
States must recognize the dangers associated with these networks.
The most troubling of emerging fronts in my view is Syria, where
Jabhat al-Nusra has emerged as the most radical of groups within the
opposition. Given the enormous instability in Syria, which has to some
degree already spread to Iraq and elsewhere in the Levant, Jabhat al-
Nusra has become a magnet for al-Qaeda-inspired fighters from around
the globe. With little likelihood of rapid improvements in Syria, the
al-Nusra front will almost certainly continue to arm, obtain real-world
combat experience, and attract additional recruits--and potentially
state assistance that is flowing to the FSA. Moreover, Jabhat al-
Nusra's ideology not only contributes to the threat of terrorism, but
more broadly it is contributing significantly to the regional Sunni-
Shia tension that poses enormous risks. The rapid removal of Bashar al-
Assad would not solve these problems, but an on-going civil war does in
my view worsen the situation.
Without declaring victory, we should also have some optimism about
al-Qaeda-inspired terrorism in Western Europe and especially the
homeland. As recent studies have shown, there has been a continuing
decline in numbers of significant homeland plots that have not been
closely controlled by the FBI since 2009. In addition, the relative
sophistication of homeland terrorists has not increased. Combined with
successful counterterrorism efforts in Western Europe--most
particularly huge strides in the United Kingdom--the picture faced
today is far brighter than just 3 years ago.
Similar optimism cannot be applied to the threat posed by Lebanese
Hezbollah, especially given its successful and foiled attacks over the
past 2 years. Most notably, Hezbollah attack in Bulgaria killed six
tourists and highlights the extent to which the group (and its patrons
in Iran) continue to see themselves as being in an on-going
unconventional war with Israel and the United States. Predicting
Hezbollah and Iranian ``redlines'' is a notoriously challenging
endeavor--as illustrated by the surprising 2011 plot to kill the Saudi
Ambassador to the United States--but both organizations almost
certainly would launch attacks at least outside the United States were
there a strike on Iranian nuclear facilities.
There is little doubt that both Hezbollah and the IRGC Qods Force
maintain a network of operatives that could be used for such strikes.
In this regard the heavy Iranian presence in Latin America and Iranian
cooperation with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez is of particular
concern. Although not every Hezbollah member and Iranian diplomat is a
trained operative, a significant number could in the case of
hostilities enable other operatives to launch attacks against Israeli
or U.S. diplomatic facilities, Jewish cultural institutions, or high-
profile individuals. In addition, and generally unlike al-Qaeda
affiliates, the specter of Hezbollah or Iranian-sponsored cyber attacks
is disturbingly real. Recent Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDOS)
attacks on major U.S. financial institutions, as well as even more
destructive Iranian-sponsored attacks on Saudi Aramco and Qatar-based
RasGas, have highlighted the extent to which physical attacks might be
combined with cyber attacks.
looking ahead
This threat picture, although complex and dynamic, is in many ways
more heartening than that which we faced from 2001 until at least 2010.
Numerous organizations continue to threaten terrorist attacks, but as a
very general matter the threats are away from the homeland and the
scale of the attacks is markedly less than what we saw in September
2001 or even 2006, when al-Qaeda came dangerously close to attacking up
to ten transatlantic airliners. It is not that events like Benghazi are
not tragic. But threats to U.S. diplomatic facilities in Libya are of a
radically different type than planes flying into civilian facilities in
New York and Washington. In this regard, this is an appropriate
juncture to look at a few of our biggest risks and challenges.
Terrorism Fatigue.--After 10-plus years of near-constant public
discussion of terrorism--in our politics, the media, and through public
messaging--many have simply had enough. This is not all bad as an
unhealthy obsession with the threat of terrorism at the expense of
countless other societal woes, such as cyber threats and drug violence
on the Southwest Border, would in many ways hand our enemy a victory.
On the other hand, there is real value in public discussion of
terrorism: It can build resilience in the population and it can lead to
the tackling of tough public policy questions like targeted killings
and domestic intelligence. With terrorism fatigue we run a real risk of
not addressing these issues in a way that provides a lasting
counterterrorism framework. In this regard I actually see the current
discussion around the use of drones as quite a heartening sign.
Terrorism fatigue poses at least two additional challenges. First,
with all of our counterterrorism success such victories have become
expected and any failure--no matter how small--can result in political
finger-pointing and excoriation of our counterterrorism professionals.
In effect we have become victims of our own success and unlike in 2001,
perfection has become a political expectation. Although we should
continuously examine how we can improve our capabilities, we must guard
against ex poste investigations that lack a serious appreciation for
the ex ante difficulties of counterterrorism.
Second, terrorism fatigue can cause dangerous lethargy within the
Executive branch on issues that do not appear to require immediate
attention but which can do longer-term damage to counterterrorism
efforts. I have repeatedly seen urgency morph into bureaucratic
sluggishness as time passes since the last attack on issues like
information sharing and interagency cooperation. Whether it is
countering violent extremism programs or information access for the
intelligence community, we must not take our foot off the gas pedal.
Weapons of Mass Destruction.--There is no doubt that smallish
terrorist attacks or at least attempts will continue to occur at home
and abroad. Such attacks can cause enormous pain and suffering to
victims and their families, but they are clearly of a scale--at least
with respect to absolute numbers killed--that is dwarfed by other
societal ills such as routine criminal activity. The same cannot be
said of terrorists' use of weapons of mass destruction--and more
specifically biological weapons or an improvised nuclear device (IND).
Although we have also made progress in reducing the likelihood of
terrorists obtaining WMD, for the foreseeable future we are faced with
the possibility that a terrorist organization will successfully acquire
these weapons. In this case, technology is not yet our friend as the
ease with which these weapons can be obtained and hidden continues to
exceed our ability to detect them.
Weapons of mass destruction pose a unique challenge as they are the
prototypical low-likelihood, high-consequence event and thus
determining the proper allocation of resources to combat them is
particular contentious. That being said, we must continue to protect
against the most dangerous of materials (e.g., HEU) being obtained by
terrorists, secure weapons in the most dangerous places (e.g.,
Pakistan), and pursue research and development that will assist in
detecting chemical and biological weapons in places where they would do
the most harm.
Counterterrorism Partnerships.--Counterterrorism has always been
and continues to be a ``team sport.'' Although the United States can do
much alone, we have always been incredibly reliant on a vast network of
friendly nations that have extended massively our intelligence, law
enforcement, military, and homeland security reach. Even before the
Arab Awakening we witnessed some weakening of these partnerships.
Whether it was fatigue on our partners' part, their own resource
challenges, or differing views on the proper scope of counterterrorist
efforts (e.g., fights over data sharing between the United States and
the European Union), these partnerships have been under some pressure.
Post-Arab Awakening we face an exponentially more daunting task, having
lost some of our most valuable partners in the very places we need them
most.
Again, part of the challenge is that we have been a victim of our
own success. Al-Qaeda is simply not viewed as the same existential
threat that it was in 2001. But without robust partnerships it will be
increasingly difficult for us to detect and disrupt rising al-Qaeda (or
other groups') cells, thus making it more likely that they will
metastasize and embed themselves in ways that makes them more dangerous
and more difficult to displace.
To maintain our partnerships we must carefully preserve funding for
programs that provide critical capabilities--and potentially more
important, a positive U.S. presence--for our allies. The increase in
funding for special operations forces is a good step, but relatively
tiny investments in Department of State and Justice programs can also
deliver real results in this realm. In addition, we will have to
approach new governments in the Middle East with sophistication and
ensure they continue to view terrorism as a mutual threat.
Staying on the Offense--on all Fronts.--Over the past week an
enormous amount has been said about targeted killings, especially of
U.S. persons. In my view, having served under both Presidents George W.
Bush and Obama, such targeted killings are a vital tool in the
counterterrorism toolbox. And regrettably, in some cases that tool must
also be used against U.S. persons like Anwar al-Awlaki who was a senior
al-Qaeda operational commander who was continuing to plot attacks
against the United States.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, I am supportive of the legal outline
contained in the released Department of Justice white paper. From my
perspective, the memorandum and administration practice (contrary to
claims by some) appropriately constrains the President's authority, has
provided extensive Congressional oversight and the opportunity to limit
the program, and provides realistic standards given the inherent
challenges of intelligence and counterterrorism. As I have previously
implied, however, I am equally supportive of the current public debate
on the issue. In fact, I believe bringing greater visibility to some
programs could be useful not only to build U.S. support, but also to
build greater international understanding if not support--a key element
in our ideological efforts.
As supportive as I am of targeted killings in appropriate
circumstances, I am equally supportive of ensuring that these are not
our only counterterrorism tools employed. I do believe that our
reliance on kinetic strikes has in some cases allowed other efforts to
atrophy or at least pale in comparison. This is enormously dangerous,
as we cannot strike everywhere nor can we lethally target an ideology.
As we increase targeted killings we must double-down on our soft power
and ideological efforts--building capacity in civilian security forces,
increasing the rule of law to diminish under-governed or ungoverned
safe havens, and the like--lest we win a few battles and lose a global
war.
Resources.--Finally, and not entirely inappropriately,
counterterrorism resources at the Federal, State, and local levels will
undoubtedly decline significantly in the coming years. It is difficult
to estimate accurately how much has been spent on counterterrorism over
the past 11 years, but the amount certainly comes close if not exceeds
$100 billion a year. Some of this was undoubtedly well spent, but it is
folly to think that inefficiencies and redundancies do not exist
widely. In this sense, a bit of frugality is likely a very good thing.
The question, however, is whether we will be willing or able to
make smart reductions to preserve critical capabilities. Our historic
ability to direct funds where the threat is greatest--as opposed to
where the political forces are strongest--have not been good. Perhaps
the declining threat will mean that we can continue to spend
imperfectly, but this is surely a dangerous bet to make.
We should use this imposed frugality to do serious mission-based--
as opposed to Department- and agency-specific-based--budgeting in the
Federal Government. This approach will require enormous changes within
the Executive and Congressional branches, but looking across the
counterterrorism budget, identifying the critical capabilities we must
preserve, and then figuring out how that matches Department-specific
budgets can be done. And if we are serious about maintaining these
capabilities we have little choice.
conclusion
More than a decade after 9/11, combatting terrorism isn't over. No
one should be surprised by this fact. Nor should anyone be surprised
that we are fighting in different places and, although some approaches
are the same as they were in 2001, many of our tools must evolve with
the evolving threat. Moreover, having the benefit of almost 12 years of
National effort we are in a better place today to balance our
counterterrorism efforts with other significant threats to our
homeland, most notably state-sponsored cyber intrusions, theft, and
attacks, and cross-border violence and instability due to
counternarcotic efforts in Mexico. To the extent we have built up
robust counterterrorist capabilities and we must maintain them, but we
must also--to the extent possible--make sure these tools are applied
effectively to other homeland security missions.
This committee has been central to much of what has been
accomplished over the past 10 years. I very much hope--and expect--that
it will be central to an inevitable transition, while never forgetting
the tragedy that was the impetus for its creation. I hope that I have
been helpful in giving a new perspective on these issues to help
address these evolving challenges. Thank you for inviting me to
testify, and for this committee's leadership on these critical issues.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you Mr. Leiter. We appreciate your
testimony and certainly miss your briefings in a classified
setting.
Now, Mr. Walker, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID M. WALKER, FOUNDER AND CEO, THE COMEBACK
AMERICA INITIATIVE

Mr. Walker. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson,
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
The perspective I will bring is primarily more on
management issues facing DHS. I have got over 40 years of
leadership experience in all three sectors of the economy
including 10 years as comptroller general of the United States
and head of the GAO. In fact, I testified on numerous occasions
at the onset of creating the Department of Homeland Security.
First picking up on something the Chairman said earlier,
from a macro perspective as has been stated by Admiral Mike
Mullen, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, myself,
and others, the single greatest threat to our Nation's security
is our own fiscal irresponsibility and mounting debt burdens.
Absent a change in course, our Nation's debt level will
become unsustainable. This will threaten our future position in
the world, our economy at home, our National security, our
homeland security, and even our domestic tranquility over time.
While legislation in recent years including the Budget
Control Act, the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012, was
intended to help address this challenge. They have not
addressed the three key drivers of our structural deficits;
known demographic trends, rising health care costs, and an
outdated and inadequate tax system.
As a result, we still face mounting deficit and debt
burdens and the portion of the Federal budget that is on
autopilot is scheduled to increase from the current 67 percent
and go up.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Congress had control of 97
percent of the budget 100 years ago. Now it controls 33 and
going down. That must change.
Therefore, a critical step to securing our Nation's future
and our homeland is to reach a grand fiscal bargain that
restores fiscal sanity, recaptures control of the budget, and
ensures adequate financing for the departments and agencies
that fall under the expressed and enumerated responsibilities
as envisioned by our Nation's founders including homeland
security.
Given the inevitability that the Federal Government will
have to do more with less it is important more than ever that
Federal agencies, including DHS, have a comprehensive and
integrated strategic plan that is future-focused, results-
oriented, resource-constrained, and that considers customers,
employees, and other key stakeholders.
In my experience, there are three key elements that any
organization must have to be successful. It has to have a plan,
it has to have a reasonable budget, and it has to have outcome-
based performance measures.
Unfortunately, over 200 years after our creation, the U.S.
Government still doesn't have any one of these three. The DHS
has done a better job, but there is still room for improvement.
From the DHS perspective, this past November marked the
10th anniversary of the formation. It is appropriate to look
back. There are several areas I think that improvement is
needed.
First, it must improve its strategic planning process. GAO
and others have noted this need. DHS relies on partners to
achieve a lot of its mission. There has to be a lot more
consultation and coordination with those partners in order to
achieve an effective plan and execution of that plan.
It needs to improve its financial management practices
although it has made real progress, and in particular, it needs
to improve its information technology and acquisition and
contracting practices; some of the issues were mentioned
previously and the waste that has occurred in that regard.
Third, there is a clear and compelling need to address
human capital challenges at DHS. It is a major organization;
the third-largest in Government. It is only as successful as
its people and yet it has one of the lowest morales of any
Federal agency with regard to its employees.
I would add two more items that aren't in my testimony but
I think they are important. As I testified when I was
comptroller general, there are certain large, complex, and
high-risk agencies that should have a chief operating officer,
a level two executive, which is a Presidential appointment,
Senate confirmation, with statutory qualification requirements,
with a 5- to 7-year tenure, and with a performance contract. We
need that in large, high-risk agencies in order to deal with
these challenges efficiently and effectively and in a timely
manner.
Last, but not least, it is not in my testimony, but I will
mention it; look, we are going to have serious budget
constraints. We are going to have to do more with less. I think
you have to also look at the possibility of user fees or other
types of fees to be able to fund some of the costs of services
associated with DHS that relate to individuals or goods, and I
will leave that to your good judgment.
Last, but not least, there are a lot of things that need to
be done in Government some of which have not been able to get
done through the normal process. I would commend to your
consideration of forming a Government transformation task force
that would be able to make recommendations to the Congress that
would be guaranteed hearings and guaranteed a vote focusing on
economy, efficiency, effectiveness, and credibility to Federal
Government.
I am happy to answer questions about this if you would
like.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, happy to answer
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walker follows:]
Prepared Statement of David M. Walker
February 13, 2013
Good morning Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and
distinguished Members of the committee. I am honored to be here to
offer my perspective on the current state of the Department of Homeland
Security and how it can best achieve its important mission, that of
helping to secure our country and its citizens.
The perspective I bring to this issue is based on my almost 40
years of experience across multiple sectors of the economy, spanning
over 20 years of private sector experience, over 15 years of total
Federal Government service, including almost 10 years as comptroller
general of the United States and head of the U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO), and almost 5 years in the non-profit
sector. During my tenure as U.S. Comptroller General, I gained
extensive knowledge of homeland security issues, and I testified before
Congress on numerous occasions about this topic, including during the
planning and formation of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in
2002. I am currently the founder and CEO of the Comeback America
Initiative, which educates and engages the public about the threat
posed by our Nation's structural deficits and mounting debt burdens,
and possible ways to address them.
As has been stated by Admiral Mike Mullen, myself, and others, the
single greatest threat to our Nation's security is our own fiscal
irresponsibility and mounting debt burdens. Absent a change in course,
our Nation's debt levels will become unsustainable. This will threaten
our position in the world, economy at home, our National security, and
even our domestic tranquility over time.
While legislation in recent years, including the Budget Control Act
and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012, was intended to help
address our fiscal challenge, they have not addressed the three key
drivers of our structural deficits: Known demographic trends, rising
health care costs, and an outdated and inadequate tax system. As a
result, the portion of the Federal budget that is on autopilot is set
to increase from its current 67%, and the Nation's longer-term deficits
will grow over time. According to last week's updated budget
projections from the Congressional Budget Office, under current law,
mandatory spending, including interest, will consume 76% of the Federal
budget in 2023. Discretionary spending will be squeezed to roughly 24%
of total spending, with non-defense discretionary spending being about
12% of total spending. As a percent of GDP, non-defense discretionary
spending will decrease to 2.7%, well below the historical average of
the past 40 years (4%). Therefore, a critical step to securing our
Nation's future is to reach a ``grand bargain'' that restores fiscal
sanity, recaptures control of the budget, and ensures adequate
financing for the departments and agencies that fall under the express
and enumerated Constitutional roles and responsibilities of the Federal
Government, including homeland security.
Given the inevitability of our Federal Government having to do more
with less, it is more important than ever for all Federal agencies,
including DHS, to have a comprehensive and integrated strategic plan
that is future-focused, results-oriented, resource-constrained, and
that considers customers, employees, and other key stakeholders. In my
experience, there are three key elements any organization must have to
be successful: (1) It must have a plan; (2) it must have a budget; and
(3) it must have outcome-based performance metrics. Unfortunately our
Federal Government as a whole fails on all three of these. DHS has done
a better job, but there is still plenty of room for improvement.
This past November marked the 10th anniversary of the formation of
DHS, and the Department has made meaningful strides during that time to
improve its performance, during some trying times, when it comes to
homeland security threats. I recall during my testimony before Congress
in 2002, when Congress was considering the creation of the Department,
pointing out that a consolidation of 22 separate agencies was one of
the biggest transformational changes the Federal Government had ever
undertaken. In fact, at the time I stated that ``the experiences of
organizations that have undertaken transformational change efforts
along the lines that will be necessary for the new department to be
fully effective suggest that this process can take up to 5 to 10 years
to provide meaningful and sustainable results''. Now that 10 years have
passed, it is appropriate to explore areas that DHS can focus on to
more effectively achieve its critically important mission.
First, I believe DHS must improve its strategic planning processes.
It is vitally important for any organization to have a strategic plan
to guide its actions, allocate resources, and measure results. Unlike
the Federal Government as a whole, DHS has made real progress in its
Department-wide planning. However, GAO and others have recommended that
DHS provide more opportunity for stakeholder participation in its
planning process. Given DHS's reliance on partners to achieve its
mission, in both the public and private sector, it is vitally important
for those stakeholders to be meaningfully engaged in the planning
process. In addition, DHS must do a better job of integrating risk
management into its planning process, especially given the nature of
its mission. Integrating risk management practices as a key element of
its planning process is also critical to achieving sustainable success
in an atmosphere of constrained resources. DHS planning must also
involve the development of more outcome-based performance measures to
guide allocation of limited resources.
Second, DHS must improve its financial management practices. While
DHS has made progress in improving its financial management practices
since its inception, a lot more work needs to be done. For example,
failure to fully integrate its financial management system, and various
internal control weaknesses, have resulted in DHS not being able to
achieve an unqualified audit opinion on its financial statements since
the Department's creation. DHS also has a number of material internal
control weaknesses that need to be addressed.
In addition to integrating its financial management systems, DHS
must make further strides in modernizing and integrating other
management practices and systems. DHS faces serious challenges in
integrating its IT, financial, human capital, and acquisition systems.
These challenges have contributed to cost overruns, schedule delays,
and an inability to achieve stated Departmental goals and objectives.
Furthermore, with regard to acquisition management, DHS should
implement more strategic and portfolio-based investment practices, and
execute existing acquisition policy more effectively.
GAO has stated that ``DHS culture has emphasized the need to
rapidly execute missions more than sound acquisition management
practices. Most major programs lack reliable cost estimates, realistic
schedules, and agreed-upon baseline objectives . . . '' DHS must
improve these practices if it is to effectively fulfill its mission.
Third, there are clear and compelling human capital challenges that
DHS must address if it is to effectively achieve its mission in a
sustainable manner. Any organization is only as successful as its
people, and based on recent analysis employee morale at DHS is amongst
the lowest at all Federal agencies. Furthermore, given the demographic
trends facing Government at all levels, it is vitally important that
DHS employ strategic workforce planning that focuses on acquiring,
developing, and retaining a workforce capable of achieving its mission.
This includes appropriate succession planning and recruiting practices.
The issues I have highlighted are areas where Congress can employ
its oversight responsibilities to ensure DHS is best able to fulfill
its mission in the future, especially in an era of serious fiscal
challenges. However, I also encourage the Congress to consider creating
a Government Transformation Task Force, similar to that being advocated
by the Government Transformation Initiative (GTI), for which I serve as
chairman of the board. Under GTI's proposed approach, an independent
body, authorized by statute, would be created to recommend ways the
Federal Government can operate more economically, efficiently, and
effectively. The task force would be made up of non-conflicted leaders
with proven track records of transforming organizations in the public,
private, and/or non-profit sectors. It would issue reports and
recommendations outlining ways to help Government focus on results,
plan strategically, streamline operations, leverage technology, adopt
best practices, and otherwise improve performance. Congress should be
required to consider the task force recommendations in a timely
fashion.
Our Nation's poor financial condition and mounting debt burdens
require that Congress think outside the box and develop new ways to
make Government more future-focused and results-oriented. The creation
of such a task force could help restructure our Government to meet the
needs of the 21st Century, while achieving efficiencies that allow it
to live within the resource-constrained reality that our current fiscal
path will require.
When testifying before the creation of DHS I said that, ``Strong
and visionary leadership will be vital to creating a unified, focused
organization, as opposed to a group of separate units under a single
roof.'' DHS has made real progress in this regard, but more action is
required. At the same time, greater vision and leadership is required
to help ensure that the Federal Government as a whole can effectively
address the many sustainability challenges that we face. This is
essential if we want to effectively discharge our stewardship
obligation to our children, grandchildren, and future generations of
Americans.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify before your
distinguished committee, and I would be happy to answer any questions
you may have.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you Mr. Walker, and as I mentioned
in my opening statement, management reform and applying more of
a business model to the Department to identify waste and
inefficiencies will also be a top priority, and I appreciate
your testimony.
Mr. Ervin, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF CLARK KENT ERVIN, PARTNER, PATTON BOGGS, LLP

Mr. Ervin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, Chairman King,
and Members, thank you very much for this opportunity to
testify today.
Let me start by joining my colleagues, Mr. Chairman, in
congratulating you on your ascension to the Chairmanship. It is
not every day that one gets to testify before a dear, personal
friend, and a former colleague.
I have worked very closely with both Ranking Member
Thompson and you, Chairman King, over the years and look
forward to continuing to do so.
It seems not so long ago that the Nation was beginning to
turn its attention away from the threat of terrorism. With the
end of the war in Iraq, the beginning of the end of the war in
Afghanistan, the killing of Osama bin Laden and that of his
would-be rival for that dubious title, public enemy No. 1,
Anwar al-Awlaki, as well as the devastatingly successful drone
campaign against various and sundry al-Qaeda lieutenants and
foot soldiers in Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia, the absence,
thankfully, of successful terror attacks, and the absence for
some time of even significant aborted terror plots, even some
sophisticated analysts and observers had come to think that
terrorism had returned to the status of a second-order concern
for policymakers and war fighters.
If anything good has come out of the crises in Mali,
Benghazi, and Syria and out of the renewed and intensified
controversy, occasioned by a recent movie and recent
confirmation hearings over drone strikes and enhanced
interrogation techniques, it is the understanding of the
sobering fact that, our signal victories and wholly
understandable war-weariness notwithstanding, terrorists of one
stripe or another continue to pose a grave threat to the world
in general and to our homeland in particular.
If anything, the terror threat today is more complicated
than it was a decade ago because, as Mr. Leiter noted, the
threat is more diffuse, with ``al-Qaeda Core'' having
metastasized, cancer-like, into various virulent regional cells
throughout most of the world.
We face today's terrorism threat in a severely constrained
fiscal environment, with huge defense cuts looming like a
proverbial Sword of Damocles, limiting policymakers' and war
fighters' options to a degree unprecedented in recent history.
For all these reasons, in this tenth anniversary year of
DHS, I would argue for placing ``security'' back at the front
and center of ``Department of Homeland Security.''
By that I mean that the rightful acknowledgement that the
Department has multiple important missions to carry out:
Preparing for and responding to natural disasters; dealing with
the issue of immigration; patrolling our coast line, et cetera,
to name just a few. Its chief role is to do its part to detect,
deter, and defend the Nation from terror attacks.
Now I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the progress
that DHS, working with its partners at the Federal, State, and
local governmental level, the private sector, and the American
people, has made, through two administrations now; one
Republican, in which I served, and one Democratic, in helping
to secure the Nation.
Our aviation sector in particular, on which terrorists
understandably, remain fixated, is far more secure than it was
on September 10, 2011. But, I remain concerned about various
aspects of even our aviation system even, like, for example,
the continued vulnerability of air cargo on passenger planes,
and our use of devices at airport passenger checkpoints that
are really anomaly detectors, as opposed to what we really
need, namely, explosives detectors.
I worry, too, about our relative lack of focus over the
years on securing our mass transit sector. The successful
attacks over the years in London, Madrid, and Moscow, and the
aborted terror plots in New York City all show that mass
transit is also in terrorists' cross hairs, and sooner or
later, they will attempt to strike here again, and if we are
not careful, one day they will succeed.
I worry also about our maritime sectors, specifically, the
smuggling of radioactive material in containers and hope that
we will redouble our efforts to try to find a way to scan not
just cargo about which we have suspicions, but all cargo if
possible in an effective, efficient, and economical manner,
without bringing global commerce to a halt.
Call me a worry wart, but I don't trust terrorists to
complete a shipping manifest accurately or to do business only
with unknown shippers, and so a risk-based automated target
system largely based on such trust gives me pause. As President
Reagan would say, ``Trust, but verify.''
Finally, cyber-threats. I look forward to learning more
about the President's Executive Order later today, but we all I
think would agree that it is no substitute for legislation and
hope very much that the administration and the Congress will
work together in a bipartisan way to enact a law this year that
will further secure our Nation against this potentially
catastrophic threat.
Finally, the success of the Department on all of these
fronts will require adroit leadership on the part of Secretary
Napolitano, working with the Congress in general, and with this
committee and your Senate counterpart in particular.
Given the grave threats and our severe fiscal constraints,
there is no time to waste and not a single dollar to waste. I
would applaud Secretary Napolitano for taking steps like
pulling the plug on costly and inefficient and ineffective
procurements like SBInet and DNDO's ASP program, and I also
hope that this year that using the fiscal crisis in which we
are in, we can ensure that going forward we direct
counterterrorism grants only to those localities most at risk
of terror attack.
With that, Mr. Chairman, again, thank you very much for
having me here today to testify and like others, I look forward
very much to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ervin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Clark Kent Ervin
February 13, 2013
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members, thank you
very much for inviting me to testify before you today at this important
hearing. It is a great joy for me to testify before you, Mr. Chairman,
recalling as I do with delight our years together as fellow deputy
attorneys general to then-Texas Attorney John Cornyn. It is not every
day that one gets to testify before a Chairman who happens to be a dear
personal friend dating back many years. Congratulations on your
ascension to the Chairmanship, and I look forward to working with you
going forward. And, of course, though we were not colleagues likewise
in a prior life, I count you, too, as a friend, Ranking Member
Thompson, and am delighted to be working with you again in your key
role on this key committee.
It seems not so long ago that the Nation was beginning to turn its
attention away from the threat of terrorism. With the end of the war in
Iraq; the beginning of the end of the war in Afghanistan; the killing
of Public Enemy No. 1, Osama bin Laden, and that of his would-be rival
for that dubious title, Anwar al-Awlaki, as well as the devastatingly
successful drone campaign against various and sundry al-Qaeda
lieutenants and foot soldiers in Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia; the
absence, thankfully, of successful terror attacks, and the absence for
some time of even significant aborted terror plots, even some
sophisticated analysts and observers had come to think that terrorism
had returned to the status of a second-order concern for policymakers
and war fighters.
If anything good has come out of the crises in Mali, Benghazi, and
Syria, and out of the renewed and intensified controversy, occasioned
by a recent movie and recent confirmation hearings, over drone strikes
and enhanced interrogation techniques, it is the underscoring of the
sobering fact that, our signal victories and wholly understandable war
weariness notwithstanding, terrorists of one stripe or another continue
to pose a grave threat to the world in general and to our homeland in
particular. And, if anything, the terror threat today is more
complicated than it was a decade ago because the threat is more
diffuse, with ``al-Qaeda Core'' having metastasized, cancer-like, into
various virulent regional cells throughout most of the world. And, we
face today's terrorism threat in a severely constrained fiscal
environment, with huge defense cuts looming like a proverbial Sword of
Damocles, limiting policymakers' and war fighters' options to a degree
unprecedented in recent history.
For all these reasons, in this tenth anniversary year of DHS, I
would argue for placing ``security'' back at the front and center of
``Department of Homeland Security.'' By that I mean that the rightful
acknowledgement that the Department has multiple important missions to
carry out--preparing for and responding to natural disasters; extending
the benefits of and enforcing the penalties in our existing immigration
laws and working with the rest of the administration and Congress to
reform our immigration system; patrolling our coastline and rescuing
mariners in distress; and protecting the President and other senior
administration officials and visiting foreign diplomats, to name a
few--its chief role is to do its part to detect, deter, and defend the
Nation from terror attacks.
I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the huge progress that
DHS, working with its partners in Federal, State, and local
governments, the private sector, and among the American people, has
made, through two administrations now, one Republican and one
Democratic, in helping to secure the Nation. Our aviation sector in
particular, on which terrorists, understandably, remain fixated, is far
more secure than it was on September 10, 2011.
But, I remain concerned about certain aspects of even our aviation
system, like, for example, the continued vulnerability of air cargo on
passenger planes, and our use of devices at airport passenger
checkpoints that are, really, anomaly detectors, as opposed to what we
really need, namely, explosives detectors.
I worry, too, about our relative lack of focus over the years on
securing our mass transit sector. The threat to mass transit is not
merely theoretical. The successful attacks in London, Madrid, and
Moscow, and the aborted plots against mass transit in New York City,
all show that mass transit is also in terrorists' crosshairs, and
sooner or later, they will attempt to strike here again. If we are not
careful, one day they will succeed.
I worry also about our maritime sector, specifically, the smuggling
of radioactive material in containers, and hope that we will redouble
our efforts to try to find a way to scan not just cargo about which we
have suspicions, but all cargo in an effective, efficient, and
economical manner, without bringing global commerce to a halt. Call me
a ``worry wart,'' but I don't trust terrorists to complete a shipping
manifest accurately or to do business with only ``unknown shippers,''
and so a ``risk-based'' automated target system largely based on such
trust gives me pause. As President Reagan would say, ``Trust, but
verify.''
And, finally, cyber-threats. Every passing day shows that cyber-
crime and cyber-terrorism are clear and present dangers to our Nation.
We will either do everything in our power to prevent a devastating
cyber-attack on our Nation now, or sit here (if we are lucky enough
still to be around) 5 years from now, or 10 years from now, or 20, and
lament the fact that we did not. It is imperative that both the
administration and Congress put partisanship and ideology aside to
devise and enact, this year, a law to make our Nation more secure from
this potentially cataclysmic threat.
To conclude, making progress on all these fronts will require
adroit leadership on the part of Secretary Napolitano and her
leadership team, working in concert with the Congress, with your
committee and your Senate counterpart in particular. Given the grave
threats, and our severe fiscal constraints, there is no time to waste,
and not a single dollar to waste. I would applaud her for to taking
steps like pulling the plug on costly and ineffective procurements like
SBInet and DNDO's ASP program, and, I hope that this year, and in the
many lean years likely still to be ahead, that she will have
Congressional support for directing counterterrorism grants to only
those localities most at risk of terror attacks.
Again, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and Members, thank you for
inviting me to appear before you today and I look forward to responding
to your questions.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Ervin. Your comments on the
necessity for cyber legislation is a good segue into my 5
minutes of questions. I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Henry, as I mentioned my trip to the NSA yesterday, my
briefings with General Alexander highlight the sobering reality
that we are under attack as a Nation and our interests are
under attack overseas.
The enormous amount of intellectual property stolen as you
mentioned, the espionage, and the cyber warfare primarily,
China, Russia, Iran, and Iran's latest attacks on Aramco in the
Saudi peninsula and our own financial institutions, which is
probably occurring, as I speak cause me great harm.
I think we need to move quickly on this so I wanted to ask
you real quickly, what is your assessment on the role of DHS?
In addition, if you have had a chance to read the draft
Executive Order, what is your assessment of that as well?
Mr. Henry. Thank you, Chairman.
As far as DHS, I think that one of the critical areas in
everything that we do as it relates to cyber is the collection
and dissemination of intelligence.
As I mentioned in my statement, we have been focusing on
reducing the vulnerabilities for so long, but it is really
critical for us to identify who the adversaries are and to take
steps as a Nation to thwart their efforts and to mitigate that
threat.
I think as it relates to intelligence sharing, DHS has a
role in collecting perhaps or deconflicting across multiple
agencies--the FBI, NSA, DOD, and others--who collect
intelligence related to the threat and how do we take that very
critical information and intelligence and synthesize it so that
it can be shared effectively in a manner that best helps the
private sector prepare to defend their networks and also to
help take the intelligence that is collected off of the network
every single day by the private sector and to get that into the
hands of the right people who can take actions to thwart the
threat; to help do the attribution to identify there is a
particular nation and we know this particular nation is taking
this action against U.S. interests.
It is impacting our economic and National security, and as
a Government there are steps that we can take whether they be
economic, some type of trade sanctions, law enforcement
actions, some intelligence community actions. There are steps
that we can take but it can only happen if that intelligence is
synthesized and shared both ways. I think that DHS can play a
role in the critical area.
Chairman McCaul. On the Executive Order?
Mr. Henry. So the Executive Order I just had a moment to
look at it this morning. I think it talks about that. It talks
about how intelligence is shared, information is shared between
the private sector and the U.S. Government. So I think
elaborating on that, the devil's in the details of course how
we actually build that out.
I also agree with the statement that somebody made about
the comprehensive whole-of-Government response here, and I
think the Executive Order also talks about that. It has to be a
comprehensive plan and it has to work across all sectors. There
is not an agency or an organization that this doesn't touch and
everybody has got to have a piece of that response.
Chairman McCaul. I agree with that. Moving on to the
border, I just visited the L.A. port. There is a threat to our
West Coast with these boats coming up from South America. There
is a threat to the Caribbean, the Southwest Border we focus
quite a bit on, and of course the Northern Border as well.
The Southwest Border particularly, Admiral Allen, we are
going to come up with a bill, an authorization bill. What would
you recommend that we focus on for a comprehensive strategy?
Admiral Allen. Mr. Chairman, I think it is important to
take a risk-based approach. Given the resource constraints we
are dealing with, the budget environment, and the physical
realities of the border, and I mentioned some of them earlier.
I think we need to understand the risk that is presented by the
border. We don't want to drive that risk to zero because we
will shut down trade.
In my view, the best thing we can do is increase
situational awareness. In the maritime environment, that would
be maritime building awareness, our ability to understand what
is out there through a combination of information sharing,
sensor information, and a collection of information on the
movement of vessels that is available through positioning
systems that are there right now.
That needs to be centrally known, shared, and coordinated
with the various databases that are resident in the other
components to create a comprehensive common operating picture
and a common intelligence picture that allows us to queue our
resources.
Specifically in relation to the Southwest Border maritime
environment that you are talking about, there is extraordinary
cooperation between the CBP and the Coast Guard there an
actually with the Navy fleet commander down there that makes
resources available.
What we need to do is refine our ability to understand what
is happening in the maritime environment, to be able to
identify legitimate flows from illegitimate flows, and be able
to focus those resources.
That needs to be done in my view by coordinating and
consolidating command centers where we can, information,
sharing where we can, and then queuing those resources in a
collective manner.
Chairman McCaul. I think the technology piece is a piece
that has not been finalized down there, and I think that is
where we are going to be focusing quite a bit on getting
technology down there to better secure it.
Last, and it has to be very quickly, Mr. Walker, what was
it--you had mentioned a management restructuring and some
specific positions that you would recommend. Can you----
Mr. Walker. One, Government is a large, complex, and very
expensive enterprise and as it has been mentioned, we have
limited resources. We need to allocate those based upon risk.
My view is when you look at the Department of Homeland
Security, which is a combination, an amalgamation of many other
departments and agencies in the past, there is a need for a
chief operating officer; a level two official that would be
responsible for the management process that would be based upon
statutory qualification requirements, would have a term
appointment, and a performance contract.
We look to other countries, we see that this exists. I
mean, you know, the United States is not an island. We need to
learn from history. We need to learn from others, and I think
it is a concept that makes sense in certain agencies such as
DHS and DOD, for example.
Last thing is there is a lot of great recommendations that
are made by the GAL, by inspectors general, by, you know, even
good work that is done by these committees as well as OMB, but
a lot of these recommendations never get implemented. You know,
whether it is duplicated programs, whether it is best practices
problems, you know, crossing many different functions in
Government.
I think there is a need for a capable, credible, and non-
conflicted statutory group that would end up being able to look
at a number of areas, make recommendations to the Congress with
guaranteed hearings and a guaranteed vote building off of like
a Hoover Commission approach if you will because the simple
fact of the matter is whether it is Simpson Bowles, and
Domenici to Weber, or anything else, they are dealing with the
big-ticket items.
On the other hand, there are billions and billions and
billions of dollars the grow every year that we are not coming
to grips with that, that we are gonna have an extraordinary
mechanism to deal with that are not being dealt with.
Chairman McCaul. I think that the outside reading group
really kind of encapsulates the DHS Accountability Act that was
introduced last Congress, passed the House, unfortunately not
the Senate. I hope I can, in working with the Ranking Member,
we can reintroduce that legislation.
With that, I now recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would
like to enter into the record a letter from Secretary
Napolitano kind of highlighting concerns around sequestration
and what that would possibly do to adversely impact----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, that is so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Letter From Hon. Janet Napolitano to Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 13, 2013.
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Representative Thompson: Thank you for your letter regarding
the potential impacts of the March 1st sequestration. The Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) shares your deep concerns about the effects
this unprecedented budget reduction to Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 funding
will have on DHS, its missions, and our Nation's security and economy.
Reductions mandated by sequestration would undermine the
significant progress the Department has made over the past 10 years and
would negatively affect our ability to carry out our vital missions.
Sequestration would roll back border security, increase wait times at
our Nation's land ports of entry and airports, affect aviation and
maritime safety and security, leave critical infrastructure vulnerable
to attacks, hamper disaster response time and our Surge Force
capabilities, and significantly scale back cybersecurity infrastructure
protections that have been developed in recent years. In addition,
sequestration would necessitate furloughs of up to 14 days for a
significant portion of our front-line law enforcement personnel, and
could potentially result in reductions in force at the Department. The
following provides specific examples of the potential impacts of
Sequestration on the Department:

U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) would not be able
to maintain current staffing levels of Border Patrol Agents and
CBP Officers as mandated by Congress. Funding and staffing
reductions will increase wait times at airports, affect
security between land ports of entry, affect CBP's ability to
collect revenue owed to the Federal Government, and slow
screening and entry programs for those traveling into the
United States.

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) would not be
able to sustain current detention and removal operations or
maintain the 34,000 detention beds mandated by Congress. This
would significantly roll back progress that resulted in record-
high removals of illegal criminal aliens this past year, and
would reduce ICE Homeland Security Investigations' activities,
including human smuggling, counter-proliferation, and
commercial trade fraud investigations.

The Transportation Security Administration would reduce its
front-line workforce, which would substantially increase
passenger wait times at airport security checkpoints.

The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) would have to curtail air and
surface operations by nearly 25 percent, adversely affecting
maritime safety and security across nearly all missions areas.
A reduction of this magnitude will substantially reduce drug
interdiction, migrant interdiction, fisheries law enforcement,
aids to navigation, and other law enforcement operations as
well as the safe flow of commerce along U.S. waterways.

Furloughs and reductions in overtime would adversely affect
the availability of the U.S. Secret Service workforce, and
hinder on-going criminal investigations.

Reductions in funding for operations, maintenance, and
analytical contracts supporting the National Cybersecurity
Protection System (NCPS) would impact our ability to detect and
analyze emerging cyber threats and protect civilian Federal
computer networks.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency's Disaster Relief
Fund would be reduced by over a billion dollars, with an impact
on survivors recovering from future severe weather events, and
affecting the economic recoveries of local economies in those
regions. State and local homeland security grants funding would
also be reduced, potentially leading to layoffs of emergency
personnel and first responders.

The Science and Technology Directorate would have to stop
on-going research and development including: Countermeasures
for bio-threats, improvements to aviation security and
cybersecurity technologies, and projects that support first
responders.

The Department would be unable to move forward with
necessary management integration efforts such as modernizing
critical financial systems. This would hinder the Department's
ability to provide accurate and timely financial reporting,
facilitate clean audit opinions, address systems security
issues, and remediate financial control and financial system
weaknesses.
Hurricane Sandy, recent threats surrounding aviation and the
continued threat of homegrown terrorism demonstrate how we must remain
vigilant and prepared. Threats from terrorism and response-and-recovery
efforts associated with natural disasters will not diminish because of
budget cuts to DHS. Even in this current fiscal climate, we do not have
the luxury of making significant reductions to our capabilities without
placing our Nation at risk. Rather, we must continue to prepare for,
respond to, and recover from evolving threats and disasters--and we
require sufficient resources to sustain and adapt our capabilities
accordingly. We simply cannot absorb the additional reduction posed by
Sequestration without significantly negatively affecting front-line
operations and our Nation's previous investments in the homeland
security enterprise.
The Department appreciates the strong support it has received from
Congress over the past 10 years. As we approach March 1, Congress is
urged to act to prevent Sequestration and ensure that DHS can continue
to meet evolving threats and maintain the security of our Nation and
citizens. Should you have any questions or concerns at any time, please
do not hesitate to contact me[.]
Yours very truly,
Janet Napolitano.

Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Ervin, let us look at TSA as a point of conversation.
Most of us here go through airports every week. The assumption
is that the screening technology that we all go through is
good.
What has been your concern about TSA's approach to
technology and whether we are really identifying all the
vulnerabilities or are we just--just tell me what your concerns
are.
Mr. Ervin. Right. Well, thank you for that Mr. Thompson. I
guess I would say several things. First of all, as I mention
just briefly in my testimony, it seems to me that the chief
problem with the current technology that we deploy at
checkpoints, advanced imaging technology, to use the technical
term, which encompasses millimeter wave machines and also
backscatter machines, and it is the backscatter machines that
the Chairman talked about in his opening statement that we are
not able to meet the privacy concerns and as a result have been
pulled back.
Both of them--while one could argue that one is more
effective than the other--both of them are anomaly detectors as
opposed to explosives detectors.
By that I mean that all those machines do is show that
there is something on the person of the passenger that is out
of the ordinary and it is therefore incumbent upon the screener
observing that image to determine that there is in fact anomaly
and then to inquire further as to whether that anomaly isn't in
fact an explosive and therefore should be of concern.
Instead, as I say, I think what we need to do is to skip a
step, take out a step, and instead to deploy machines that are
automated explosive detectors, which is to say immediately
without any human intervention determine that there is in fact
or is not which of course is usually the case an explosive and
I think that would be a huge advantage.
There are certain companies that have such technology. That
technology is being tested by TSA to be fair, but I think we
need to redouble our efforts to deploy it. I guess----
Mr. Thompson. My point, to support what the Chairman has
said, one of the things we will look at is how we do
procurement and contracting with the Department. We know all of
these vulnerabilities are out there, but we can't get the
through-put to the point of reality.
So, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to--as we go forward.
Admiral Allen, Congress passed some legislation long time
ago saying that we should screen in-bound cargo coming in to
this country from foreign areas, and we are woefully beyond the
point of the Congressional mandate.
Do you see that also as a vulnerability from a security
standpoint to this country not knowing what is coming in the
containers to this country?
Admiral Allen. Mr. Thompson, there is always going to be a
risk in any cargo entering the country and any inspection
regime associated with that.
As I stated earlier, we need to understand the risk that is
inherent in these flows in trades and then try and attack it
where we best get the return on our resources.
I know that 100 percent container inspection has been
discussed for many, many years. I myself think that that is a
little bit of a bridge too far in terms of resources and the
technology available to accomplish that and make that actually
an effective way to secure cargo.
I think we need to look at emerging technologies. Some of
the other Members here have alluded to different types of
sensing equipment that could actually interrogate these
containers while they were being moved themselves.
I think in the long run, it has to do with evaluating data
intelligence and sharing information is the way to go. I know
there is a desire to see 100 percent screening of containers. I
don't think it is realistically achievable in the near-term,
sir.
Mr. Thompson. What is realistic in your opinion?
Admiral Allen. Well, considering the technology challenges
and the costs associated with it, sir, I think that it would be
very, very difficult to achieve that goal in the current budget
environment and current technology environment.
Mr. Thompson. Good answer.
Mr. Walker, you talked about creating a commission or a
individual who has some responsibility for certain challenges
within DHS. Can you go a little farther in how you see that----
Mr. Walker. Sure.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Individual operating?
Mr. Walker. Sure. There is two issues. One is a micro-issue
for the Department of Homeland Security and the other is a
macro-issue that deals with the Government at large.
The Department of Homeland Security is the third-largest
Federal agency. It is accumulation, amalgamation of a bunch of
different, you know, previous organizations. It has got a very
important mission. It has got very limited resources, and it
has got a number of fundamental management challenges that
exist and will continue to exist.
We need to have somebody focused full-time on management
transformation and execution; economy, efficiency,
effectiveness, credibility.
We need to focus, have somebody focus full-time on the
issue of risk assessment. There is no such thing as zero risk.
You have to be able to allocate limited resources to mitigate
as much risk as possible.
In my view, while deputy secretaries typically try to do
some of this job and to differing degrees of success and this
has nothing to do about the current incumbent or prior
individuals that were there, it is just a big darn job and that
we need to recognize that we need to have people in those jobs
that have appropriate qualification requirements who will be
there for enough time to be able to get things done.
That is why say 5- to 7-year term with a performance
contract focused on results so that we are in effect
professionalizing part of the management and execution of
Government. I think----
Mr. Thompson. If the Chairman will indulge me, are you
saying that individual will also have the authority to fix
whatever they encounter?
Mr. Walker. Well, there is two things. One of which is they
will identify to the extent that they have the authority under
current law then they would fix it.
The second is the macro issue I am talking about. If you
look at duplicate programs, if you look at problems with
procurement, human capital, whatever, there are a number of
things that exist throughout Government and that have not been
effectively addressed for a variety of reasons in the normal
course.
I believe there is a need to create some type of a
statutory task force where the Congress would buy in and the
President would buy in that would be comprised of individuals
who are capable, credible, with proven transformational change
experience in the private sector, public sector, and/or not-
for-profit who don't have conflicts, who would oversee a
process to review different functions or programs that would
make recommendations focused on economy, efficiency,
effectiveness, and credibility that would be guaranteed
hearings and guaranteed a vote.
If you look at, you know, whether it is the Grace
Commission or the good work that Vice President Gore did, you
know, on reinventing Government, there is a lot of things that
come out that frankly never get acted on and I think we have to
recognize that given our current and projected financial
condition and the fact that the agencies that are discretionary
spending including this Department that is envisioned by the
Constitution, but nonetheless is getting squeezed--not--didn't
say homeland security but domestic tranquility and I would
argue that this is part of domestic tranquility, then, you
know, we have got to figure out a new way to try to be able to
address these long-standing problems to free up more resources
to mitigate the risk and to execute on mission.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much.
I appreciate the Chairman's indulgence.
Chairman McCaul. I thank the Ranking Member. I plan to
recognize Members who are in accordance with the committee
rules, those who were present at the start of the hearing, by
seniority, and those coming in after the hearing will be
recognized in the order of arrival.
With that, Chairman King is now recognized.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank all of the witnesses for their Government
service over the years. It is greatly appreciated.
Director Leiter, let me just focus on a few things in your
statement. You mentioned the concern about terrorism fatigue
both in the Government and among the general public.
You also referenced the concern about improvised nuclear
devices. I know in New York we are very concerned about dirty
bombs, the impact that would have whether it was in lower
Manhattan, Wall Street, Times Square area. Both, you know, the
loss of human life, which would be significant enough, but also
the economic impact it would have on the country perhaps
costing billions of dollars in the economy making it
uninhabitable for 6 to 8 months.
In response to that, we set up the Secure the Cities
Program, which was intended to be not just for the New York
area and this includes Long Island, Connecticut, and New
Jersey, but also to serve as a template for the country for
other urban areas around the country.
When you were with MCTC, did you have an opportunity to
observe Secure the Cities or discuss with Commissioner Kelly
all?
Mr. Leiter. I did not, Congressman, but I spent an
extensive amount of time with the NYPD counterterrorism
officials throughout the region in New York, New Jersey, and
Connecticut.
In my regard, I think this is a very good program. I would
associate myself with previous comments that a risk-based
approach on these topics is absolutely critical.
If we simply slice the salami and try to get all of the
funding everywhere in the country to defend against low-
likelihood but high-consequence events like an improvised
nuclear device, we will not cover the places that are most
likely to be hit and we have to take some risk there.
Certainly major metropolitan areas, New York, Chicago, Los
Angeles--this is not to say that other parts of the country are
not important--but we have to prioritize because if we try to
spend the money everywhere, we either will run out of money or
we won't be able to protect anything effectively.
Mr. King. Thank you.
Mr. Ervin, if anyone was literally present at the creation
of the Department it has been you, and you have been involved
in many capacities ever since the Department was created, both
as a Government official and as a private citizen.
As Director Leiter said, you mention the importance of
risk-based funding in your statement. You also pointed to mass
transit and that has been--again it is perhaps a parochial
concern of mine since we have 5 million passengers every day
whether it is the subway system, Long Island Railroad, Path
subways. We have had six attempted plots against the mass
transit system in New York.
What though would you suggest that we do since to me it is
much easier to secure an airport, much easier to make airliners
secure. I think in New York we have over 1,000 entrances and
exits just on the subway system. How you can possibly secure
that? Is it technology? Is it personnel? Is it intelligence
gathering?
Mr. Ervin. Well, thank you for that, Mr. Chairman. I am
glad you underscored that because as I said in my statement,
just briefly, I really worry about that and think that we have,
relatively speaking, underprepared for it.
I think you put your finger on it. We certainly cannot
secure the mass transit sector in the same way or attempt to
secure it in the same way that we secure the aviation sector
for all of the reasons you cite.
I think what we need to do going forward is what New York
City does very well, but I think we need to see that model
replicated in other cities around the country that don't have
the same degree of threat that New York has.
I think New York is unique in that regard, but are likewise
in terrorist crosshairs--Washington, DC; Los Angeles; Chicago;
and by that I mean, it is what you said. It is a combination of
personnel and technology.
The good news is, after every scare, mass transit scare, in
around the world and in this country we see--not just in New
York City but in the cities that I mentioned--an increased
police presence, the greater deployment of technology, but what
tends to happen is that that is just time-limited.
When the issue fades from the headlines, those resources
are taken away and that is understandable to some degree given
the budget constraint we are in and the fact that to a very
large degree, mass transit, unlike aviation security, is
financed at the State and local level.
Given our fiscal environment and given this threat, I think
we need to redirect our resources so that a greater percentage
of TSA's budget in particular and the overall DHS budget is
directed to mass transit sector given, as I say, the threat
that the mass transit sector poses to our country.
Mr. King. I would suggest also, and the question, of
course, though, that we factor in--I think you agree with
this--the financial impact a successful attack on any of our
urban centers would have, whether it is in New York, Los
Angeles, Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia--go down the line, and
that would impact billions and billions of dollars.
Mr. Ervin. No question about it, sir. You know, mass
transit is called mass for reason. There are huge numbers of
people, as you note, who are affected by mass transit, and we
know that terrorists' intention is to maximize the number of
people killed and maximize the number of people injured, to
maximize the psychic impact of it, and to maximize the economic
impact.
We certainly saw that in 9/11 with regard to the aviation
sector. We would see that with regard to the mass transit
sector if God forbid there were successful attacks.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Ervin.
My final statement will be to Mr. Leiter. You testified
before our committee in January 2011, and you said that al-
Awlaki was the most dangerous person in the world followed by
bin Laden.
Within 8 months, they were both gone. Anybody else you want
to mention today?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Leiter. Mr. Chairman, Mr. King, that is a dangerous
question and my answer is even more dangerous, but what I would
say is it shows that focused or prioritizing where our most
deadly enemies are and doing so with greater transparency, so
our elected officials have an opportunity to weigh-in with the
Executive branch and make their views known about whether or
not someone should or should not be legitimately targeted, is
an important role for this committee, the intelligence
committee, the armed services committee.
In my view, the fact that someone is an American citizen,
although tragic and a weighty decision for the President,
clearly cannot immunize that person from being stopped from
launching attacks, and sometimes we have to do that using
deadly force.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Leiter.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the gentleman
from Massachusetts, Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am gonna just drill down on one issue that I brought up
in the past but still remains a problem. Since 2001, there's
been over 1,300 perimeter security breaches at airports.
So even though we have an easier job at airports, I don't
think that job is being done frankly, and as history has shown
us, one unsafe airport compromises every airport in the entire
country.
In October 2011, I introduced an amendment in the
authorization bill for this committee that seeks to protect
U.S. travelers and threats resulting from airport perimeter
breaches by asking TSA to map out a plan to conduct security
vulnerability assessments at airports throughout the United
States--not just the 17 percent that they had checked at that
point of the airports.
So going forward, what is the best way to address perimeter
security at the airports? We have that the public going through
gates and radiation and screening and doing all kinds of things
as they approach the gate yet we are wide-open in my opinion;
pretty darn close to wide-open around our perimeters.
Could any of you comment on that? Because I continually see
no action going forward with the Department in this respect.
Mr. Ervin. Can I say a word about that, Mr. King? I am
really glad you raised it. Perimeter security at airports is an
issue that is not often talked about, but like you I worry
about that as a vulnerability. I guess I would say a couple of
things.
One is I would commend to you and I am sure you are aware
of it and others, the work that Los Angeles has done in this
regard. There is a forward appointment of police officers,
which can serve as a deterrent effect--obviously nothing is
perfect--but can serve as a deterrent effect.
There are random searches of cars before they approach the
airport. I think we need to see the wider deployment of this in
airports around the country.
We all should recall the incident in Edinborough I believe
back in 2010 or something like that where an airport was
breached and there were--I believe there--certainly there were
injuries, I think there were deaths as well, within the pre-
checkpoint area of the airport.
There is no screening whatsoever that happens and so in the
same way, and Admiral Allen can talk about this, in the same
way that we successfully since 9/11 have pushed the borders out
as far as border security is concerned, likewise, I think we
need to push airport security out past the checkpoint and long
before a passenger approaches the airport.
Mr. Keating. Yes, I am reminded when I was the district
attorney there was a case just before I entered Congress where
a 16-year-old boy just pierced through all the security that is
there or wasn't there. He stowed away on a commercial airline
and tragically ended up being killed as the airplane elevated
and his body dropped in our district.
They went back through all of the video and all of the
security and had no trace of him. So can you imagine if
somebody was doing a bank robbery and you knew the bank was
going to be robbed and you are gonna go back and find out how
they did it that you never even had a trace of the person?
This is how wide open it is and the other thing that--if
anyone wants to comment--it is a big problem with homeland
security, the pointing of the finger of the local--oh, this is
the local airport municipality or the ownership of the airport
or this is the local police and TSA is just saying it is not
our job. Well, it is their job.
Mr. Leiter. Congressman, I would say not to minimize your
concern at all, I think it is very appropriate. I think we have
similar challenges along the perimeter of much of our critical
infrastructure in this country whether it is oil and gas,
electrical facilities, and the like.
Going to Mr. Henry's area of expertise, but one in which I
also work, we should accept that we have adversaries from
around the world who are already inside the perimeter of all of
these institutions. It just happens to be in the cyber world.
If we don't look at the combined cyber and physical world
together we will undoubtedly be burned by one or both.
Mr. Keating. We are still recovering from the Wall Street
meltdown yet if there is a cyber breach in one of the big five
financial institutions, for even several hours, they go
bankrupt and can you imagine the effect on our economy.
So you are absolutely right. I yield back my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Walker. Can I mention one other thing, Mr. Keating?
Mr. Keating. Yes.
Mr. Walker. First, I guess I would say to what extent are
we using the same technologies that we use on the border of the
United States for the perimeter of airports? I don't know the
answer to that, but there are technologies that are used to
provide border security. So you could argue that this is
another potential application of those technologies.
Mr. Keating. That airport--just to clarify a point--where
that young man breached security I believe was the eighth-
biggest hub of the country. So this isn't just small airports
that this becomes a problem with.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, and point of personal
privilege, I enjoyed sharing the Chair with Chairman King for a
couple of minutes.
[Laughter.]
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the Vice Chair
of the full committee, Mrs. Miller.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First I
want to thank you for this great panel, for all of these great
patriots, great Americans coming to testify before the
committee.
Sort of a broad range of I think the vision of this
committee; where we are going, whether it is border security or
cybersecurity or terrorism. Mr. Walker talking about how the
National debt is going to impact our ability to secure the
homeland, so I say it is a very interesting panel and I am very
appreciative of that.
As you mentioned, I am and again, I am very appreciative
again to be the Chairperson in the 113th Congress of the
Subcommittee on Border and Maritime Security and so I am going
to be focusing most of my questions for Admiral Allen and I
appreciated your testimony. I will also say I do want to
recognize again your service to the Nation, particularly with
the Deepwater.
The country has moved past that but we are never forgetting
when you were tasked with that mission and when you arrived on-
site and started pulling everybody together and just by the
very--your presence and your determination, you really--that
was a remarkable mission that accomplished so well. Thank you
so much for that.
Admiral, you have talked about, you know, all of the
various components that might go into operational control of a
border; what that might look like. You know, I was interested
in a report that came out a couple of years ago from the GAO
that talked about the percentage of operational control that we
currently have at the Southern Border which is about, in the
40, low 40 percentile and the Northern Border in its single
digits, 1-digit numerals and, you know, this is not the best
position to be in, I think.
Whether or not Secretary Napolitano has mentioned that
operational control is an antiquated term, but we have to have
some sort of metrics. How do you actually measure that?
Our committee is actually going to be--our subcommittee is
actually going to be having a hearing just asking the
Department: ``What does a secure border look like to you, at
the Department?'' I would ask you, sir, if you were sitting
there, what does a secure border actually look like?
Admiral Allen. Thank you for the question, ma'am. If I
could start off with a metaphor related to the oil spill. I get
asked all the time if there is any way to safely extract
hydrocarbons in deep water drilling I tell everybody there is
no risk-free way to extract hydrocarbons and we are going to go
to another generation of energy development before we are going
to have to move away from dependence on that.
So the question is: What is an acceptable level of risk to
carry out those activities? I would tell you just the same as
in deep water drilling, it depends on where you are at, the
local region, the particular characteristics related to that,
and frankly, the political sensitivities and some of the
political perspectives and culture in the region.
The reason operational control of the border is such a
vexing term is some cases you can effectively control the
border with a 1-mile offense in a downtown municipal area like
Juarez or Otay Mesa.
In other areas, sensors, integrated fixed towers can give
you enough situational awareness where you can react if
something does occur before it becomes a threat inside the
United States.
In other places, they are such a remote area in the big
bang country of Texas where it is going to take you an hour or
2 hours to get to the nearest crossroad. So the question is:
What is deployed there that can respond to the threat?
I think what is needed is an integrated assessment of the
areas of the border focusing on regional risk and
vulnerabilities and what constitutes the greatest threat. There
were conversations earlier about improvised explosive devices
and nuclear devices in relation to high-population areas.
I think we need to look at the vulnerabilities that are out
there and where we best mitigate risk, understanding that there
are places where we will have to respond in some period of
time.
That is the reason when people say operational control of
the border or border security, I kind of cringe because I used
to tell people if you can explain what that is, you have just
proved you don't know it.
I think what we have to have is a comprehensive assessment
and what happens in one port or one area of the border needs to
be specifically--criteria that is equally applied in each area
that will produce a different outcome on the type of resources,
personnel, sensors that you need, but ultimately, all of that
needs to come back someplace to create common operating picture
to direct responses from.
Mrs. Miller. Well, I appreciate that and just one other
question then. Following up on that, talking about the Southern
Border, the Northern Border, if you think about the Maritime
Border as well and with your background, the Ranking Member
asked a question about the percentage of scanning, you know,
the Congress saying we are going to have 100 percent scanning.
I would agree with your assessment that that is not
possible. We are really only right now at 3 or 4 percent,
scanning 3 or 4 percent of all the cargo that is coming.
So as we look at the outer ring of border security
particularly from a maritime environment at our ports, et
cetera--excuse me--what again, what kinds of things, you know,
we talk about some of the--looking at our partners at some of
the point of debarkation for some of the cargo, et cetera.
How could we do a better job and again how do you even
measure those kinds of things?
Admiral Allen. Well, if I could just reiterate on the
container situation, I think the best way to reduce that risk
as low as we can is to look at technologies that actually allow
those containers to be interrogated with sensors while they are
being moved and the devices that lift them and that is a
technology that has not matured, but I think that is where we
ought to be looking there because we are never gonna be able to
drive that risk to zero.
We made tremendous strides in the last 10 years in maritime
domain awareness in terms of automated identification systems,
devices that are required to be carried and transmitted by
vessels of a certain length, and long-range tracking devices
that are required by the International Maritime Organization
when vessels have declared their intent to enter into a
country.
It is not 100 percent. We need to continue to evolve this
because the more we can identify the traffic that is out there
and separate legitimate from illegitimate or dark traffic that
is not identifying themselves, then we can funnel those
resources where they can best be used to address those threats.
I think building out a robust National automated
identification system for the country, which has struggled to
get funding and support over the years, and create that
maritime domain awareness is the best thing we can do in the
maritime domain and that is consistent with international
treaties and sharing agreements on trying to track and
basically create more transparency out there on the ships that
are moving on the ocean.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Admiral, I appreciate your reference to
Texas as a ``big country.''
[Laughter.]
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking
Member of the Emergency Preparedness Response Committee, Mr.
Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ervin, following up on what Mr. King asked about mass
transit, and as you know I am in Newark, New Jersey right
across the river from New York and a lot of our mass transit
systems are shared.
Could you be more specific about what security measures
should be taken? Does it look like airport security, the
screening of the bags, passengers? Does it involve more
targeted screening through human observation?
Mr. Ervin. Thank you for that, Mr. Payne. Well, I think it
is really all those things and as I mentioned, New York City I
think is a very good incubator in this regard for other
relevant cities in the country to emulate. It is a combination
of personnel.
In New York you have these Viper teams for example, which
are, you know, for want of a better word, multidisciplinary
teams of police officers who have a variety of skills who
deploy en masse occasionally unprovoked at mass transit
stations.
It serves to deter terrorists who are casing mass transit
facilities to see what the vulnerabilities are. I think there
should be greater deployment of cameras for example. There are
smart cameras that can spot anomalies and call those anomalies
to the attention of those who are monitoring those cameras at
police headquarters and otherwise.
There are sensors that can be deployed that detect the
presence of chemical agents in the air and there are also
random bag searches. In New York City there was a lawsuit, I
think, is correct that the ACLU brought and the city won that
lawsuit.
So I would urge the adoption of measures like that in
cities across the country and I recognize as I said that
financing is a problem especially now at the Federal level and
at the State and local level, but this is a major threat and
eventually the threat is going to catch up to us if we don't do
something to address it not just at the time of the headline
but on an on-going basis.
Mr. Payne. Just a follow-up on that. What would you think
would be an appropriate time line for this transit security
that is needed?
Mr. Ervin. Well, you know, that is difficult to say. I
think of the fierce urgency of now, to use that phrase.
I really don't think we have a moment to waste. You know,
the principal point of my testimony, and I think Mr. Leiter
made the same point, is that we cannot allow ourselves to think
that the terrorism threat has receded.
In part I think we are a potential victim of our own
success because we have done such a good job over the years in
securing the aviation sector. I think that opens up terrorists'
eyes to the vulnerabilities that remain with regard to mass
transit, with regard to maritime, and also with regard to soft
targets.
We haven't talked about soft targets today during the
course of the hearing, and I think that you know as devastating
as an attack was on the aviation sector, as devastating as an
attack would be on the mass transit sector, an attack on a
movie theater, on a shopping mall, and not just in New York
City or Washington, DC, but in Clute, Texas or in, you know,
Nebraska or Idaho would have a huge psychological, political
impact in this country. So we have got a huge job to do and
fewer resources than ever with which to do it.
Mr. Leiter. Congressman, if I may just add to that. I agree
with everything that Clarke has said, but I think it is a
mistake to try to only think about this in defensive measures,
because we can't defend all of the sites, whether it is mass
transit or City Hall or whatever it is. It is simply
impossible.
In my view, intelligence is the key here and we have to
understand these networks and find the people before they go
out and actually launch the attacks. Now, we are not going to
be perfect there either; that is critical
From this committee's perspective, I think one of the areas
where we have to find efficiencies and improve our capabilities
simultaneously is a greater rationalization of responsibilities
between DHS-funded State and local fusion centers and FBI joint
terrorism task forces.
We have spent a lot of money on this over the past 12
years. They do serve different purposes, but in my view we
could rationalize a relationship between those organizations,
have just as much safety, and save money.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Intelligence, and
Security Technologies, Mr. Meehan.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to express
my appreciation to the Chairman for his confidence in allowing
me the distinct honor of chairing the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Intelligence, and Security Technologies coming
into this new Congress here on this committee.
I also want to express my deep appreciation to this very
distinguished panel not just for your presence here today, but
for your long record of service and attention to the multiple
issues before us. We watch this morph, but a couple of times
this issue has been raised, the word ``fatigue'' has been
identified.
Mr. Leiter, I think you spoke to it quite eloquently and
now an aspect of that fatigue includes sort of a sense of
complacency and built because of the successes that have been
realized by many of the people who have worked alongside of you
and your colleagues.
One of the challenges that I face as I look at this and I
just left a week of visits throughout New York with many
members of the banking community and others that have been most
recently victimized by the scope of the attacks. Cyber--how
real is this threat, Mr. Leiter?
Mr. Leiter. I think this is far more real than almost
anyone understands. We have state-sponsored threats,
principally China and Iran and Russia.
In the case of China, stealing absolutely billions of
dollars and targeting not just traditional government, not just
traditional military, but targeting every sector of our
economy; agriculture, advanced manufacturing, clean energy, the
law firms that support these worlds, our information service
providers, all of them are being penetrated.
The best organizations at this, organizations like BAE who
sell cyber defenses, have had these intruders in their networks
for 18 months before they even know it.
In the case of Iran, we have seen destructive Iranian cyber
attacks on Saudi Aramco and RasGas and if anyone thinks that
you can't go from stealing data to destroying data and
disrupting critical infrastructure, they simply don't
understand the technology.
It is changing a few zeros and ones and that intrusion
becomes an attack. So in my view, the scope of economic loss
and the potential for physical destruction is very, very real.
Mr. Meehan. Well thank you. I think you framed it well.
Mr. Henry, we had the good privilege of working together
during your days in the FBI and I appreciated your expertise,
but you are one who works exclusively in this area of
cybersecurity and I was struck--I mentioned I was in New York
and I had been preceded just a few weeks earlier by Mr. Panetta
and he used the word a ``Cyber Pearl Harbor'' talking about
trains being diverted off of tracks with chemical weapons and
the shutdown of our electrical grid.
But at the same time, how does the average American
appreciate that they are affected by what is going on today in
the cyber world, they have got a role, and that we have got to
be responsive to this threat?
Mr. Henry. I think that your recognition of that is key
here. It is very, very difficult for the average American to
see this because it is, to some of them, many of them it is
very amorphous.
You can't actually see many of the impacts of this and I
think that it may take unfortunately the digital equivalent of
planes flying into buildings for people to take this seriously,
until they can actually see it.
I have used an example before. If I were to say that there
was a bomb under this table, everybody here would get up and
run out of the room because everybody knows what it looks like
when that bomb goes off. We have seen the news footage. We have
seen the movies. We know what that means if there is a bomb
under the table.
But if I say to that same audience that there is a foreign
adversary in your computer network right now, they are stealing
your most sensitive information, your most important research
and development, that same group of people looks back at me and
smiles like I am telling a joke because it doesn't resonate
with them. It is not real to them, and that is very
unfortunate.
I think the way we do that is through hearings like this,
through committees, through some of the media attention to some
of the real impacts.
When Mr. Leiter talks about some of the critical
infrastructure that has been damaged, that needs to be
highlighted for people for them to understand what the real
risk is to their organizations, to our society as a whole going
forward.
Mr. Meehan. I appreciate your framing it that way as well.
One of the recognitions, 90 percent of this internet in which
all of our commerce really today is built around, is in the
hands of private entities.
Now we have got a real challenge tying together the
intelligence resources that we are able to generate but working
simultaneously with the private sector and information sharing.
It includes a variety of things, not only how we move that
information, but how we protect privacy and other things too.
How do we get people comfortable with the idea that we need to
be working together while simultaneously being able to protect
the individuals concerned about intrusions on thier privacy?
Mr. Henry. Well, the, again is very, very critical. I think
that for people to understand what the risk is that they are
willing to accept certain inconveniences that may be critical
to securing the networks.
If on September 10, 2001, somebody came from, a Government
official, and said from now on September 10, 2001, from now on,
we recognize that there as a terrorism threat and we are going
to ask everybody to take their shoes off when they come
through, take your laptop out of the bag, take your jacket off,
you can't carry any shampoo, people would be outraged.
We can't do this. This is an inconvenience. It infringes on
people's privacy. But then the next day the world changed and
all of a sudden everybody understands how significant the risk
is and they are willing to accept the inconvenience.
I don't particularly care to do it, but I get it. I
understand what the risk is, what the adversaries are trying to
do to us, and I am willing to make those concessions.
I think in the cyberspace it is very, very similar. People
need to understand the risk. I think we can balance privacy
with security. That is gonna take some work and some effort and
I think the committee has a huge role to play in that.
Voice. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Walker. Very quickly I think there are three elements
that you have to be able to make real to people, okay.
No. 1, self-preservation. That is the most fundamental in
hierarchy of needs. So how can a cyber have an impact that
could end up having loss of life?
Second, economic security. How might cyber affect their
assets, their resources, their accounts, all right?
Third, personal privacy. Those are the three big elements,
I think, and you have to make that real to people to help them
understand it and appreciate it and then they will be, I think,
more aware and concerned about it.
Mr. Leiter. Congressman, privacy considerations here are
really enormous and I would offer at least two ways in which
this committee can be of assistance on that.
One is making sure there is transparency about how when
this information is shared with the U.S. Government and vice
versa, how it is used. Narrowing the scope of how it is used is
critical in my view.
Second, currently today, as much as the Department of
Homeland Security has done to increase the skill of its
workforce technically, it is still pale by comparison to the
National Security Agency and the Department of Defense.
They don't have the people they need to do this job well.
Hence we talk a lot about giving the National Security Agency
and the Department of Defense a larger role in this than we
might otherwise do.
In my view, we might have to do that at the beginning, but
this committee is critical in providing DHS the management
flexibility and personnel authority to bring in people that
they won't normally get so they can actually build up that
expertise.
Hiring and firing people in the Federal Government is
impossible. If you give DHS flexibility to bring in people
through private sector for short-term tours at DHS they can
build up that capacity much, much faster and then there is less
of an operational impetus to share all of the staff all the
time with the National Security Agency and Department of
Defense.
Mr. Meehan. Well, thank you. My time's expired, but I look
forward to working with each of you as we move forward in the
year on this very challenging issue.
Chairman McCaul. Yes, and thank you for your testimony, Mr.
Leiter, in terms of, I think, building the capability and
credibility--excuse me--of the cyber workforce within DHS will
be a priority as well.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. O'Rourke, is recognized.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would ask for unanimous consent to submit two articles
both published this week--one by our county judge in El Paso,
Veronica Escobar, the other by Eric Olsen and Chris Wilson of
the Wilson Institute--both dealing with the dynamic on the
U.S.-Mexico border and the need to secure our border without
sacrificing our way of life, trade, mobility, and our economy.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted for the Record by Hon. Beto O'Rourke
February 10, 2013
gridlock on the rio grande
By Veronica Escobar, El Paso.
Talk of comprehensive immigration reform is welcome news--
especially because it could offer a possible path for citizenship for
undocumented immigrants and more visas for highly-skilled workers.
But the debate's focus on enforcement is ill-advised and its
approach is still too narrow. By emphasizing enforcement, Federal
resources won't go where they are truly needed: America's international
ports of entry, where millions of dollars in goods enter and leave the
country each day.
These ports are overburdened and underfinanced. While billions are
spent on walls and drones, the movement of people and goods is choked.
Instead of further militarization of our Southern Border, we need to
invest in the movement of people and goods through our land ports. The
El Paso area's five ports of entry handle tremendous traffic: In the
2011 fiscal year, they had 6.8 million pedestrian crossings, 811,000
truck crossings, and almost 11 million car crossings, which translated
into $80 billion in trade.
Much of that trade arrives in the form of trucks that go on to
points deep inside the country. But a substantial amount stays in El
Paso: Some 350,000 visitors walk across the Paso del Norte bridge into
downtown every month.
But these ports haven't received significant Federal investment in
personnel or technology for years. Facilities are outdated and
understaffed. A Texas Department of Transportation assessment found
that two were already at ``operational failure,'' with average peak
wait times of more than an hour for commercial traffic and 2 hours for
passenger traffic.
One has only to view the rush hour between El Paso and Ciudad
Juarez, its Mexican counterpart: Long lines of idling vehicles and
exasperated pedestrians, infuriating at best, hazardous--during
sweltering summer months--at worst.
Last year Steve Ortega, an El Paso City Council member, frustrated
by the lack of meaningful response to the long wait times, drove
repeatedly across the border to experience the process himself. Each
morning he waited at least twice as long as what was being reported,
mainly because most of the available lanes were closed for lack of
staff.
El Paso isn't alone; ports of entry all along the border need
investment. But for too long, policy makers, including the Obama
administration, have fixated on security and enforcement to the
exclusion of all else.
The result is a significant and chronic loss of jobs and trade on
both sides of the border. But long waits could be eliminated if the
Federal Government would aggressively invest in personnel, port
infrastructure, and technology.
El Paso County is building a new port of entry, but the Federal
Government has to pay for its personnel. Will it be another clogged
artery in a country that fails to recognize the enormous benefits of
cross-border movement, or will it be adequately staffed through more
rational immigration reform?
When Government prioritizes enforcement and minimizes the benefits
of the people and goods flowing through those ports, it does so at its
own peril. Just as a path to citizenship for the undocumented would
create millions of new taxpayers, a smoother path through our ports
would create stronger economies.
Veronica Escobar, a Democrat, is the county judge in El Paso.
______

Politico Article Submitted for the Record by Hon. Beto O'Rourke
Defining border security
By: Eric Olson and Christopher Wilson
February 10, 2013, 08:48 PM EST.
The recent announcements by President Barack Obama and a bipartisan
group of senators outlining broad principles for immigration reform are
very welcome. While the specifics of any reform will be hotly debated,
a major advance has been made with the emergence of a broad political
consensus, from left to right, that the current system is broken and in
need of major repair.
It would be troubling, then, if this golden opportunity to fix a
broken system falls victim to the very same trap that has ensnared
other reform efforts. By conditioning reforms on achieving a poorly
defined and much misunderstood notion of ``securing the border,'' the
whole effort is at risk of unraveling.
It has never been clear what precisely is meant by the term, but
billions have nevertheless been spent on fences and sophisticated
technology, and the Border Patrol is now more than five times larger
than it was two decades ago. Has the border been secured? Hard to say
since there is no agreement on the metrics for measuring border
security.
In the post-Sept. 11 era, border security has largely been thought
of in terms of terrorist threats, ``spillover'' violence from drug-
trafficking organizations operating in Mexico, and the risks associated
with undocumented migrants. The top priority for border law enforcement
has been denying entry into the United States to would-be terrorists.
To this end, enforcement has been quite effective: There are no
reported cases of a terrorist attack in the United States that involved
passage over our Southern Border.
While drug-trafficking-related violence in Mexico has increased
dramatically in recent years, violence has largely stayed in Mexico.
Illegal drugs continue to flow in significant amounts, but crime data
suggest that it has not contributed to a significant increase in crime
or violence in the United States. There are exceptions to this, such as
the 2009 kidnapping of a suspected drug trafficker in West Texas, but
these are exceptional cases, not a trend, and communities near the
border have, on average, rates of murder and violent crime that are
lower than the rest of the Nation. San Diego and El Paso, the two
largest cities on the border, are among the safest in the country.
Protecting the United States from the unauthorized entry of
migrants often becomes the default criterion for establishing border
security. Counting illegal crossings is inherently difficult, but we do
know that unauthorized crossings are at their lowest point in 40 years,
and the Pew Hispanic Center believes there are now as many Mexicans
leaving the United States as entering. Studies have also dispelled the
myth that immigration and crime are linked; in fact, the presence of a
large immigrant population appears to actually help make a city safer.
All of this is to say that defining border security is actually
quite complicated. The Department of Homeland Security has been
wrestling with this concept for some time, and is currently working to
revise its definition and measures of success.
In the absence of a clear definition and diagnostic of border
security to help focus their strategy, Congress and the past two
administrations have responded to border security concerns by
dramatically increasing spending on technology and personnel on the
border. The focus of these efforts has been the vast empty areas
between the official ports of entry. Yet nearly half of all
unauthorized immigrants in the United States entered through our ports
of entry with legitimate visas but failed to leave when their visas
expired, and most hard drugs like cocaine and methamphetamine likewise
enter via official crossing points. While the Border Patrol does appear
to be apprehending more unauthorized crossers, migrants are taking
ever-greater risks by heading farther into the desert, with hundreds
dying each year as a result.
The relative lack of attention on the official crossing points is
also getting in the way of business. Wait times at the border for cargo
and individuals have increased, resulting in new costs to manufacturers
and shrinking the number of customers who enter the United States each
day to shop. This same congestion can actually facilitate illegal
crossing and trafficking rather than decrease it.
So before Congress and the Obama administration fall into the
reflexive pattern of conditioning immigration reform on border security
and spending additional money to further beef up the Border Patrol, we
suggest they take a close look at what has already been done and
whether more of the same is really the answer. As Homeland Security
Secretary Janet Napolitano recently said at the Wilson Center, ``We're
getting to the point of diminishing marginal returns. What would really
help us is if we could improve the legal migration system so that
people come through our ports of entry.''
Instead of making another border buildup a pre-condition for
immigration reform, border security should be addressed in a way
complementary to immigration reform. To do so, two things are needed.
First, clearer metrics for border security must be established so we
can ensure limited resources are directed to where they can best
protect the Nation. Second, rather than more border security, we need
better border management. Creating more legal avenues for workers to
enter and depart the United States in an orderly fashion also serves as
a disincentive to illegal immigration and allows law enforcement to
focus its energy on more dangerous traffic. Similarly, at official
border crossings, techniques to expedite known, safe travelers and
shipments can free up resources to search for and deny entry to
criminals and contraband.
Eric Olson is associate director of the Latin American Program at
the Wilson Center and an expert on regional security and organized
crime. Christopher Wilson is an associate with the Wilson Center's
Mexico Institute and an expert on U.S.-Mexico trade and border
management.

Mr. O'Rourke. For Mr. Walker, you know, in your testimony I
was, I was very pleased to hear you talk about doing more with
less and for your request that we adopt efficiency,
effectiveness, economy, and credibility as the watchwords for
DHS going forward.
For a little bit of context for my question, I represent
most of El Paso, Texas, which with Ciudad Juarez forms one of
the largest binational communities in the world. We have five
land crossings connecting the two communities and two countries
over which pass $80 billion in trade every year.
In addition to that, there are millions of pedestrians and
auto crossings every year in El Paso and those crossing north
spend upwards of $2 billion in our economy, and the trade and
retail activities alone support about 50,000 jobs in my
community.
At the same time, we have 2-, 3-, even 4-hour wait times to
cross those bridges--up to 9 hours for trade--and so with the
over doubling of the Border Patrol force that we have seen in
the last 10 years, billions of dollars spent on border walls,
and the adoption of new technologies like drones to man the
border, how do we do more with less?
How do we prioritize our ports of entry and the legitimate
legal crossings taking place there and not sacrifice the
economies of communities like El Paso, the economies of the
State of Texas--Mexico is our largest trading partner--and the
economy of the United States; 6 million jobs are dependent on
U.S.-Mexico trade?
Mr. Walker. Well, first, I have been to El Paso several
times so I know exactly what you are talking about. Look, I
think we are all recognizing that the threats are real and they
are diverse. I think we are also recognizing that the resources
are constrained and are likely to get more constrained as time
goes on.
There is no such thing as zero risk and therefore I think
what it means is that we not only have to develop a
comprehensive integrated strategy but we have to work with our
partners, in this case, Mexico and if we are talking about
freight that is coming from Europe, or Asia or whatever, we
have to work more productively with our partners to be able to
figure out what can be done elsewhere but before you get to the
border, to keep able to use technology to a greater extent, and
to, you know, have human intervention on a more limited basis
in circumstances where we think there may be a credible threat
or there is something unusual, alright?
So there is clearly an opportunity to make more progress
there. Quite frankly, we are going to have to make more
progress there given that we can't mitigate all the risk and
given that we want the flow of people and we want the flow of
goods and given that resources are going to become more
constrained as time goes on.
Admiral Allen. Sir, could I make a comment?
Mr. O'Rourke. Please.
Admiral Allen. When I was commandant I served as the
chairman of the interdiction committee for 4 years and made
several trips to El Paso, and in the middle of 1970s I was one
of the people that set up the maritime program with the El Paso
Intelligence Ccenter. So I am familiar with El Paso.
I would like to focus a little on some of the challenges
the CBP has related to border operations and I think it is
really important to understand this. The inspections that take
place at ports of entry are done by the Office of Field
Operations and the Border Patrol's mission is between ports of
entry.
When you are looking at how to effectively--and I am really
cognizant of the trade issue down there. I recently did a panel
with Nelson Balido of the Border Trade Alliance looking at how
we could do this better and also Mr. Winkowski who is the
acting Customs Commissioner.
We need to look at the actual organic operation of the
ports of entry, how they are staffed, how they are resourced,
and we also need to look at how CBP is resourced to carry out
these missions.
They are still dealing with a legacy appropriation
structure that looks at fees that go back to when agriculture,
customs, and INS were actually separate inspections.
They have problems with their human resource structure over
time, how they handle their workforce, and it really restricts
their agility and flexibility on how they apply inspection
operations at ports of entry.
Likewise, I think we need to look at queuing on the Mexican
side of the border, how we handle truck traffic, which you know
there is a large amount of, agricultural products that come
across. Most of the offloads by trucks on the Southwest Border
are done for agricultural purposes.
I think, I try to bring all of these things together and
look at them as a system, and I look at the resource structure
that supports those in terms of the human resource practices
that are going on inside of CBP and how they have to fund their
personnel overtime and so forth is something that desperately
needs to be looked at.
Mr. O'Rourke. Very quickly, Admiral Allen, I was pleased to
hear you talk about the consequences of zero risk; one of which
would be zero trade to paraphrase what you said. I want to
commend and thank the Chairman and many others for their
remarks about the need to set defined goals, metrics that will
chart our progress towards those goals because right now,
border security can mean many different things to many
different people, and I am afraid that any more border security
in areas like El Paso will crush our economy, our way of life,
and threaten the National economy as well. So I appreciate your
testimony.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the Chairman
of the Oversight and Management Efficiency Subcommittee, Mr.
Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for your
confidence in me to handle the committee that you led so well
in the last Congress.
I want to thank the members of the panel for your service
to our great Nation in your various roles.
Specifically, Mr. Walker, and continuing, I will raise
awareness about the Nation's debt and our fiscal situation and
its threat to our National security.
If you followed the last Congress, you will understand that
one of the areas of emphasis that I had was Iran and the threat
that Iran and its proxies posed to the security of the United
States.
Mr. Leitner, if you could provide, I am gonna ask you to
provide in writing to the committee and myself, your thoughts
on Iran and specifically the Caracas-Tehran nexus in a post-
Chavez Venezuela.
That is an in-depth issue I know and so for my oversight
role, what I would like to ask you guys independent of that,
given the fact that the Department of Homeland Security has a
$59 billion budget, 225,000-plus employees--and I will start
with Mr. Walker--if you were named Secretary of the Department,
where would you direct the resources to meet your mission or
the mission of the Department?
Mr. Walker. Well, that is getting down to the detail. I
guess what I would say is I would come back to what I said. I
think that you have to have three things to effectively manage
any entity. You have to have a strategic and integrated plan
that is forward-looking, threat/risk/opportunity-oriented,
resource-constrained.
Second, you have to define specific goals and objectives.
What are you trying to achieve? How do you measure success?
Third, you have to have outcome-based performance metrics.
How can you end up measuring whether or not you are being
successful? Are you getting better or worse? How do you compare
to others on an outcome basis?
Third, you have to allocate your limited resources to be
able to maximize value, mitigate risk within current and
available resource levels.
That means: Do they have all of those? They don't have all
of that to the extent that they need to. Second: Who is going
to execute on this? Who is going to make sure that the systems
and the processes are in place and that you have continuous
improvement in order to be able to execute on these things? I
am talking about the--I am not talking about the operators, but
I am talking about the management aspects and support
mechanisms.
That is why I come back to a chief operating officer who is
focused full-time on these types of things because the fact is,
is that we have too much turnover in those critical roles that,
you know, very good political appointees are appointed, but
they don't necessarily have the right background. They don't
necessarily stay there long enough in order to effectively do
what needs to be done.
So, I mean, I would give you--that is what I think needs to
be done rather than saying I would give more money in this
particular area versus another because it would be, I think, I
don't have that data to be able to give you an intelligent
answer there.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. I am going to ask the admiral to comment
on that and then I am gonna come back to Mr. Ervin. How would
you allocate those resources to meet the mission?
Admiral Allen. Frankly, sir, I would go with the current
financial structure of the Department and start there. You need
to be able to enable mission execution with a mission support
organization and that is not completely integrated in the
Department now.
There have been great strides that have been made in the
last 10 years, but attempts to establish a core financial
accounting system and a standard human resource system have not
been successful.
One of the problems I think exists if you want to get right
to the bottom of it is that the appropriations structures for
each of the components is not the same.
It is not possible to compare personnel costs, operating
costs, and capital expenditures across the components. Because
of that, it is not possible to come up with future-years
homeland security plan very similar to the future-year defense
plan that allows consistency in planning, especially in capital
investment.
I believe that the first step towards getting our arms
around this would be to standardize the appropriation
structure--and this gets back to the comments I made about
CBP's having a legacy structure of fees that date back to their
legacy departments that have never been rationalized--so it
makes it almost impossible to estimate personnel costs.
This is like blocking and tackling of management. Without
that structure below you it is going to be very hard to do
that. I would start with the financial management structure of
the Department.
Mr. Duncan. Okay.
Mr. Ervin, how would you allocate the resources?
Mr. Ervin. Well, sir, I guess I would make a--one quick
overarching comment and then give a couple of items of detail.
I guess my overarching comment is I think the bulk of the
DHS' resources should be deployed on the counterterrorism given
the importance of that mission to the Department and the
genesis of the Department.
To be a bit more detailed about that, given this budget
environment, I think the DHS should look hard and I think this
committee can be helpful in this regard and I think, to be
fair, DHS is beginning to look hard. It needs to look harder.
Among the missions it performs, even within the
counterterrorism space: What is it that DHS can perform
uniquely that other agencies either literally cannot perform or
can't perform as well as DHS? I will give you two examples.
One is the Intelligence and Analysis, I&A unit, at DHS.
There are lots of other intelligence agencies, some 15 others
within the United States Government, but of all the multiple
intelligence missions out there, the one it seems to me that
DHS uniquely can play is to take the intelligence that the rest
of the community collects and analyze this and then make sure
that that intelligence is then shared with the private sector
that owns and operates the bulk of critical infrastructure and
State and local governments in a non-classified way, but in an
actionable way, in enough detail such that action can be taken
on it when action needs to be taken, and I don't know that DHS
has focused on that enough.
The second area that I would highlight is S&T. There are
lots of other S&T R&D components elsewhere in the United States
Government; DOD comes immediately to mind and that is the case
as well in the intelligence community.
It seems to me that S&T should do a better job of
piggybacking onto those research and development advances that
other agencies have developed and deployed, and then focus on
what it is uniquely that either DHS should develop or should
adapt for the unique purposes of the homeland security mission.
I think if that mindset is brought to bear we can see huge
economies, huge efficiencies, and a more effective security for
the Nation.
Mr. Duncan. Okay.
Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Vela.
Mr. Vela. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, like Mr. O'Rourke, represent a border region in Texas. I
represent the most southern border region beginning in
Brownsville, and I just have a few questions.
Mr. Walker, you have on a few occasions mentioned the
difficulty in mitigation of risk, and I was curious if you
could expound on that.
Mr. Walker. I think my point is that we are never going to
fully protect the border. We are never going to fully protect
the air system. Just recognize reality. That is not going to be
the case.
It is an impossible task and therefore we also have to
recognize that we have got limited resources that are going to
become more limited and that is why it is so important to be
able to create this comprehensive integrative plan that focuses
on risk. There are certain areas of the country that are higher
risk than others.
There are certain modes of transportation that are higher
risk than others. There are certain areas of the country that
quite frankly where you don't have, you know, a large
population and you can use technology to be able to help scan
the border, but if somebody crosses the border, which they
easily can, you are going to have to have a system to be able
to get them within 100 miles or something of that nature in
order to be able to deal with it.
So we have to recognize there is no such thing as zero
risk. We have to mitigate risk. It will never be zero and we
need to mitigate it in an intelligent way where we are trying
to protect as many people as possible and as much assets as
possible given the resources we have.
Mr. Vela. Of course like Mr. O'Rourke, we have a
significant interest in our Texas border on the facilitation of
trade, so I share many of the same concerns that he has.
Admiral Allen, one of the questions I have for you is, I
was curious as to your thoughts on the significance and impact
of security in Mexico on the safety of citizens on our side of
the border.
Admiral Allen. Let me start with an overarching statement.
I believe the most significant security issue that Mexico has
to deal with is their southern border and their ability to
control illicit trafficking, movement of people.
Once either people or contraband moves into Mexico, we are
dealing with our own ports of entry. So I think as a general
statement, working with Mexico to enable them to do a better
job on their southern border is in everybody's best interest.
They have had tremendous challenges there; the new
administration coming into place has some ideas about what to
do with the national gendarme, if you will. They have been
effective in the past by using their naval forces and their
Marines as a special operation forces, if you will, to be
effective against the drug cartels.
We exchange information with Mexico. We are improving daily
on that. I think there has to be a shared common purpose on the
border related to exchange of information. There are some
barriers. Those barriers are starting to be dropped down, but I
think in the long run it is in our best interest to enable our
Mexican partners to deal with their southern border first and
then look at the art of the possible in dealing with our
borders as far as managing risk.
That includes things like taking advantage of high-
performance computing and data analysis to look at license
plate reader data, and other things out there that we can't put
into a data link or data cloud and do analytics on them to look
at trends and anomalies that would allow us to be able to
attack the areas of highest risk.
Mr. Vela. What is the state of affairs, so to say, of
Mexico's efforts on their southern border?
Admiral Allen. I might defer to other panel members here if
they have any information on that because I am a little time
late being out of the Coast Guard at this point.
I do know initiatives like the America Initiative may have
been put in place to give them resources and create capability
and capacity to allow them to manage those issues on their
southern border.
I believe that this is a regional issue. It is not just a
Mexican issue. The Central American countries that are
suffering the corrosive effects of drug movements that are now
moved into the littoral areas in mainland because of our
successes offshore are producing a regional risk down there.
I think the more that we can encourage regional approaches
to their southern border the better off we will be, but I think
anything that empowers them to have a better situational
awareness, to be able to move resources, and attack those
threat vectors that are crossing the southern border should be
our goal.
Mr. Vela. So do any of the other witnesses have that
information with respect to the current state of affairs of
Mexico's efforts on the southern border or is that something
left for maybe another witness?
Admiral Allen. I would defer to our current colleagues that
are in Government right now and potentially probably a
classified briefing.
Mr. Vela. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. The Chairman now recognizes the
gentleman from Utah, Mr. Stewart.
Mr. Stewart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To the witnesses, thank you for being here today and thank
you, each of you, for a lifetime of service to your Nation.
This committee has broad responsibilities. We have touched
on some of those responsibilities today even if only briefly--
border security, anti-terrorism training and efforts, WMDs,
cybersecurity--I mean, the list is long.
I am a former Air Force pilot. Many years we were trained
to be effective; we had to analyze the threat. We had to
prioritize the threat in order to effectively defeat that and I
would ask you to kind of take a--you know--again an Air Force
analogy; a 30,000-foot view here.
Is there, with your various backgrounds and your areas of
expertise, is there a consensus at all about what our priority
should be? Our No. 1 priority?
If there is not a consensus, would you individually answer
the question? If you were king for the day, what would you do?
What would be the one thing that you would do in order to, you
know, most greatly enhance our security; the thing were all
striving to do?
Admiral, we will start with you if you don't mind.
Admiral Allen. Let me echo what was said earlier and I
quote my very good friend, Mike Mullen, past chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. I don't think it can be overstated
enough the current risk that the current budgeting situation,
continuing resolution, sequestration, and the uncertainty
associated with that has on National security.
Moving to actual threats themselves, I would place
cybersecurity at the top.
Mr. Stewart. Okay.
Admiral Allen. I think one of the challenges associated
with cybersecurity is that it manifests itself differently; the
different infrastructure sectors and with privacy. I think
somewhere we need to divide that out and then talk about what
an inherent Governmental role is within the regulatory
frameworks of each of those sectors, and find out where that
places where we can exchange the information that was alluded
to moving forward.
I think after that, we need to look at how we functionally
manage our borders--not just at a port of entry or between or
Border Patrol or field operations or Coast Guard does. We need
to look at the border as a holistic framework and how we are
going to minimize risk by, in my view what is underutilized
right now is bringing the various sets of data that are
resident in the components and taking advantage of high-
performance computing and data analytics to be more aware of
anomalies and where we ought to be putting our forces.
Mr. Stewart. So Admiral, just making sure I understand,
your No. 1 would be, focus would be, cybersecurity then?
Admiral Allen. Right now, yes.
Mr. Stewart. Okay. Yes.
Mr. Henry.
Mr. Henry. Well, I will follow on then on the admiral and
concur as well on cybersecurity. Although as a taxpayer and a
former Government employee working in the budget, certainly our
budget deficit is a significant concern to me for a lot of
different reasons that have been articulated here.
I think from the cybersecurity perspective, what we need to
do, king for a day, what is the one thing you need to do, I
think it really is defining the red lines and communicating
those red lines to our adversaries, so they know very clearly
what the repercussions are for attacking the United States of
America whether it be stealing intellectual property or
impacting our critical infrastructure.
That has got to be key, and again, we cannot just merely
try to reduce the vulnerabilities. That is important, but we
have to thwart the adversary. They have to know that they
cannot attack us.
There are so many comments that have been made here today
by each of the distinguished witnesses regarding
counterterrorism and protecting the border, all of those things
that they said absolutely apply right here to this space, to
cyber, it is a direct parallel.
Mr. Leiter talked about----
Mr. Stewart. Mr. Henry, could I, could I just add, follow-
on before you move on? It seems to me that they don't pay a
great price right now that to some degree they work with some
impunity towards us. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Henry. There is no risk to the adversary. The return on
their investment is tremendous.
Mr. Stewart. Yes.
Mr. Henry. They are stealing billions of dollars, and there
is no risk because nobody is telling then, ``Stop.''
Mr. Stewart. Yes.
Mr. Henry. Nobody--there is no penalty and until the
penalty and the threat to them, the risks to them, outweighs
the game, you are absolutely right, Congressman, there will be
no stopping this threat.
Mr. Stewart. Okay.
Admiral Allen. There is no barrier to entry.
Mr. Stewart. Yes.
Mr. Leiter. Congressman, with the caveat that I am a formal
naval aviator, so you might choose to dismiss everything I say.
Mr. Stewart. You are a bigger man than I am, if you have
landed on a carrier.
Mr. Leiter. Just close your eyes and pray. Congressman, I
would say two mission areas that I simply can't say one is more
important than the other; counterterrorism and cyber.
But on counterterrorism I am going to caveat that with we
can not aim to stop every small attack and we have to really
defend and prioritize the catastrophic event.
But there is a different priority that I would take which
is not mission-focused, it is following on what Mr. Walker and
Admiral Allen said. If I was king for a day, I would spend 75
percent of my time striving for true coordination and
cohesiveness across the Department, and then making sure that
the Department is really only doing those things that other
departments and agencies can't do in the rest of the Federal
Government.
By doing that, I am going to have a lot more capability and
resources to cover all of my other mission-focused priorities.
Mr. Stewart. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Walker. If you don't put your finances in order,
everybody will suffer to differing degrees over time and every
function of Government will suffer to differing degrees over
time.
Second, I do agree that we need to focus on, you know, a
more comprehensive and integrated approach, a more risk
management approach, focus on core competencies and comparative
advantage, which is I think what is being said. What can they
do uniquely?
Then last, cyber and border. I think, my personal view is
we are wasting a hell of a lot of money on what TSA is doing
domestically with regard to airport security.
You know what TSA stands for, right? The acronym? Yes,
okay.
Mr. Ervin. I associate myself with everything my colleagues
said. I particularly agree with Mr. Leiter. He said exactly
what I would say about where to focus.
You know, I think it is very tough to distinguish between
the degree of threat posed by cyber and terrorism. I think they
are essentially equal within terrorism.
I would agree with Mr. Leiter what he said earlier that we
need to focus most on events that are low-probability but high-
consequence, namely the threat of terrorists with the weapons
of mass destruction.
In terms of what to do about it, again I agree with my
colleagues. One thing that hasn't been said that I think is
important is that, you know, I think the figure of $100 billion
was used by Mr. Leiter earlier as the total amount of money
that has been spent since
9/11 to secure our country against the threat of terrorism. It
is something like that--yearly, annually. So it is a huge
amount of money needless to say.
But we don't have an integrated approach, a strategic
approach to the expenditure of that money. There is a lot of
duplication within DHS across agencies with regard to that and
I don't think--for example, part of the strategy is how much of
the total money spent is focused on preventing terrorism?
Countering violent extremism?
To what degree is that integrated across governments? So I
think greater attention needs to be paid to that and I think it
would yield outsize dividends if we were to.
Mr. Stewart. Thank you, all.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
The Chairman recognizes the gentleman from Nevada, Mr.
Horsford.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on this
committee.
My district includes a portion of Las Vegas and our airport
there, the McCarran Airport, is the fifth-busiest airport in
the country; nearly 40 million people fly through that airport
on an annualized basis.
So listening to the testimony today, clearly security,
technology, innovation is at the forefront and I appreciate the
explanation while also balancing the interests of civil
liberties and protecting the privacy of individuals.
My question is: What are the processes in place to share
the best practices that we have learned over the last few years
in airport security, particularly in large airports like
McCarran, and how do we share that with other airports that
aren't yet at that level? And for airports that are at the
cutting edge, how do we make sure that they are staying at the
cutting edge?
Mr. Ervin. Well, I guess I will start there--start with it.
I think it is a very good question. I don't know frankly the
extent of which TSA focuses on best practices among airports.
You know, there certainly is a degree of variation among them.
There are differing degrees of effectiveness, differing
degrees of efficiency, differing degrees of innovation as you
said. I don't know that there is an organized way to do that,
but there certainly should be. I agree with that.
Mr. Walker. I fly multiple times every week all over the
country. I have been to all 50 States. I have been to 100
countries. I think that is a great question to ask the
administrator at TSA because it is a very clear to me they are
not consistent. They are not consistent and there are clearly
opportunities to share best practices and lessons learned, if
you will.
Mr. Leiter. Congressman, I am not sure of the best
practices, but I would say one thing for this committee to
consider how TSA and the Department of Homeland Security can
accelerate those programs that we all know work well, which are
real risk-based approaches, in particular global entry and TSA
PreCheck.
These are ways of focusing on the people you have to focus
on and not focusing on the people that you have already done
background investigations as a matter of intelligence are far
lesser threats.
Admiral Allen. Just to follow up, if you look at the risk-
based, screening is probably what you want to do. I don't think
there is any legal requirement to run people through scanners.
That is the technology or that is the process that is being
used right now even with the new advanced imaging technology.
I think the more you can understand about people and the
threat posed by that and the more you understand about them in
advance related to prescreening, the better off you are going
to be, but I would encourage TSA very much to go to risk-based
screening, to look at other areas other than just--and Clarke
already mentioned this--you know, just screening for anomalies
is not going to reduce risk to zero.
But to allow them to understand more about passengers, to
understand about behaviors, behavioral detection officers is
being deployed, and things that don't negatively impact the
queues.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Chairman, just a follow-up briefly.
On the counterterror-attack funding--I think one of you
mentioned that earlier--I know that there have been issues in
the past where communities like ours that have a higher tourism
base aren't always taken into account in that methodology. Can
one of you touch on the need for that in various areas?
Mr. Ervin. Yes sir, I think I am the one who mentioned it,
but I am sure we would all agree with that. As you know, over
the course of the, you know, decade or so of post-9/11, DHS's
history, there has been a constant struggle over how
counterterrorism--scarce even then and even scarcer now--
counterterrorism dollars should be allocated.
You know, my argument is that, you know, perhaps there is a
role for pork barrel programs, one can argue about that, but if
there is, there certainly isn't a role for pork with regard to
counterterrorism dollars in particular in this time.
So I think on a bipartisan, bicameral basis, there needs to
be a consensus about the obvious that certain--the larger a
city is, the more iconic it is, like Los Angeles being a
tourism mecca, Las Vegas and--and I believe that there was some
interaction with the 9/11 hijackers in Las Vegas as a matter of
fact--the more likely it is that they continue, those cities
continued to--localities generally speaking--continue to be in
terrorists' crosshairs. So we have got to direct those
counterterrorism dollars to cities and localities most at risk.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
The Chairman now recognizes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Rothfus.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Allen, I appreciated the interchange with
Representative Miller about the operational control of the
border issue.
You know, we are going to be taking a look at immigration
and one of the measures that they are going to be looking at is
securing the border and I think part of the discussion was
there is going to be maybe a commission that would certify that
the border is secure.
You know, what are going to be the criteria? Are there
objective criteria by which we can judge whether the border is
secure? What would we be looking for?
Admiral Allen. Well, it gets back to the comments I made
about the oil spill. These are sometimes subjective evaluation
of what is acceptable risk because the risk can never be driven
to zero.
But what it needs to be is an acceptance of risk that is
openly arrived at, transparent, and the criteria that is
supplied in the discussion needs to be universally understood,
recognized, and accepted.
That will be different in different parts of the border. It
is a far different border in Ciudad Juarez and El Paso than it
is in Detroit where you have got an international border there
with Canada.
I think what we need to strive for are criteria that we can
apply to a certain area that will produce different outcomes
depending on the geography and everything else.
Mr. Rothfus. What kind of criteria would we be looking for?
Admiral Allen. Well, the physical nature of the border
itself. Is there a land border? Is there a water border? The
type of access, the terrain.
The population density, the amount of cargo in traffic that
moves through it. How much of that is related to trade? How
much is foot traffic?
All of those are different dimensions----
Mr. Rothfus. So if it is a land border for example, are we
looking at a fencing issue, I mean looking at, you know,
remoteness----
Admiral Allen. Well, I think you----
Mr. Rothfus [continuing]. If it is a water border, are we
looking at certain either drones or cameras or something
watching?
Admiral Allen. If you look at a highly densely-populated
area, you can extend fencing out several miles either way and
you have not reduced the risk to zero but you have channeled
the threat to places where it can be more adequately dealt
with.
There are places where fences aren't going to do you any
good, out in the middle of nowhere. Where you have a river or
some other natural barrier, that needs to be considered.
I guess what I am saying is we need to come up with a
universally recognized and accepted set of criteria that will
allow us to make it the best assessment of risk and then accept
that in terms of what constitutes adequate border security
knowing that it will never be driven to zero and if we wait for
that we will never--if we drive it to zero, we will have no
trade in this country and you will never see immigration
reform.
Mr. Rothfus. As far as establishing those criteria, I guess
it is to policymakers in this House and looking to the people
in the administration who would be suggesting things also?
Admiral Allen. I believe, and this gets back to my
experience in environmental issues and the oil spill, there is
a much different view of what constitutes an acceptable level
of risk in the Gulf of Mexico say than there might be off
southern California or off the North Slope of the Arctic.
These are local issues that that need to be--that need to
be taken into account the concerns and the equities of those
communities, but I think from a National standpoint, we have to
come up with a set of criteria where we equally apply those to
areas knowing they will be different outcomes because as one of
my predecessors said, ``If you have seen one port, you have
seen one port.''
That doesn't mean you can't apply criteria to each port. It
might produce a different outcome, but then you have a standard
way to assess risk and know what kind of risk you are
accepting.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you.
Mr. Henry, on cybersecurity, you know, taking a look at the
organization of the Department, we have an office in the
National preparedness--it used to be preparedness--the programs
and--NPPD directorate. There is an office of cybersecurity
there.
We also have cybersecurity elements in other components of
the Department. Is this the optimal organization for
cybersecurity issues at the Department? Should we be--we are
two levels down from the Secretary that I can see anyway on
handling cybersecurity issues.
Can you comment on the how the assets of the Department are
deployed with respect to cybersecurity?
Mr. Henry. Yes, let me first say that when we are talking
about cyber, we are talking about espionage, we are talking
about terrorism, we are talking about criminality. Cyber is
actually the tool.
So that is why so many of the things that we have talked
about here and other areas, border protection,
counterterrorism, et cetera are absolutely relevant in this
space. That is important to get out.
As it relates to DHS, I think that you need to have
visibility into this at the senior levels. I think that
executives have to be part and parcel of this. This is a whole-
of-Government response and a whole-of-agency response, and
there is a lot of overlap and many gaps and not enough
comprehensive review of this at the and in the departments and
agencies and writ large, the Government writ large, so I think
that that has got to be considered and look across the agency
and bring it, consolidate it into one particular area with the
leadership of the executives directly involved.
Admiral Allen. I might suggest there are three roles inside
the DHS related to cyber, and I am going to go functional not
related to the threat that Mr. Henry talked about.
The first is the Department has to protect its own network.
The second: There is a role right now for the Department in
coordinating across the dot-gov domain, in terms of continuous
diagnostics and monitoring, to bring them in compliance with
the administrative directive regarding how the entire
Government will defend its networks.
Third is the external requirement that we have discussed
here today to interact with the private sector, especially
regarding infrastructure protection and how those sectors will
be protected, and that is a work in progress impacted by the
Executive Order that was signed by the President yesterday and
hopefully will be codified and have legal ambiguities removed
through legislation that is passed by Congress.
So if you look at those tiering, it is easy to kind of
break out who in the Department is doing what. For internal
network security you are talking about the CIO. When you are
talking about their role in relation to the dot-gov domain and
the private sector, then you are talking about NPPD, but there
also is a role for Intelligence and Analysis that are related
to how they are dealing with the State and local governments in
the critical infrastructure sectors as well.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the gentlelady
from New York, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the Ranking Member.
I thank all of you who have testified before us today, and
I am going to be a little bit more provocative than some of my
other colleagues because I truly believe that while we all have
good intentions when it comes to homeland security, we are
really playing at homeland security, we are not doing homeland
security.
I say that in the light of the fact that when you look at
our armed services and the role that they play in securing our
Nation, if we treated our armed services the way we treat
homeland security, other nations would be eating our lunch.
Other nations would be eating our lunch.
The title of today's hearing was ``A New Perspective on the
Threats to Homeland,'' and as a New Yorker I am extremely
sensitized to it having lived and currently living in New York
City; I am extremely sensitized to it.
But when I have CBP officers or, come to my office to tell
me how at any moment in time something really bad can happen
because they are doing double, triple shifts because assets
have been moved to the Southern Border and we are not looking
at the whole matrix of what needs to be done to actually have
the FTEs in place to protect our Nation, I get concerned.
I get extremely concerned, and when we talk about
cybersecurity for instance, we know what the vulnerabilities
are. It is not a matter of, you know, how it is going to
happen, it is--it is like, when is it going to happen, at this
stage.
So my concern is that while yes we are trying to do more
with less, why are we playing with homeland security? Why is it
that everyone is so ambivalent to talk about what is really
required to secure the homeland?
I am really intrigued at the fact that were this the
Marines, the Air Force, the Navy, the Coast Guard, that we
would not have the same posture about it.
So I want to raise a question because we are talking about
threats to the homeland and when you have a situation where
ports of entry for instance like JFK Airport has far fewer
workers, CBP officers, than they had prior to 9/11 working on a
given shift. You have hundreds if not thousands of people
coming through customs. They are waiting in a very--about the
size of this room, maybe a little bit bigger, to go through and
be documented and be screened.
You have people waiting there for 2 and 3 hours and mayhem
breaks out and you have got like four guys sitting there. Is
that not a threat? Does not that--something like that--pose a
problem for us as a Nation and how do we bring efficiency, how
do we bring balance to what we are looking at?
When people are able to walk around a CBP officer and leave
undetected the airport and then we find out that, you know,
there is a superhighway within our communities of drug flow, of
gun flow.
Isn't there some connection that we should be looking at in
terms of threats to the homeland? I am raising this because I
am a bit concerned--I have heard all of you speak to the threat
of terrorism but terrorism is one aspect of homeland security
and we are so fixed on it as we should--listen--well, I have
been through two terrorist attacks.
My father worked for the Port Authority, so I am not
looking at this as someone who doesn't understand what
terrorism is, but I have also been in City Hall when my
colleague was gunned down. So I know what illegal handguns can
do.
How do we look at this comprehensively and how do we raise,
stand up this agency, so that it does what it needs to do
without excuse, without equivocation?
Because what I am hearing here today is that well we are
going to do more with less. Well, you know what, we invested in
IC about one, two, three, four, five, six technology
deployments for the Southern Border at the cost of billions of
dollars that never worked, that never worked.
Yet my airport is a powder keg ready to explode. I am
putting this out there just a little frustration. I wanted to
raise it with you because I wanted to get a sense from you of,
you know, what do we really see as the role of CBP?
If they are not the first line of defense than who is? That
is one question. I will have you answer that and then I will
come back with my next.
Admiral Allen. I will take a stab----
Ms. Clarke. But if you can just share with me your----
Admiral Allen. If I could maybe provide a little context.
What you are talking about, terrorism, drug trafficking,
trafficking human beings, trafficking and guns, what you are
really talking about is illicit trafficking that produces
financial resources that perpetuate criminal activity. Now I
would classify terrorists as political criminals.
All of these networks require money to continue to operate
and I didn't discuss it specifically, but I think one of the
challenges facing the Department and the country right now is
how to deal with these criminal networks by attacking a network
with a network.
When we talk about cyber, we talk about defending a network
with a network. I think we need to understand that these
threats start to pass organizational boundaries that a lot of
our traditional law enforcement agencies are created for one
specific threat; DEA in drugs; ATF in guns, and so forth.
What we need to understand is moving ahead in this country
and dealing with either criminal activity, terrorist activity--
we have got to start breaking down the barriers between
agencies that are being constructed to attack one problem, put
the information together, and attack a network with a network.
Ms. Clarke. Isn't that what DHS does? Isn't that their
role?
Admiral Allen. That gets back to the high-performance
computing data analysis, information sharing, breaking down IT
stovepipes, coming up with a common operating, common
intelligence picture. I think it is a major challenge for the
Department.
Mr. Leiter. Congresswoman, I will be a bit provocative
back. Without disagreeing with you that you of course have to
have adequate staffing to deal with whatever threat you see,
first of all, we shouldn't be looking at the Department as
having counterterrorism resources. I agree with you. They have
border protection and security resources and those should be
applied equally across different missions.
In most cases, not many things are actually specialized and
cut down one mission area. You can work all of these security
threats, but the place where I will be a bit more provocative
is I think you have very little sense of whether or not
security at Kennedy Airport has been increased because there
are four people or eight people there at the border.
What we learned in the case of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab on
Christmas day in 2009, is that if we are waiting to screen
these people once they get to JFK, we have probably already
lost the fight.
So I would go to Admiral Allen's point. The question is:
How is the National Targeting Center for CBP doing in screening
these travelers before they even get there, either stopping
them from getting on a plane and arriving at JFK or knowing
which ones they have to screen additionally?
So I do think it is more than a uni-dimensional look at the
number of people that are at that airport.
Mr. Walker. Yes. I would say don't focus on how many people
they have and how big the budget is because that is not
necessarily indicative of outcome-based results. I will give
you some examples.
We spent two-and-a-half times per person for health care.
We spent two-and-a-half times per person for K-12 education,
and we get poor results. We are not top 25 in the world, okay.
If you look at the Defense Department, I can assure you
that the Defense Department has a huge amount of waste, a huge
amount of waste, and they are going to have to be cut too.
But it comes back to what a lot of us have been saying. You
need a plan, you need a comprehensive and integrated plan. You
need to define risk and measure risk. You need to determine
what are you trying to accomplish and how do you measure
success in that regard, and you have to allocate your limited
resources, whatever they are, to try to accomplish the most
with what you have; focus on outcomes. I think there is clearly
room for improvement there.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony.
The record will stay open for 10 days pursuant to the rule.
Without objection, this committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


