- PROS AND CONS OF RESTRICTING SNAP PURCHASES

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROS AND CONS OF RESTRICTING SNAP PURCHASES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

FEBRUARY 16, 2017

----------

Serial No. 115-2

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

PROS AND CONS OF RESTRICTING SNAP PURCHASES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 16, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-2

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

24-325 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas, Vice Ranking
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  Minority Member
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
JEFF DENHAM, California              RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
DOUG LaMALFA, California             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana         TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             JIMMY PANETTA, California
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                DARREN SOTO, Florida
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas            LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DON BACON, Nebraska
JOHN J. FASO, New York
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas

______

Matthew S. Schertz, Staff Director

Anne Simmons, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Submitted report.............................................   153
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     3

Witnesses

Rachidi, Ph.D., Angela K., Research Fellow in Poverty Studies,
American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C.................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Schanzenbach, Ph.D., Diane Whitmore, Director and Senior Fellow,
Economic Studies, Brookings Institution; Professor of Social
Policy and of Economics, The Hamilton Project, Northwestern
University, Washington, D.C....................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Submitted question...........................................   395
Sarasin, Leslie G., President and Chief Executive Officer, Food
Marketing Institute, Arlington, VA.............................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Weidman, John, Deputy Executive Director, The Food Trust,
Philadelphia, PA...............................................    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Wansink, Ph.D., Brian, John S. Dyson Professor of Marketing and
Director, Cornell University Food and Brand Lab, Ithaca, NY....    33
Prepared statement...........................................    34

Submitted Material

Feeding Texas, submitted policy brief............................   282
Secretaries' Innovation Group, submitted statement...............   283
Allison, Ph.D., David B., Distinguished Quetelet Endowed
Professor; Associate Dean for Research & Science; Director,
Office of Energetics; Director, Nutrition & Obesity Research
Center, Department of Nutrition Sciences, School of Health
Professions, University of Alabama at Birmingham, submitted
letter.........................................................   284

PROS AND CONS OF RESTRICTING SNAP PURCHASES

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to other business, at 10:24
a.m., in Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon.
K. Michael Conaway [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Conaway, Thompson,
Goodlatte, King, Rogers, Gibbs, Austin Scott of Georgia,
Crawford, Hartzler, Denham, LaMalfa, Davis, Yoho, Allen, Bost,
Rouzer, Kelly, Comer, Marshall, Bacon, Faso, Dunn, Arrington,
Peterson, David Scott of Georgia, Costa, Walz, Fudge, McGovern,
Lujan Grisham, Kuster, Nolan, Bustos, Maloney, Plaskett, Adams,
Evans, Lawson, O'Halleran, Panetta, Soto, and Blunt Rochester.
Staff present: Bart Fischer, Caleb Crosswhite, Callie
McAdams, Haley Graves, Jackie Barber, Jadi Chapman, Jennifer
Tiller, Mary Rose Conroy, Stephanie Addison, Keith Jones,
Kellie Adesina, Lisa Shelton, Troy Phillips, John Konya, Nicole
Scott, and Carly Reedholm.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS

The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
entitled, Pros and Cons of Restricting SNAP Purchases, will
come to order. Thank you.
I want to welcome our witnesses to today's hearing, and
thank them for taking the time to share their views on a very
timely and somewhat sensitive topic, the idea of restricting
SNAP purchases. This hearing is a continuation of the
conversation had at a Member roundtable last October. There are
good arguments to be made on both sides of this issue, and this
discussion will be yet another addition to the Committee's
commitment to strengthening the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program.
On November 18 of last year, USDA released a report
entitled, Foods Typically Purchased by Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program Households. This study analyzed food
purchase data collected at the point of sale to assess
differences in the purchasing patterns of SNAP and non-SNAP
households. Ultimately, the report found that about 40  of
every dollar of every purchase dollar was spent on basic items
like meat, fruits, vegetables, milk, eggs, and bread. Another
20  was spent on sweetened drinks, desserts, salty snacks,
candy, and sugar. The remaining 40  was spent on a variety of
items such as cereal, prepared foods, other dairy products,
rice, beans, and other cooking ingredients. To be clear, when
comparing spending on broad food categories, the data show that
both SNAP and non-SNAP households make similar food choices.
However, the report also confirms that there are differences in
spending in individual food categories. One can also reasonably
infer from the report that billions in taxpayer dollars are
being spent on items like sweetened beverages and prepared
desserts.
This report, while not the sole basis of this hearing, begs
the question of whether certain food or beverage items should
be restricted as eligible food items in SNAP. While it is
important to have this discussion, we can all agree that no one
in America ought to go hungry, and SNAP is essential to
providing nutrition to the most vulnerable citizens during
tough times.
Our goal is to provide much-needed nutrition and to
encourage Americans to eat healthier. To that end, this
Committee has historically advocated for nutrition education
and healthy eating incentive programs. Today, we will consider
whether additional restrictions should be added to that mix.
Thank you again to the witnesses for being here today. We
look forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conaway follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. K. Michael Conaway, a Representative in
Congress from Texas
I want to welcome our witnesses to today's hearing and thank them
for taking the time to share their views on a very timely and somewhat
sensitive topic--the idea of restricting SNAP purchases. This hearing
is a continuation of the conversation had in a Member roundtable last
October. There are good arguments to be made on both sides of this
issue, and this discussion will be yet another addition to the
Committee's commitment to strengthening the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program.
On November 18th of last year, USDA released a report entitled,
Foods Typically Purchased by Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Households. This study analyzed food purchase data collected at the
point of sale to assess differences in the purchasing patterns of SNAP
and non-SNAP households.
Ultimately, the report found that about 40  of every food purchase
dollar was spent on basic items like meat, fruits, vegetables, milk,
eggs, and bread.
Another 20  was spent on sweetened drinks, desserts, salty snacks,
candy, and sugar. The remaining 40  was spent on a variety of items
such as cereal, prepared foods, other dairy products, rice, beans, and
other cooking ingredients.
To be clear, when comparing spending on broad food categories, the
data show that both SNAP and non-SNAP households made similar food
choices. However, the report also confirms that there are differences
in spending on individual food categories. One can also reasonably
infer from the report that billions in taxpayer dollars are being spent
on items like sweetened beverages and prepared desserts.
The report, while not the sole basis of this hearing, begs the
question of whether certain food or beverage items should be restricted
as eligible food items in SNAP. While it's important to have this
discussion, we can all agree that no one in America ought to go hungry,
and SNAP is essential in providing nutrition to the most vulnerable
citizens during tough times.
Our goal is to provide much needed nutrition and to encourage
Americans to eat healthier. To that end, this Committee has
historically advocated for nutrition education and healthy eating
incentive programs. Today, we will consider whether additional
restrictions should be added to that mix. Thank you again to the
witnesses for being here today. We look forward to your testimony.
With that, I now turn to the Ranking Member for any comments he
would like to make.

The Chairman. I now turn to the Ranking Member for any
comments that he would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have had 16 SNAP hearings, we are now taking a look at
how SNAP recipients are purchasing food, what kind of food they
are purchasing with their SNAP dollars.
Before we get too far, though, I think it is important to
again note that the overwhelming theme of the testimony we have
heard in the last Congress is that while there are some areas
for improvement, SNAP works. We heard testimony opposing
efforts to block grant SNAP and on the importance of keeping
SNAP within the farm bill.
Those of us who have been around a while know that this is
a complicated program, and I would urge Members to keep that in
mind as we work on the farm bill this next year. I don't think
there is one single issue that is the problem, and I don't
think there is one single solution that will magically somehow
improve SNAP efficiency.
Looking specifically at SNAP food choice, it would seem
pretty straightforward that we not allow SNAP dollars to be
spent on junk food. But the problem is, how do you define that?
This is something that I took a look at when I was Chairman.
In Minnesota, they tried this. Somehow or another they
requested a waiver from FNS to disallow candy, I don't know how
they did this, but when they were defining candy, if the candy
didn't contain wheat it was banned, but if it did contain
wheat, it wasn't. So a Kit-Kat bar was okay under what they
were doing, and a Hershey bar was not. So I don't know. When
you go down this route, you are opening a real can of worms,
and from what I can tell talking to my folks back home, that
grocery stores have really no interest in being the food
police. USDA has been resistant to this effort as well. And
from what I know, when you look at how, and the kind of food,
SNAP recipients buy, it is really not different from the food
of people that are not on SNAP. The underlying issue is all of
us in the United States do a bad job of deciding what to eat,
and we can all use some guidance probably. But I am not sure
the government is the way to provide that.
So I am hopeful that we can be open-minded. The discussion
on these issues can continue and our efforts can continue, so
that we learn more about how SNAP actually works, and I look
forward to hearing today's witnesses and yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The chair would remind
or request that other Members submit their opening statements
for the record so witnesses may begin their testimony to ensure
that there is ample time for questioning.
I want to thank our panel for being here. It is, by all
arguments, some of the best informed folks, and it is a
balanced panel. We have folks on both sides of the issue, and
we have folks who have to administer the program, whatever it
is we come up with. So we have a terrific panel and I am
excited to hear from them after reading their testimony last
night.
Today, we have with us Dr. Angela Rachidi. She is a
Research Fellow, Poverty Studies at American Enterprise
Institute here in Washington, D.C. We have Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach, Director of The Hamilton Project, Senior Fellow,
Economic Studies, the Brookings Institute here in D.C. We have
Leslie Sarasin, CEO of the Food Marketing Institute in
Arlington, Virginia. We have Mr. John Weidman, who is the
Deputy Executive Director, The Food Trust, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. And we have Brian Wansink, the Director of
Cornell University Food and Brand Lab at Ithaca, New York. And
given everyone's last names, I came sort of close to getting
some of those right. So Dr. Rachidi, if you will, please, 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANGELA K. RACHIDI, Ph.D., RESEARCH
FELLOW IN POVERTY STUDIES, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE
INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Dr. Rachidi. Thank you. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, and other Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning on restrictions on
purchases in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or
SNAP. My name is Angela Rachidi, and I am a Research Fellow in
Poverty Studies at the American Enterprise Institute, or AEI.
Prior to joining AEI, I was the Deputy Commissioner for Policy
and Evaluation at the New York City Department of Human
Resources, or HRA. HRA administers SNAP, and during my time
there, we provided benefits to almost two million New Yorkers
each month.
Most relevant for my testimony today is my experience
drafting a proposal for a demonstration project in New York
City to restrict the use of SNAP benefits to purchase sweetened
beverages. Regrettably, it was denied by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture in 2011.
I will make four main points today. First, obesity and the
related health problems remain one of the most challenging
public health issues of our time, with sweetened beverages
identified as one of the main contributors. Second, the
integrity of SNAP as a publicly funded program rests on how
well its implementation matches the stated goals of the
program. Third, this problem is not unique to low-income
households, but SNAP offers one opportunity for government to
play a positive role. And fourth, a demonstration project to
test a restriction on sweetened beverages in SNAP is consistent
with bipartisan efforts to support evidence-based policy
making.
For my oral testimony, I won't go through all of the
research on obesity, the related health problems, and its
connection to sweetened beverages. But I do want to say,
however, that obesity is a major public health crisis that
affects all Americans, no matter their income status, and for
this reason, it requires a multi-faceted public health
approach.
High sweetened beverage consumption is not unique to SNAP
households, but supporting such purchases, especially at the
levels suggested in the data, directly contradicts the stated
goals of the program. The Food Stamp Act of 1977 states that
the goal is to provide for improved levels of nutrition among
low-income households through a cooperative Federal-state
program of food assistance. This purpose holds today.
For a program with a stated goal of improving nutrition,
accepting such a large percentage of spending on beverages with
no nutritional value seems counterintuitive and likely
undermines public support for the program. Estimates suggest
SNAP households spend almost ten percent of their food budgets
on these products. Allowing the purchase of sweetened beverages
also directly competes with nutritional education programming,
and it competes against costs associated with obesity, which
sweetened beverages are a large contributor to; estimates
suggest that obesity costs $147 billion per year.
Placing restrictions on SNAP should be part of a broader
approach to address this problem. Some believe that educating
SNAP recipients on healthy eating is a better approach. I would
argue that it should not be one or the other, and the USDA's
own research supports this. The USDA's Healthy Incentives
Program, which gave financial incentives to SNAP households to
purchase fruits and vegetables had no effect on sweetened
beverage consumption, even though these households did eat more
fruits and vegetables. The Summer EBT for Children Program
found that a WIC-based model which provided restrictions was
more effective than a SNAP-based model, which did not allow
restrictions. And another study not conducted through the USDA
found that restrictions plus incentives was most effective in
reducing sweetened beverage intake.
As part of a broader approach toward evidence-based policy
making, a demonstration project is needed. I believe that with
cooperation from the USDA and funding from Congress, a
demonstration project is feasible. A random assignment
experiment similar to the Healthy Incentives Pilot could be
conducted. With the technology that exists today, this would
not be overly burdensome on retailers. In fact, when we
developed the proposal in New York City, we spoke to retailers
and they told us that it would not be that difficult to
implement such a restriction, since they program their EBT
systems anyway.
In conclusion, with a new Congress and Administration, I am
hopeful that a demonstration project in a few states will be
allowed in order to test whether a restriction could be
effective. At a time when leaders of both parties are promoting
evidence-based policy making, testing such an idea and
rigorously evaluating the results should receive broad support.
Thank you, and I can respond to any questions that you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Rachidi follows:]

Prepared Statement of Angela K. Rachidi, Ph.D., Research Fellow in
Poverty Studies, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C.
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): Time to Test a
Sweetened Beverage Restriction
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and other Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning on
restrictions on purchases in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program or SNAP.
My name is Angela Rachidi, and I am a Research Fellow in Poverty
Studies at the American Enterprise Institute (AEI). Prior to joining
AEI, I spent almost a decade at the New York City Human Resources
Administration (HRA) as the Deputy Commissioner for Policy and
Evaluation. HRA is New York City's main social service agency and
administers SNAP. During my time at HRA, the city provided SNAP
benefits to almost two million New Yorkers each month.
In my role, I studied all aspects of the program. Most relevant for
today is my experience--under the direction of then-Mayor Michael
Bloomberg, Commissioners for Health Thomas Friedan and Thomas Farley,
and HRA Commissioner Robert Doar--drafting a proposal for a
demonstration project in New York City to restrict the use of SNAP
benefits to purchase sweetened beverages. We proposed a restriction as
a way to support the overarching goal of the program, which is to
improve nutrition. Regrettably, it was denied by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) in 2011.
In the years since I left HRA, the public health problems caused by
sweetened beverages have not solved themselves. I am here today to urge
the Committee to support demonstration projects that test whether a
sweetened beverage restriction in SNAP can improve the health and well-
being of SNAP recipients.
I will make four main points to support this recommendation:

1.  Obesity and related health problems remain one of the most
challenging public health issues of our time, affecting
millions of poor and non-poor Americans, with sweetened
beverages identified as one the main contributors.

2.  The integrity of SNAP as a publicly-funded program rests on how
well its implementation matches the stated goals of the
program. Congress has stated that the purpose of SNAP is to
support nutrition among low-income households, which is
directly contradicted by allowing sweetened beverages to be
purchased.

3.  This public health problem is complex and requires a
comprehensive approach that includes multiple strategies,
including changes to SNAP.

4.  A demonstration project to test a sweetened beverage restriction
in SNAP is consistent with bipartisan efforts to support
evidence-based policymaking. Through rigorous evaluation, a
demonstration project could assess whether government
efforts can achieve potential gains, such as better health,
without adversely affecting other measures of well-being.

Before I get to these main points, I want to state clearly that
SNAP is one of the more effective Federal safety net programs in the
U.S. A large body of research shows that it reduces poverty, improves
food security among low-income households, and has positive effects on
infant health and long-term benefits for children who receive it.\1\ In
the average month in 2016, 44.2 million Americans received SNAP for a
total cost of $70.9 billion.\2\ Among American households, 12.7 percent
were food-insecure in 2015 and 5.0 percent had very low food
insecurity; percentages which likely would be much higher without
SNAP.\3\ In 2015, SNAP lifted almost 4.6 million people out of poverty,
according to the Supplemental Poverty Measure.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Judith Bartfield, et al., eds, SNAP Matters: How Food
Stamps Affect Health and Well-Being (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2015); Douglas Almond, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach, ``Inside the War on Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on
Birth Outcomes,'' Review of Economics and Statistics 93, no. 2 (May
2011): 387-403; and Hilary Hoynes, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and
Douglas Almond, ``Long-Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety
Net,'' American Economic Review 106, no. 4 (April 2016): 903-34.
\2\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service
``Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Participation and Costs,''
February 3, 2017, https://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/
SNAPsummary.pdf.
\3\ Alisha Coleman-Jensen, et al., ``Household Food Security in the
United States in 2015,'' U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic
Research Services, September 2016, https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/
publications/err215/err-215.pdf?v=42636.
\4\ Trudi Renwick and Liana Fox, ``The Supplemental Poverty
Measure: 2015,'' U.S. Census Bureau, September 2016, http://
www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/demo/p60-
258.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beyond these national statistics, I saw first-hand the positive
impacts that SNAP had on individuals and families in New York City. It
serves a wide variety of households, including the elderly, the
disabled, and working families. However, as with any government
program, it can always be improved. And as a nutrition assistance
program, SNAP could do more to support healthy eating among recipient
households, especially children.
Obesity, Health Problems, and the Connection to Sweetened Beverages
The National Institutes of Health has termed obesity ``a
devastating public-health crisis for the United States,'' \5\ and for
good reason. Among all Americans, 37.9 percent of adults (age 20 or
older) were obese in 2013-2014 and over 70 percent were overweight or
obese.\6\ Among children, 20.6 percent of 12-19 year olds and 17.4
percent of 6-11 year olds were obese in those same years.\7\ According
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), people who are
obese are a greater risk for a variety of health issues, including type
2 diabetes, heart disease, stroke, some cancers, low quality of life,
and certain mental illnesses.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ National Institutes of Health, ``About We Can! Background,''
February 13, 2013, https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/wecan/
about-wecan/background.htm.
\6\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
Health Statistics, ``Obesity and Overweight,'' June 13, 2016, https://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/obesity-overweight.htm.
\7\ Ibid.
\8\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ``The Health
Effects of Overweight and Obesity,'' June 5, 2015, https://www.cdc.gov/
healthyweight/effects/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Excessive sugar consumption is considered one of the primary causes
of obesity, with sugar-sweetened beverages specifically linked to
excessive weight gain and obesity, and the related health problems that
result.\9\ Because of these known associations and because sweetened
beverages have no nutritional value, the White House Task Force on
Childhood Obesity issued a report in 2010 that included recommendations
calling for the nation's food assistance programs to be part of the
solution by encouraging access to nutritious foods and offering
incentives and eliminating disincentives to healthy eating habits.\10\
In addition, according to the 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for
Americans:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Brian K. Kit, et al., ``Trends in Sugar-Sweetened Beverage
Consumption Among Youth and Adults in the United States: 1999-2010,''
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 98, no. 1 (May 2013): 180-88.
\10\ White House Task Force on Childhood Obesity, ``Solving the
Problem of Childhood Obesity Within a Generation,'' May 2010, https://
letsmove.obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/letsmove.gov/files/
TaskForce_on_Childhood_Obesity_May2010_FullReport.pdf.

The two main sources of added sugars in U.S. diets are sugar-
sweetened beverages and snacks and sweets. Many foods high in
calories from added sugars provide few or no essential
nutrients or dietary fiber and, therefore, may contribute to
excess calorie intake without contributing to diet quality;
intake of these foods should be limited to help achieve healthy
eating patterns within calorie limits. There is room for
Americans to include limited amounts of added sugars in their
eating patterns, including to improve the palatability of some
nutrient-dense foods, such as fruits and vegetables that are
naturally tart (e.g., cranberries and rhubarb). Healthy eating
patterns can accommodate other nutrient-dense foods with small
amounts of added sugars, such as whole-grain breakfast cereals
or fat-free yogurt, as long as calories from added sugars do
not exceed ten percent per day, total carbohydrate intake
remains within the AMDR [Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution
Range], and total calorie intake remains within limits.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Dietary Guidelines for
Americans 2015-2010, December 2015, 31, https://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/2015-2020_Dietary_
Guidelines.pdf.

The USDA's Dietary Guidelines go on to note that the ``the major
source of added sugars in typical U.S. diets is beverages, which
include soft drinks, fruit drinks, sweetened coffee and tea, energy
drinks, alcoholic beverages, and flavored waters.'' \12\ In fact,
almost \1/2\ of added sugars consumed by the U.S. population come from
sweetened beverages.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Ibid.
\13\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is why it is so alarming that such a notable percentage of
food/beverage purchases in American households are for sweetened
beverages, according to a recent USDA study.\14\ Among SNAP households,
9.25 percent of food purchases were for sweetened beverages and 7.10
percent of non-SNAP households were for the same. SNAP households spent
more on sweetened beverages than fruits and milk combined. According to
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), low-
income children are more likely to consume sweetened beverages and
intake more calories from sweetened beverages than higher-income
children.\15\ Children participating in SNAP in particular were more
likely than nonparticipants to consume sweetened beverages,\16\ and 63
percent of adults receiving SNAP consumed a sweetened beverage on the
day of the NHANES.\17\ Also according to the NHANES, more than \1/2\ of
adult SNAP recipients drank regular soda and 24 percent drank another
sweetened beverage on the day of the survey.\18\ Sweetened beverage
consumption is high among all American households, with low-income
households and SNAP recipients no exception.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service,
``Foods Typically Purchased by Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) Households,'' November 2016, https://www.fns.usda.gov/
sites/default/files/ops/SNAPFoodsTypicallyPurchased.pdf.
\15\ Euna Han and Lisa M. Powell, ``Consumption Patterns of Sugar-
Sweetened Beverages in the United States,'' Journal of the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics 113, no. 1 (January 2013): 43-53.
\16\ Cindy Leung, et al., ``Associations of Food Stamp
Participation with Diet Quality and Obesity in Children,'' Pediatrics
131, no. 3 (March 2013): 463-72.
\17\ Sara N. Bleich, Seanna Vine, and Julia A. Wolfson, ``American
Adults Eligible for SNAP Consume More Sugary Beverages Than Ineligible
Adults,'' Preventative Medicine 57, no. 6 (December 2013), https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3842507/.
\18\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service,
``Diet Quality Among SNAP Recipients by SNAP Participation Status: Data
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2007-2010,''
May 2015, https://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/ops/NHANES-
SNAP07-10.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Program Integrity
High sweetened beverage consumption is not unique to SNAP
households. But supporting such purchases, especially at levels
suggested in the data, directly contradicts the stated goals of the
program. The Food Stamp Act of 1977, which outlines the purpose of the
program, states that the goal is ``to provide for improved levels of
nutrition among low-income households through a cooperative Federal-
state program of food assistance.'' \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Food Stamp Program Act of 1977, https://www.fns.usda.gov/
sites/default/files/PL_106-580.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Public health experts have clearly determined that sweetened
beverages have no nutritional value and are a major contributor to
obesity and related health problems. Few can argue the reverse. Yet,
almost ten percent of food and beverage spending among SNAP households
is on these products.
To be fair, it is unclear whether SNAP households would make these
purchases with their own money if they were restricted from SNAP or
even in the absence of SNAP. However, for a program with a stated goal
of improving nutrition, accepting such a large percentage of spending
on beverages with no nutritional value seems counterintuitive and
likely undermines public support for the program.
Beyond these concerns, allowing the purchase of sweetened beverages
directly competes with the USDA's nutrition education programming at
the Federal and state level. Approximately $350 million is spent per
year on SNAP Nutrition Education activities, with more spent by the
states.\20\ The Farm Bill of 2008 authorized an additional $20 million
to test demonstration projects designed to increase healthy eating.
Federal dollars dedicated to improving nutrition are in direct
competition with benefit dollars being spent to purchase sweetened
beverages.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service,
``Nutrition Education,'' October 12, 2016, https://www.ers.usda.gov/
topics/food-nutrition-assistance/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-
program-snap/nutrition-education/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Separately from SNAP, not confronting the problems created by
obesity has substantial impacts on Federal medical expenditures.
Medical costs associated with obesity (which largely fall on Medicare
and Medicaid) are estimated to be at least $147 billion per year.\21\
Not only is SNAP contributing to sweetened beverage consumption, but it
may be adding to other Federal expenditures related to medical costs
associated with obesity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See Eric A. Finkelstein, et al., ``Annual Medical Spending
Attributable to Obesity: Payer and Service-Specific Estimates,'' Health
Affairs 28, no. 5 (2009): w822-31, http://content.healthaffairs.org/
content/28/5/w822.full.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Problem Is Complex and Requires a Comprehensive Approach
As I already mentioned, the public health challenges posed by
sweetened beverages are not unique to low-income households. But
restrictions could be part of a broader approach to address the
problem. Already, the USDA pilot tested a Healthy Incentive program,
which gave financial incentives to SNAP households to purchase fruits
and vegetables. The results of the evaluation found that the financial
incentives increased consumption of certain fruits and vegetables by a
small, but statistically significant amount.\22\ It also found that
retailers had little trouble implementing the pilot. But the incentives
had no effect on added sugars, which included no change to sweetened
beverage consumption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ See U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition
Service, Healthy Incentives Pilot Final Evaluation Report, September
2014, https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/healthy-incentives-pilot-final-
evaluation-report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In another study, researchers randomly assigned low-income
households not receiving SNAP into four different groups to test
incentives, restrictions, and both. They found that the incentive plus
restriction group (the restriction was on sweetened beverages and other
sweets) had positive effects on fruit consumption and reduced sweetened
beverage and other sweets intake.\23\ The incentive-alone and
restriction-alone group showed no difference compared with the control
group. Although this was not conducted with SNAP households (given that
the USDA has not allowed testing restrictions), it suggests that
restrictions could be used to reduce sweetened beverage consumption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Lisa Harnack, et al., ``Effects of Subsidies and Prohibitions
on Nutrition in a Food Benefit Program: A Randomized Clinical Trial,''
JAMA Internal Medicine 176, no. 11 (November 2016): 1610-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, although not the main purpose, a study of the Summer
Electronic Benefit Transfer for Children Program published in 2016
found that only a Women, Infant, and Children (WIC)-based model, which
restricted what could be purchased with benefits, including sweetened
beverages, led to a reduction in sweetened beverage consumption among
families who participated.\24\ The SNAP-based model, which had no
restrictions, did not reduce sweetened beverage consumption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service,
``Summer Electronic Benefit Transfer for Children (SEBTC)
Demonstration: Summary Report,'' May 2016, https://www.fns.usda.gov/
sites/default/files/ops/sebtcfinalreport.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another recent study surveyed SNAP and non-SNAP participants on
their perceptions of the program and areas for improvement around
nutrition. Just over \1/2\ of SNAP participants supported removing
sweetened beverages from products allowed under SNAP, and almost 80
percent of non-SNAP participants supported the same.\25\ In 2011, we
surveyed New York City SNAP participants on their consumption patterns
and attitudes around restrictions. We found that almost 70 percent of
surveyed SNAP participants supported restricting sweetened beverages
from SNAP (49 percent) or didn't care one way or the other (16
percent).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Cindy W. Leung, et al., ``Improving the Nutritional Impact of
SNAP: Perspectives from the Participants,'' American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 52, no. 2 (February 2017): 252.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This research suggests that a restriction may be beneficial, but
likely as part of other efforts to achieve the same. It also suggests
that combining a restriction with incentives, broader nutrition
education programs, and public messaging may reduce sweetened beverage
consumption among those exposed.
SNAP Demonstration Project to Test Restrictions
For these reasons, and as part of a broader approach toward
evidence-based policymaking, a demonstration project to test a
sweetened beverage restriction in SNAP is needed. It could involve a
few states or localities to assess whether the potential gains, such as
better health, can be achieved without adverse effects on other
measures of well-being. In a bipartisan effort in 2010, under the
direction of Governor David Patterson and Mayor Michael Bloomberg, and
in partnership with the New York City Department of Health, we
submitted a proposal to the USDA to administer a demonstration project
in New York City that would restrict sweetened beverages from SNAP.
Our main objective was to test whether a restriction would lead to
changes in consumption of sweetened beverages and other food groups
among SNAP recipients, as well as whether a restriction could be
implemented. We designed a rigorous evaluation to compare like counties
within New York City (one would experience the restriction while the
other would not), as well as to assess whether retailers could
appropriately implement the restriction and whether participants could
follow the changes. We proposed using survey data and retailer data to
assess changes in consumption patterns over time, as well as
qualitative work to assess the retailer and participant experience.
Regrettably, our proposal, which was to be funded completely by the
city and the state, was denied by the USDA in 2011.
Since our proposal in 2010, we now know more about the Healthy
Incentive[s] Pilot and the Summer EBT pilot. Both studies suggest that
more can be done to improve nutrition and reduce sweetened beverage
consumption among SNAP households. The logical next step is to conduct
a study of SNAP restrictions. Given what was learned from those
studies, a demonstration project is not only possible, but has been
made more feasible. With cooperation from the USDA and funding from
Congress, a demonstration project involving a few states could greatly
expand our knowledge of what works in combating sweetened beverage
consumption and the obesity crisis.
To give you a sense of how this might work, the Healthy
Incentive[s] Pilot operated in 2010-2012 reprogrammed EBT data systems
at the retailer source to identify and calculate incentives as part of
the program. A similar approach could be taken, but with restrictions.
Participants assigned to the restriction group would receive special
EBT cards and retailer EBT systems would be programmed to not allow
sweetened beverage purchases among those SNAP households. With the
technology systems in place today, implementing this type of
demonstration project would not be overly burdensome on retailers. In
fact, as part of the Healthy Incentive[s] Pilot, few retailers
identified problems, and few said the pilot affected store operations.
This type of design is not only possible, but it would provide a strong
treatment and control study that would tell us whether any changes in
sweetened beverage consumption were due the restrictions or not.
When we developed the New York City proposal, retailers were
consulted about the ease or difficulty of implementing such a
restriction. Retailers with EBT systems indicated that it could be done
fairly easily since restrictions are already in place for other
purchases, such as alcohol or nonfood items. One concern was retailers
who do not use EBT systems, instead using manual systems. But these
retailers make up a small share of overall SNAP sales and, as part of a
demonstration project, could be counseled to ensure that they
understand who is restricted from purchasing sweetened beverages and
who is not. As part of the data collection effort, the evaluators would
know whether households assigned to the restriction group were allowed
to purchase sweetened beverages or not.
With a new Congress and Administration, I am hopeful that a
demonstration project in a few states be allowed in order to test
whether a restriction could be effective. Given the problems of obesity
and the toll it takes on our poor communities, this is an issue that
receives bipartisan support. For example, the bipartisan National
Commission on Hunger recommended in its 2015 report that Congress pass
legislation to restrict sweetened beverages from SNAP. As a first step,
Congress could authorize funding for demonstration projects.
Conclusion
Some may ask why restrict sweetened beverages and no other foods
with added sugar. Even though precedent exists in other government
programs to determine what is nutritious and what is not, there are two
reasons for starting with sweetened beverages. First, the research is
clear that sweetened beverages are a much larger contributor to added
sugars in the diets of Americans today (almost 50 percent of added
sugars comes from these products) than other products. Second, the
amount of spending on sweetened beverages far surpasses what is spent
on other candies and sweets. And added sugars are often combined with
other nutritious foods, such as whole grain cereals, yogurts, or nuts.
The case against sweetened beverages in a nutrition assistance program
seems clear.
Some also argue that restrictions would be overly burdensome on
retailers. While I respect the views of industry professionals,
retailers already place restrictions on what can be purchased with SNAP
benefits through their EBT systems, and the definition of sweetened
beverage could be defined in a way that is very straightforward.
In terms of how a restriction might affect low-income households, I
am sympathetic to not wanting the government to stigmatize or unfairly
targeted poor households. But SNAP is a government-funded program with
a clearly stated goal: to improve the nutrition of low-income
households. Not only is allowing sweetened beverages inconsistent with
that goal, it actually may work against it by contributing to poor
health. I also question how detrimental a restriction could be, given
that certain restrictions already apply, other food assistance programs
implement restrictions, and the majority of SNAP households either
support the restriction or do not care when asked on surveys. It is
also possible that SNAP benefits are fungible, and many SNAP households
use their own money for food purchases, suggesting that a restriction
may not have much effect on consumption. However, it is unclear how
SNAP households would respond to a restriction until it is tested and
rigorously evaluated.
In conclusion, a restriction on sweetened beverages should be
tested as part of a demonstration project for the purpose of improving
public health. At a time when leaders of both parties are promoting
evidence-based policymaking, testing such an idea and rigorously
evaluating the results should receive broad support. I urge Congress to
support pilot projects and urge the USDA to approve any requests from
states.
Thank you, and I can respond to any questions that you may have.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Rachidi.
Dr. Schanzenbach?

STATEMENT OF DIANE WHITMORE SCHANZENBACH, Ph.D.,
DIRECTOR AND SENIOR FELLOW, ECONOMIC STUDIES, THE HAMILTON
PROJECT, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION;
PROFESSOR OF SOCIAL POLICY AND OF ECONOMICS, NORTHWESTERN
UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Dr. Schanzenbach. Thank you. Chairman Conaway, Ranking
Member Peterson, and Members of the Committee, thanks for the
opportunity to appear before you today. My name is Diane
Schanzenbach. I am the Director of The Hamilton Project, which
is an economic policy initiative at Brookings Institution. I am
also a Professor of Social Policy of Economics at Northwestern
University in Illinois.
SNAP is a highly efficient and effective program. It lifted
nearly five million children out of poverty in 2014. SNAP is
targeted efficiently to families who need benefits the most. It
reduces the likelihood that families have trouble affording
food, and serves as an automatic fiscal stabilizer in times of
economic downturn. It also has extremely low rates of both
error and fraud.
A key reason for SNAP's success is that it relies on the
private-sector to provide efficient access to food from grocery
stores and other retail outlets. The reliance on the program on
the free market system has been a feature of SNAP since the
beginning. With a few restrictions, recipients have been able
to optimize which items to purchase, and from which retail
stores, subject to prevailing prices, and also to their own
taste preferences and nutritional needs.
SNAP also has long-term benefits to children. My own recent
research study, which is the only long-term causal study on
SNAP access, found that those who had access to SNAP benefits
during childhood were more likely to graduate from high school,
they grew up to be healthier, and for women in particular, they
grew up to be more economically self sufficient as adults, all
due to childhood access to SNAP benefits, because this is an
investment in children.
There has been much media discussion of the November 2016
USDA report on the typical food purchase patterns by SNAP
participants and non-participants. The top line finding of that
report is that SNAP and non-SNAP families have extremely
similar spending patterns. The study did not address the more
fundamental question, namely, how does SNAP change the types of
groceries that participants buy? By increasing a family's
resources available to purchase groceries, SNAP is expected to
increase not only the quantity, but also the quality of foods
purchased. SNAP families are able to buy more nutritious foods
that they otherwise could not afford.
Additional restrictions on SNAP purchases will undermine
the effectiveness and the efficiency of the program. In
particular, SNAP restrictions will be difficult to structure
and practice. In the case of a proposed ban on the purchase of
soft drinks or sweetened beverages, it will be unlikely to
change consumption patterns.
So recall that SNAP benefits are modest. They are
approximately $4.50 per person per day, and as a result, almost
everyone who participates in the program has to supplement
their SNAP purchases with groceries purchased out of their own
cash income. So what will happen if a soft drink purchase is
banned using SNAP benefits? Well, we would expect there to be
no consumption change. A family could continue to purchase the
same basket of goods. They will just have to make certain at
the checkout line to pay for the soft drinks out of their cash
instead of their SNAP benefits. In other words, a ban will
likely increase the administrative cost of the program, both to
the USDA and to retailers, and increase the stigma faced by
recipients when they use SNAP, but not have the benefit of
actually inducing any behavioral changes. It will be all costs
and no benefits.
I think there are better policy options that are more
likely to improve the diets of SNAP recipients. Market-based
policies that reduce the relative price of healthy foods can
increase that consumption. For example, as you know, the
Healthy Incentives Pilot in Massachusetts increased consumption
of targeted healthy foods by 25 percent. Exploring ways to
replicate or scale this type of program nationally would
provide an effective and a market-based path forward toward
achieving the goal of increasing healthy food consumption of
SNAP recipients.
Strengthening SNAP is a smart public investment that will
improve both public health and economic growth, but banning
certain foods will raise the administrative burdens and costs
of the program, making it less efficient, but is unlikely to
change consumption.
By contrast, policy changes that strengthen the purchasing
power of SNAP benefits and allow markets to function without
undue interference are more likely to improve dietary choices
of recipients and reduce food insecurity.
Thank you, and I am looking forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Schanzenbach follows:]

Prepared Statement of Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, Ph.D., Director and
Senior Fellow, Economic Studies, The Hamilton Project, Brookings
Institution; Professor of Social Policy and of Economics, Northwestern
University, Washington, D.C.
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today at this
hearing on the Pros and Cons of Restricting Purchases in the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP).
My name is Diane Schanzenbach, I am Director of the Hamilton
Project, an economic policy initiative at the Brookings Institution,
where I am also a Senior Fellow in Economic Studies.
I am also a Professor of Social Policy and Economics at
Northwestern University. For the past 2 decades, I have conducted and
published numerous peer-reviewed research studies and book chapters on
the U.S. safety net, including SNAP and the Food Stamp Program. I also
study childhood obesity, food consumption, and food insecurity. I
recently served as a member of the Institute of Medicine's Committee on
Examination of the Adequacy of Food Resources and SNAP Allotments.
My testimony today draws primarily from research that I have
conducted or reviewed that considers the role of SNAP and other
influences on food consumption and food insecurity.
SNAP is a highly efficient and effective program. It lifted nearly
five million people out of poverty in 2014 (the most recent data
available).\1\ SNAP is targeted efficiently to families who need
benefits the most, reduces the likelihood that families have trouble
affording food, and serves as an automatic fiscal stabilizer in times
of economic downturns.
2-3
It has extremely low rates of both
error and fraud.
4-5
SNAP also has long-term benefits to
children. My own recent research study found that those who had access
to SNAP benefits during childhood were more likely to graduate from
high school, grew up to be healthier, and women in particular were more
likely to become economically self-sufficient due to childhood access
to SNAP benefits, as shown in Figure 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Sherman, Arloc. 2015, September 16. ``Safety Net Programs Lift
Millions From Poverty, New Census Data Show.'' Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities, Washington, D.C. Available at: http://www.cbpp.org/
blog/safety-net-programs-lift-millions-from-poverty-new-census-data-
show.
\2\ Institute for Research on Poverty. 2015, November. ``SNAP, Food
Security, and Health.'' Policy Brief No. 8, Institute for Research on
Poverty, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI. Available at:
http://www.irp.wisc.edu/publications/policybriefs/pdfs/PB8-SNAPFoodSecu
rityHealth.pdf.
\3\ Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore, Lauren Bauer, and Greg Nantz.
2016, April 21. ``Twelve Facts about Food Insecurity and SNAP.''
Economic Facts, The Hamilton Project, Washington, D.C. Available at:
http://www.hamiltonproject.org/papers/twelve_facts_about_food_
insecurity_and_snap.
\4\ Rosenbaum, Dottie. 2014, July 2. ``SNAP Error Rates at All-Time
Lows.'' Report, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, Washington,
D.C. http://www.cbpp.org/research/snap-error-rates-at-all-time-lows.
\5\ U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2013, August 15. ``USDA
Releases New Report on Trafficking and Announces Additional Measures to
Improve Integrity in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.''
Food and Nutrition Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington,
D.C. Available at: https://www.fns.usda.gov/pressrelease/2013/fns-
001213.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 1. Impact of Access to Food Stamps During Early Life on Adult
Health and Economic Outcomes
Access to food stamps in early life improves health outcomes
in men and women and economic self-sufficiency in women in
later life.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Sources: Hoyes, Schanzenbach, and Almond 2016.
Note: Hollowed bars are not statistically significant.

Generally, economists advise policymakers not to interfere in the
private market unless there is a compelling reason to do so--such as a
market failure or another inefficiency that would be improved through
government intervention. In the case of SNAP, the fundamental problem
the program is meant to address is not a market failure, but is instead
a lack of resources available to purchase food. Government assistance
is needed because some families, generally temporarily, do not have
adequate resources to purchase enough food to sustain an active,
healthy lifestyle. When they receive SNAP, participating families have
more resources they can use to purchase groceries. Once the fundamental
problem of resource adequacy is addressed, recipients can interact with
the private market to obtain the food they need.
A key reason for SNAP's success is that it relies on the private-
sector to provide efficient access to food, through grocery stores and
other retail outlets. The reliance of the program on the free market
system has been a feature of SNAP since the beginning. With few
restrictions, recipients have been able to optimize which items to
purchase and from what retail stores, subject to prevailing prices and
their own tastes, preferences, and nutritional needs.
In my opinion, additional restrictions on SNAP purchases will
undermine the effectiveness and the efficiency of the program. In
particular, based on my research on SNAP and food consumption I believe
that SNAP restrictions: will be difficult to structure in practice,
will be inefficiently targeted, and in many cases--such as a proposed
ban of the purchase of soft drinks or sweetened beverages--will be
unlikely to change consumption patterns. There are better policy
options for promoting healthy eating patterns, both for SNAP recipients
and for all Americans.
SNAP Restrictions will be Difficult to Structure in Practice
There are a few broad types of restrictions that have gained policy
traction. One set involves narrowly targeting the commodities that can
be purchased with SNAP, another involves restricting the purchase of
unhealthy foods broadly, or sodas or sugar sweetened beverages in
particular, and another proposes banning purchases of certain luxury
foods. Each of these will be difficult to implement in practice because
of the complexities involved in determining which items would fall
under the ban. In addition, the restrictions would increase the
administrative burden on private businesses, and particularly on small
establishments.
The complexities arise in part because of the sheer number of
products that would need to be classified. Consumers have vast
differences in their tastes and preferences, and the market responds by
providing variety. There are more than 650,000 food and beverage
products on the market today, and 20,000 more are introduced
annually.\6\ The complexity is multiplied because there is no clear
standard for defining foods as ``healthy'' or ``unhealthy,'' or as
luxury goods. Creating such standards would be difficult at best, and
would entail substantial administrative costs to categorize and track
the nutritional profile of each good to produce a SNAP-eligible foods
list. The list would have to be maintained continuously and
communicated to retailers and consumers in real time. My prediction is
that the additional bureaucracy needed to support such an undertaking
is not likely to save taxpayer money.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  USDA. 2016, October 12. ``New Products.'' Economic Research
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. Available at:
https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-markets-prices/processing-
marketing/new-products/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, items should not be classified in a manner that
suggests a particular food is always ``good'' or ``bad.'' The Academy
of Nutrition and Dietetics, the largest organization of food and
nutrition professionals, has adopted a position statement that the
``total diet'' or overall pattern of food eaten should be the most
important focus of healthy eating.\7\ All foods can fit into a healthy
diet if consumed in moderation and with appropriate portion size, and
as a result no particular food should be always banned.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Freeland-Graves, Jeanne H., and Susan Nitzke. 2013. ``Position
of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Total Diet Approach to
Healthy Eating.'' Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 113
(2): 307-17. Available at: http://www.andjrnl.org/article/S2212-
2672(12)01993-4/abstract.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Improves Diets
By focusing on the descriptive question of what SNAP participants
buy, the USDA study did not address the more fundamental question--
namely how does SNAP change the types of groceries that participants
buy? Economists have strong predictions about the impact of SNAP: by
increasing a family's resources available to purchase groceries, SNAP
is expected to increase both the quantity and the quality of foods
purchased, and it has. When SNAP increases low-income families' grocery
purchasing power, they are able to buy more nutritious foods they
otherwise could not afford. While this is a surprisingly hard question
to study empirically, a recent study found that a $30 increase in
monthly SNAP benefits would increase participants' consumption of
nutritious foods such as vegetables and healthy proteins, while
reducing food insecurity and consumption of fast food, as shown in
Figure 2 below.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Anderson, Patricia M., and Kristin F. Butcher. 2016, June 14.
``The Relationships Among SNAP Benefits, Grocery Spending, Diet
Quality, and the Adequacy of Low-Income Families' Resources.'' Report,
Policy Futures, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, Washington,
D.C. Available at: http://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/the-
relationships-among-snap-benefits-grocery-spending-diet-quality-and-
the.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 2. Estimated Impact of a $30 Increase in Monthly Per Capita SNAP
Benefits

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Anderson and Butcher 2016.
Note: Percentages for the dark green bars represent change in
consumption. Food insecurity is defined as having difficulty at
some time during the year providing enough food for all
household members due to lack of resources. The hollowed bars
are not statistically significant.

Similar impacts were found in a randomized controlled trial of a
Summer EBT program that gave families $60 per month in benefits per
eligible child during the summer months, to offset the loss of school
meals. The study found that children assigned to receive additional
benefits improved their diets, consuming more fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, and dairy products, and fewer sugar-sweetened beverages.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Briefel, Ronette, Ann Collins and Anne Wolf. 2013, November 8.
``Impact of the Summer Electronic Benefits Transfer for Children
(SEBTC) Demonstration on Children's Nutritional Status.'' Panel Paper,
Mathematica Policy Research and Abt Associates, Washington, D.C.
Available at: https://appam.confex.com/appam/2013/webprogram/
Paper7254.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP and Non-SNAP Households Have Similar Consumption
There has been much media discussion of the November 2016 USDA
report on typical food purchase patterns by SNAP participants and non-
participants.\10\ The top-line finding of that report is that SNAP and
non-SNAP households have extremely similar food spending patterns. Out
of every dollar spent by SNAP families:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ USDA. 2016, November 18. ``Foods Typically Purchased by
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Households.''
Nutrition Assistance Program Report, Office of Policy Support, Food and
Nutrition Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Available at: https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/foods-typically-purchased-
supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap-households.

Around 40  went to what the study classifies as ``basic
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
items'' such as meat, fruits, vegetables, eggs, bread and milk.

Around 20  went to salty snacks, sugar, candy and sweetened
beverages, with 5  going to soft drinks.

The remaining 40  spent on other goods, including prepared
foods, cereal, rice, beans, and dairy products.

The USDA findings are consistent with my own published research
using the Consumer Expenditure Survey that also found similar spending
patterns across food categories for SNAP and non-SNAP households.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Hoynes, Hilary W., Leslie McGranahan, and Diane W.
Schanzenbach. 2014. ``SNAP and Food Consumption.'' Discussion Paper
2014-03, Center for Poverty Research, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY. Available at: http://uknowledge.uky.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=
1008&context=ukcpr_papers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Public-health advocates rightly point out that sugar-sweetened
beverages are the largest source of excess calories in the average
American diet, and they provide no nutritional benefit.
12-13

The obesity epidemic has hit Americans across all income levels, and
public-health advocates are right to call attention to our excessive
consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages as one probable cause.\14\ The
USDA study indicates that this is an issue across the income
distribution, and there is no need to single out SNAP recipients for
their consumption of soft drinks. Among the spending observed in the
USDA study, about 5  of each dollar went to the purchase of soft
drinks. This rate is similar to non-SNAP households, which spend an
average of four percent of their grocery dollars on soft drinks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\  Welsh, J.A., A.J. Sharma, L. Grellinger, and M.B. Vos. 2011.
``Consumption of Added Sugars is Decreasing in the United States.''
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 94 (3): 726-34. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21753067.
\13\ The Nutrition Source. ``Public Health Concerns: Sugary
Drinks.'' School of Public Health, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Available at: https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/healthy-
drinks/beverages-public-health-concerns/.
\14\ Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2016, September 1.
``Adult Obesity Facts.'' Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Atlanta, GA. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Soda Ban Will Not Reduce Soda Consumption
Another option that has been proposed is to disallow only the
purchase of soft drinks or sweetened beverages with SNAP benefits.
These proposals exaggerate the potential impacts on consumption such
bans would have, because the rationale for the bans is based on a false
understanding of how SNAP benefits work. SNAP benefits are modest--
approximately $4.50 per person per day--and as a result nearly all
families supplement their SNAP purchases with groceries purchased from
their cash income. This occurs by design, and is why the program is
called the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; it is intended in
most cases to extend a family's food purchasing power, not to cover 100
percent of food purchases. Estimates suggest that 70 to 80 percent of
participants, perhaps even higher, supplement their SNAP spending with
cash.
What will happen if soft drink purchases are banned using SNAP
benefits? Take a typical family that spends the average amount--$12 per
month--on soft drinks, and supplements their SNAP spending with
spending out of cash resources. Our best prediction is that there will
be no consumption change as a result of the SNAP restriction; such a
family can continue to purchase the same basket of goods, but they
would have to make certain to pay for the soft drinks out of their own
cash instead of their SNAP benefits. In other words, a ban will likely
increase the administrative costs of the program to both the USDA and
retailers, and increase the stigma faced by recipients when they use
the benefits, but not have the benefit of inducing any behavioral
changes.
Recommendations
There are better policy options that are more likely to improve the
diets of SNAP recipients, particularly when you consider that, over the
past decade, fresh fruits and vegetables have become relatively more
expensive compared to foods that are considered less healthy, as shown
in Figure 3 below. In response, market-based policies can increase the
affordability of healthy foods and provide incentives for low-income
families to purchase them.
One approach that merits further consideration is the USDA's
randomized controlled trial of the Healthy Incentives Pilot in
Massachusetts. This pilot program gave SNAP recipients an immediate 30
rebate for every dollar they spent on a narrowly defined group of
fruits and vegetables.\15\ In response to this price rebate,
consumption of the targeted healthy foods increased by 25 percent.\16\
In recent years, many local areas and even a few states have taken a
similar approach by awarding bonus dollars for benefits used at
farmers' markets, allowing recipients to stretch their food budget
farther when they buy fresh produce. To date, these programs have been
successful. Exploring ways to replicate or scale these types of
programs nationally would provide a more constructive and effective
path forward toward achieving the goal of increasing healthy food
consumption by SNAP recipients.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ USDA. 2015, September 2. ``Healthy Incentives Pilot.'' Report,
Food and Nutrition Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington,
D.C. Available at: https://www.fns.usda.gov/hip/healthy-incentives-
pilot.
\16\ Bartlett, Susan, Jacob Klerman, Parke Wilde, Lauren Olsho,
Michelle Blocklin, Christopher Logan, and Ayesha Enver. 2013. ``Healthy
Incentives Pilot (HIP) Program.'' Food and Nutrition Services, Office
of Policy Support, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Available at: https://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/
HIP_Interim.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 3. Price Levels by Food Category, 1980-2016

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics 2016.
Note: Base year of the index (100) is the average for 1982-
84.

Strengthening SNAP and reducing food insecurity in the more than 22
million U.S. households that receive nutritional assistance on a
monthly basis is a smart public investment that will improve both
public health and economic growth. Banning certain foods will raise the
administrative burdens and cost of the program, but is unlikely to
change consumption. By contrast, policy changes that strengthen the
purchasing power of SNAP benefits and allow markets to function without
undue interference are more likely to improve dietary choices of
recipients and reduce food insecurity.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering any questions you might
have.

The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Sarasin, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LESLIE G. SARASIN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, FOOD MARKETING INSTITUTE,
ARLINGTON, VA

Ms. Sarasin. Good morning. Thank you very much. I am Leslie
Sarasin. I serve as President and CEO of FMI. Our members'
grocery stores are located in every Congressional district in
the country.
Grocers play an important role in the efficient delivery of
safe, affordable food for both the SNAP and the WIC Programs.
We appreciate this Committee's work to better understand SNAP
this morning.
Becoming an authorized SNAP retailer is a complicated
process. Retailers must submit specified paperwork and
credentials, and adhere strictly to the SNAP operating rules
and ongoing training for their associates. Violation of SNAP
operating rules results in revocation of both the SNAP and the
WIC licenses.
SNAP authorized stores code all products within the
electronic checkout system as either SNAP eligible or
ineligible. When an eligible item is scanned, the system
deducts the product's price from the customer's SNAP EBT card.
When an ineligible item is scanned, the cashier is prompted to
ask the customer for another form of payment. Approximately 50
percent of SNAP transactions are multi-tendered, such that
another form of payment is also used to pay for non-food items,
ineligible items, or eligible food items that exceed the
balance available on the SNAP EBT card. If a customer tries to
purchase a tobacco or alcohol product with their SNAP EBT
benefits, the electronic system will freeze until the product
is actually removed. Within the electronic systems, WIC
eligible items are charged against that benefit first, followed
by those eligible for SNAP, and finally, the cashier must
collect another form of payment: cash, check, debit, or credit
for all remaining items.
Grocery transactions for SNAP customers vary significantly
throughout the month. Data indicate the first transaction of
the month is usually the largest and may contain larger
quantities of protein and perishables. By the last week of the
month, customers typically purchase maximum calories at minimum
cost.
We appreciate the Committee's recognition of the role
grocers play in the SNAP program. FMI has announced a new
industry SNAP task force to identify areas where the program
works well, and also to consider those that may require
improvement. Some suggest that limiting what customers can buy
with SNAP, making it more like WIC, may help achieve these
goals. Doing so would place a tremendous burden, both on USDA
and on food retailers, and likely would not achieve policy
goals. Please consider two recent examples from the WIC
Program.
When USDA began the Fresh Fruits and Vegetables Cash Value
Voucher Program, it subjectively decided all fresh fruits and
vegetables were eligible, except white potatoes. As many of you
will recall, this ban on white potatoes unleashed a great
debate throughout Congress and the industry. In the end, after
more than a year of debate and consideration of actual science,
USDA reversed the ban to allow white potatoes to be purchased
through WIC. This was one item out of the tens of thousands
found in each of our members' stores that would have to be
studied and debated before USDA can make a determination as to
whether a product is in or out.
Second, if our goal with SNAP is to provide short-term
lifelines to needy Americans so they can get and keep a job to
earn enough to support their families without government
benefits, such limitations seem unlikely to help accomplish
that goal at a reasonable cost. Doing so will require
additional USDA staff to make these decisions for all products
currently in market, as well as the estimated 20,000 new
products introduced every year. USDA would also need to
maintain a real time list downloadable to every electronic
payment system in the country.
I should note that in 2004, Congress directed USDA to
create an electronically downloadable real time UPC database
for all WIC eligible foods. Today, retailers are still waiting
for this list. The fact that nearly 13 years later we are still
waiting for the list shows the complexity of creating and
keeping one updated in real time, even for a list of products
as small as WIC's. A similar SNAP database would include more
than 100 times the number of products, along with more than the
20,000 that are introduced every year. Could it be done?
Probably so, but we expect it would be both challenging and
expensive.
Finally, FMI members are incredible contributors to their
communities. They are the largest contributors to our nation's
food banks, create good paying jobs, and help build our future
workforce. We look forward to working with the Committee on
SNAP and other related issues, and I am also happy to answer
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sarasin follows:]

Prepared Statement of Leslie G. Sarasin, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Food Marketing Institute, Arlington, VA
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee,

My name is Leslie Sarasin, and I serve as President and Chief
Executive Officer of Food Marketing Institute,\1\ a trade association
that represents food retailers and wholesalers, as well as their
suppliers of products and services. FMI members are located in every
Congressional district across the country. FMI's maxim when referring
to its member companies is ``Feeding Families and Enriching Lives,'' a
responsibility we take very seriously.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Food Marketing Institute proudly advocates on behalf of the
food retail industry. FMI's U.S. members operate nearly 40,000 retail
food stores and 25,000 pharmacies, representing a combined annual sales
volume of almost $770 billion. Through programs in public affairs, food
safety, research, education and industry relations, FMI offers
resources and provides valuable benefits to more than 1,225 food retail
and wholesale member companies in the United States and around the
world. FMI membership covers the spectrum of diverse venues where food
is sold, including single owner grocery stores, large multi-store
supermarket chains and mixed retail stores. For more information, visit
www.fmi.org and for information regarding the FMI foundation, visit
www.fmifoundation.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Retail Role
In the context of ``feeding families,'' our industry is pleased to
maintain an important role in facilitating the efficient delivery in
our stores of safe, affordable food products for both the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program (WIC). I appreciate the work this Committee is
undertaking to better understand the operations of SNAP and the
differences between a short-term hunger program as contemplated in SNAP
and a longer-term nutrition program as contemplated in WIC.
As you know, the WIC program serves mothers and their children up
to age 5. FMI members redeem very specific food prescriptions designed
to ensure moms and their babies have access to the early nutrition they
need for optimum physical and mental development. This important
nutrition program is overseen by the House Education and the Workforce
Committee and is currently up for reauthorization.
SNAP, the program under the full purview of this Committee, is one
in which FMI members serve as the delivery mechanism for benefits.
SNAP, a program created to address hunger among Americans, is designed
to supplement the food budgets for seniors and/or families experiencing
financial difficulty, or on a longer-term basis, individuals who are
disabled.
As designed, SNAP allows customers to purchase approved food
products from a SNAP-authorized retailer. Becoming an authorized SNAP/
WIC retailer is not a simple process, and that process requires
completion of specified paperwork and the providing of many
credentials, including a business license, a photo ID for each owner of
the business and proof of a social security number. This information
may be requested at reauthorization or at any time throughout the
process. Once approved, retaining SNAP/WIC authorization is not a
foregone conclusion. The food retailer must agree to adhere strictly to
the SNAP operating rules, violation of which results in having both the
SNAP and WIC licenses revoked. Additionally, authorized retailers must
agree to ongoing training programs for their associates to ensure they
understand and adhere to all SNAP rules and regulations, as delineated
in USDA's 25 page training guide.
SNAP has been enhanced in recent years by moving from a paper-based
program that issued ``food stamps'' to an electronic benefits transfer
program known as ``EBT,'' through which benefits are downloaded
electronically to a government-issued debit card which then may be
utilized at store level by SNAP benefit recipients. This movement to
EBT has increased the efficiency of the program and enhanced its
accountability by reducing the opportunity for fraud and human error.
The program also benefitted from the work of this Committee and then
Nutrition Subcommittee Chairman Bob Goodlatte, whose efforts focused on
ensuring interoperability and consistency of the program across state
lines. The EBT Interoperability and Portability Act (P.L. 106-171),
signed into law in 2000, ensures that EBT transactions operate
consistently from state to state. This law has significantly reduced
the incidence of error and has allowed shoppers living in border state
areas to seek the best prices through which to stretch their SNAP
benefits. It also has enabled those who must cross state lines for
emergency reasons, such as to care for a sick relative or to escape the
disastrous results of a natural event like Hurricane Sandy, to continue
receiving benefits in a seamless manner.
As the front line purveyors of SNAP, authorized retailers maintain
a unique and special vantage point from which to see SNAP transactions.
At the time of food purchase, SNAP recipients input their unique,
secret PIN after swiping their card. As is the case with commercial
debit cards, the PIN is an important added authentication to prevent a
stolen card from being used by an unauthorized person.
All products in SNAP-authorized stores are coded within the
electronic checkout system as being either eligible or ineligible for
purchase with SNAP benefits. This designation often can be seen on a
paper receipt with the initials ``FS.'' When a SNAP customer places
products on the checkout conveyor belt, the checkout system scans each
item as either eligible or ineligible for SNAP. If an item is eligible,
the system deducts the product's price from the customer's SNAP EBT
card. If ineligible, it prompts the cashier to ask the customer for
another form of payment. Examples of ineligible items include laundry
detergent and diapers, since they are not food items, and a hot
rotisserie chicken, since hot, ready-to-eat food items are not eligible
for purchase with SNAP benefits.
Data indicate that approximately 50% of supermarket customers using
SNAP benefits when purchasing groceries also use other forms of
payment, either to pay for non-food items, ineligible products or for
eligible food items that exceed the remaining balance on the SNAP EBT
card. It also is my understanding that if a customer attempts to
purchase a tobacco product or alcoholic beverage, the electronic system
will freeze and will not allow the transaction to continue until the
tobacco or alcohol product is removed.
Those not fully involved in the SNAP transactional process can find
it baffling and can often be confused about products that are eligible
and those that are ineligible and therefore paid for through other
means, and even in some cases by products that are eligible but not
paid for with SNAP benefits in a particular transaction. Under the
electronic systems in place today, the items eligible for WIC are
charged against that benefit first, followed by those eligible for SNAP
benefits, and finally, the cashier must collect another form of
payment--cash, check, debit or credit--for all remaining items not
eligible under either of the programs and/or for items that exceed the
dollar or prescription value of the benefits. As a result, while the
items the electronic system charges to the SNAP benefit are eligible to
be purchased with SNAP, they may not necessarily be designated by the
customer to be the specific items purchased with SNAP benefits. This
occurs, for example, when a SNAP customer places $100 worth of eligible
items, such as bananas, eggs and bread, and has only $80 in benefits on
the EBT card; the electronic system deducts $80 from the grand total of
SNAP-eligible items, but does not necessarily attribute the $80 to a
specific array of products on the checkout conveyor belt.
It is worth noting that grocery transactions for SNAP customers
vary significantly throughout the month. Data indicate the first
transaction of the month is likely the largest and may contain larger
quantities of protein, perishables, or even a splurge item. The
purchases of second and third weeks of the month are often more
balanced, and the purchases made in the last week of the month
typically find customers purchasing maximum calories at minimum cost.
This variation among purchases is particularly noteworthy in the
seven states that continue to issue benefits to all recipients on only
1 day of the month, rather than spreading issuance dates throughout the
month. There are four states that distribute benefits on only 2 or 3
days each month. Expanding the dates for issuing SNAP benefits allows
supermarkets to better address supply chain issues on fresh and
perishable items and allows labor needs to be spread throughout the
month into full-time positions rather than having them concentrated in
a segment of the month with multiple part-time positions to accommodate
the volume of SNAP shoppers trying to redeem benefits on one day. A
chart of state issuance time frames is attached to this testimony.
Need for Sound Public Policy
FMI member companies appreciate the Committee's recognition that
food retailers are engaged and informed partners in the SNAP and WIC
programs, as evidenced by the invitation for this testimony. As your
partners in this endeavor, we hope you will consider several issues of
concern to food retailers.
Against the backdrop of food retailers' commitment to enrich the
lives of individuals in the communities they serve, we suggest that as
the Committee examines SNAP, it keep in mind the larger goals and
purpose of this hunger program. A strategic policy-oriented discussion
could help make an already good program even better. If, however, the
consideration becomes bogged down in energy zapping tactical questions
of specific product(s) to be considered for elimination from SNAP, this
program enhancement will be made much more difficult, if not
impossible. FMI respectfully submits that changes to the program should
be part of a broad policy discussion with clearly articulated desired
results and delineation of the most effective and efficient means to
achieve those results.
We at FMI would be pleased to participate in that ``results''
discussion. To assist in that process, we have announced the
development of an industry SNAP Task Force to identify areas of the
program we find to be exceptional, to make sure those are not
eliminated, and to consider those we believe may require improvement in
order to achieve your policy goals.
As I understand them, among the Committee goals are the following:

To ensure no unfair penalty on individuals who find
themselves on the edge of the benefits cliff and who are trying
to move to a higher paying job;

To ensure SNAP is the most efficient program possible,
eliminating fraud and opportunities for fraud on both the
delivery and recipient side;

To make SNAP the least burdensome possible for individuals
whose participation in the program may actually reduce
government health care, social services, and education costs,
such as seniors with a fixed income, disabled individuals and
families supporting children under the age of 18; and

To identify and prepare individuals who receive SNAP
benefits for enhanced employment opportunities.

It has been suggested that achievement of these goals might be
facilitated by development of a prescription of limitations for SNAP
purchases, perhaps similar to those that exist in the WIC program.
While this may seem an attractive option, I respectfully suggest that
prior to doing so we first identify the result being sought in
undertaking such a change in the program.
To demonstrate how a tactical reaction may actually prove to be
inconsistent with a policy goal, it is worthwhile to consider an
anecdote from the most recent reauthorization of the WIC nutrition
program. At that time, similar debates occurred regarding products that
should or should not be authorized under the WIC program. There were a
number of factions, including farmers touting the unique benefits of
the crops they were growing. Ultimately, WIC was updated to allow for
the first time a fresh fruits and vegetables benefit and all fruits and
vegetables were allowed under this program, with one exception. The
exception made was for white potatoes, deemed at the time not to be
nutritionally significant. Yet, just 1 year later, the Institute of
Medicine issued a report indicating that Americans suffer from
relatively high incidences of a deficiency in potassium, for which
white potatoes serve as a good source under definitions established by
the Food and Drug Administration. Moreover, we are now in the process
in this country of redesigning the Nutrition Facts Panel that appears
on food products to add potassium as a required element so that
consumers can begin to address this deficiency. In the last Congress,
in 2015 a change was made to allow white potatoes as a vegetable in the
WIC program.
From experience previously in my career while serving as the
President and Chief Executive Officer of the American Frozen Food
Institute, I can relay anecdotes regarding the treatment of frozen
foods, specifically frozen fruits and vegetables, that are
nutritionally equivalent and in some cases nutritionally superior, to
their unfrozen counterparts in not being declared WIC eligible by some
states to the utter detriment of both the programs and the frozen fruit
and vegetable industries.
Of course, the discussions today will hardly illuminate specific
issues such as these, but it is critical as we consider changes to
Federal hunger programs such as SNAP that we identify the policy goals
to be achieved, rather than just focus on a potentially desirable sound
bite. I would respectfully suggest that if our goal with SNAP is to
provide needy Americans a short-term lifeline to allow them to get and
keep a job so they earn enough to support their families without
government benefits, the unilateral limitation of any specific product
is unlikely to help accomplish that goal. It is worth noting that doing
so will also increase the need for additional USDA staff to make and
encode these determinations for an estimated 20,000 new products
introduced into the marketplace annually and then download these
electronically on a real-time basis to every electronic payments system
in the country.
SNAP was designed and currently serves as a hunger program. It is a
supplementary program for the customers whose circumstances require
them to rely upon it for a season of their life, and for these
individuals it is a life-saver. Eighty-two percent of all SNAP benefits
in FY 2015 went to households that included a child, an elderly person
or a person with disabilities.
There have been a number of limitations suggested for this program
whether it be no meats, no desserts, no snacks, no soft drinks and even
no white bread. Not only do such limitations appear incongruous to the
policy positioning of a program designed to provide temporary
assistance addressing hunger considerations, but they also would prove
an administrative nightmare, increasing the cost of acceptance and
slowing down checkout lines in an industry that historically has
experienced only just more than a 1% profit margin and in which every
second of delay affects profitability and ultimately the number of
associates that can be hired and the prices in a store.
Language was included in the WIC reauthorization legislation in
2004 directing the Secretary to develop an electronically downloadable
list of WIC-eligible products on a state by state basis. This has still
not been completed because of its complexity. A similar type of
electronic list for SNAP would easily involve 100 times more products
making it a 100 times more complex. Could it be done? Probably so. But
if it hasn't been done in the WIC program in spite of a 15 year old
Congressional directive, it likely would not be easy or inexpensive.
And at the end of the day, we must ask ourselves what the policy goal
is that this level of expenditure of time and money would achieve.
We are truly blessed in this country with the safest, most abundant
and most affordable food supply in the world. We believe that with that
blessing comes the responsibility to lift up those individuals in our
communities who may need an extra hand, with the goal that they might
provide an extra hand for someone else at another time in the future.
FMI member companies are the largest contributors to our nation's
food banks. In 2016, food retailers donated more than 1.3 billion of
the four billion meals Feeding America provided to families in need.\2\
We are also constantly developing new ways to enhance this donation
level by decreasing food waste. In fact, we have spent much of the past
year working with our supplier partners at the Grocery Manufacturers
Association (GMA) on efforts to reduce customer confusion regarding
product date labels, frequently misunderstood to be expiration dates.
FMI and GMA have just announced an industry-driven voluntary program to
reduce dozens of terms currently in use on date labels and move (to the
extent possible) to two primary labels: ``BEST if used by'' to indicate
quality and ``USE by'' for perishable products that may have potential
degradation implications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Source: Feeding America, 2016 Annual Report, Available at
http://www.feedingamerica.org/about-us/about-feeding-america/annual-
report/2016-feeding-america-annual-report.pdf, pp.13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am pleased to answer any questions you may have and to serve as a
resource to this Committee as you work to make SNAP even more
efficient. I also have to call out the exceptional FNS retailer
management division at USDA headed by Andrea Gold. Through hurricanes,
tornados and floods as well as new store openings or changes in
ownership, we could not have had a better resource than Andrea and her
team to help our members through their challenges.

State-by-State Monthly SNAP Benefit Issuance Schedule
(Current as of February 13, 2017; Food Marketing Institute Research)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State                 Day(s) of SNAP Benefit Distribution
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama                         In August 2013, the state expanded their
distribution dates, moving from the 4th
to the 18th of the month to the 4th
through the 23rd of the month. To
assist in the transition, recipients
received \1/2\ of their benefit on
their original date and \1/2\ on their
new date in the month.
Alaska **                       The main SNAP issuance is all on the
first day of the month. Smaller
supplemental issuances for new
applicants and late recertifications
occur daily throughout the month.
Arizona                         SNAP benefits are distributed over the
first 13 days of the month by the first
letter of the recipients' last name.
For example: last names that begin with
A or B are distributed on the first day
of the month; 2nd day of the month: C
and D; etc.
Arkansas                        Arkansans receive their benefits on
these 8 days: 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th,
11th, 12th or 13th of each month, based
on the last number of their [S]ocial
[S]ecurity [N]umber.
California                      California is different in that each
county distributes SNAP to those who
qualify. The payments go out to all
those who qualify between the 1-10 of
the month. Others (i.e., new
applicants) get paid throughout the
month depending on when they were
accepted.
Colorado                        Food Stamp benefits are distributed on
the first 10 days of the month by the
recipient's last digit of their
[S]ocial [S]ecurity [N]umber.
Connecticut                     SNAP benefits and cash are distributed
on the first 3 days of the month, by
the first letter of the recipient's
last name. (A-F are available on the
first; G-N on the second and O-Z are
distributed on the third day of the
month.)
Delaware                        Benefits are made available over 23
days, beginning with the 2nd day of
every month, based on the first letter
of the client's last name.
District of Columbia            Benefits are made available from the 1st
to the 10th of every month, based on
the first letter of the client's last
name.
Florida                         All SNAP recipients moved from a 15 day
distribution to a 28 day distribution
in April 2016. In March 2016, to assist
in the new transition, benefits were
``split.'' Recipients received the
first half of their benefits on their
``old'' date and received the second
half of their monthly benefits on what
was their ``new'' date going forward.
The ACCESS Florida system assigns
benefit availability dates based on the
case number recipients received when
they became eligible for the SNAP
program.
Georgia                         In September 2012, SNAP benefits in
Georgia expanded from the 5th to the
14th, and then finally to the current
5th to 23rd of each month, distributed
every other day.
Hawaii                          Benefits are made available on the 3rd
and the 5th of every month, based on
the first letter of the client's last
name.
Idaho                           Benefits were previously made available
on the first day of every month. (Prior
to August 2009, benefits were
distributed on 5 consecutive days at
the beginning of each month, but this
was later moved to 1 day.) In 2014,
H.B. 565 was enacted. The bill requires
the state Department of Health and
Welfare to issue SNAP benefits over the
course of 10 consecutive days within a
month. Bonus money received from USDA
paid for the cost of the change.
Currently, and since July 1, 2016,
benefits are distributed over the first
10 days of each month based on the last
number of the birth year of the
recipient; for example, a birthday of 8/
25/64 would receive benefits on the 4th
day of each month.
Illinois                        SNAP benefits are made available on
these 12 days of the month: 1st, 3rd,
4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th, 14th, 17th,
19th, 21st, and 23rd of every month,
based on a combination of the type of
case and the case name.
Indiana                         On January 1, 2014, the state
implemented an expanded schedule for
the distribution of benefits during the
fifth through the twenty-third day of
each month, to be issued every-other-
day, based on the first letter of the
recipient's last name. For example: A
or B = benefits available on the 5th;
first Letter of the Last Name is: C or
D = benefits available on the 7th.
Previously, benefits were made
available on the first 10 calendar days
each month. (TANF is issued on the
first of the month.)
Iowa                            Benefits are made available over the
first 10 calendar days of every month,
based on the first letter of the
client's last name.
Kansas                          Benefits are made available over the
first 10 calendar days of every month,
based on the first letter of the
client's last name.
Kentucky                        Benefits are made available over the
first 19 calendar days of every month,
based on the last digit of the client's
case number. This was recently expanded
from the previous 10 day distribution.
Louisiana                       Benefits are made available between the
1st and the 14th of every month, based
on the last digit of the client's SSN.
(Elderly and disabled benefits are made
available between the 1st and the 4th
of every month.)
Maine                           Benefits are available the 10th to the
14th of every month based on the last
digit of the recipient's birthday.
Maryland                        In January 2016, the distribution
schedule was changed. Benefits are now
distributed from the 4th to the 23rd of
every month, based on the first three
letters of the client's last name.
Previously, benefits were distributed
from the 6th through the 15th of the
month. This was accomplished through a
5 month phase-in.
Massachusetts                   Distribution is based on the last digit
of each recipient's [S]ocial [S]ecurity
[N]umber and distributed over the first
14 days of the month.
Michigan                        In January 2011, SNAP moved from a 7 day
distribution to the current
distribution, which is from the 3rd to
the 21st, distributed every-other-day,
based on the last digit of the head of
household's recipient identification
number. For example, clients' numbers
ending with 0 will receive food
benefits on the 3rd of the month;
numbers ending with 1, food benefits
will be available on the 5th of the
month.
Minnesota                       Benefits are staggered over 10 calendar
days, beginning on the 4th through the
13th of every month, without regard to
weekends or holidays, based on the last
digit of the client's case number.
Mississippi                     Effective February 2017, benefits are
made available from the 4th to the 21st
of every month, based on the last two
digits of the client's case number.
Benefits were previously distributed
from the 5th to the 19th (15 days) of
every month.
Missouri                        Benefits are made available over the
first 22 days of every month, based on
the client's birth month and last name.
Montana                         Benefits are distributed over 5 days by
the last number of the recipient's case
number, from the 2nd to the 6th of
every month.
Nebraska                        Nebraska distributes benefits during the
first 5 calendar days of the month. The
day of distribution is based on the
last digit of the [S]ocial [S]ecurity
[N]umber.
Nevada **                       In Nevada, food stamp benefits are
issued on the first day of each month.
New Hampshire **                New Hampshire benefits are available on
the 5th of every month.
New Jersey                      The monthly SNAP allotment is available
over the first 5 days of the month. The
day is based on the number in the 7th
position of their case number. Some of
the cases still receive their benefits
based on the assignment at the time the
county was converted to EBT. In Warren
County, all benefits are made available
on the 1st of the month.
New Mexico                      Benefits are made available over 20 days
every month, based on the last two
digits of the SSN.
New York                        The process is twofold as follows: in
New York City, recipients receive their
SNAP benefits within the first 13
business days of the month, according
to the last digit of their case number,
not including Sundays or holidays. The
actual dates change from 1 month to the
next, so NYC publishes a 6 month
schedule showing the exact availability
dates. For the remainder of New York
State, recipients receive their
benefits within the first 9 days of the
month, also according to the last digit
of their case number, including Sundays
and holidays.
North Carolina                  Effective July 2011, the state expanded
its 10 day distribution schedule.
Benefits are now distributed from the
3rd to the 21st of every month, based
on the last digit of the primary
cardholder's Social Security Number.
North Dakota **                 Benefits are made available on the first
day of every month.
Ohio                            In April 2014, Ohio expanded its SNAP
distribution from the first 10 days of
the month to the first 20 days of the
month, staggered every 2 days. This
only affected SNAP recipients who moved
from one county to another; recipients
who experienced a 1 day or more break
in eligibility; and, all new
recipients. Recipients who were on SNAP
before April 2014 did not see a change.
Oklahoma                        Benefits are made available from the 1st
to the 10th of every month, based on
the last digit of the client's SNAP
case number.
Oregon                          SNAP is distributed on the first 9 days
of the month as such: [S]ocial
[S]ecurity [N]umbers ending with ``0''
or ``1'' distribute on the 1st day of
the month, numbers ending with a ``2''
are distributed on the 2nd day of the
month and so on.
Pennsylvania                    Benefits are made available over the
first 10 business days of every month
(excluding weekends and holidays) based
on the last digit of the client's case
number.
Rhode Island **                 Benefits are made available on the first
day of every month.
South Carolina                  In 2012, South Carolina expanded from a
9 day to a 19 day issuance. Current
recipients stayed within the 9 day
distribution, but all new recipients
were given a date that expanded into
the 19 days.
South Dakota **                 Benefits are made available on the 10th
day of every month.
Tennessee                       In October 2012, Tennessee expanded
distribution from 10 to 20 days.
Texas                           Benefits are made available over the
first 15 days of the month, based on
the last digit of the client's SNAP
case number.
Utah                            Benefits are made available on the 5th,
11th, or 15th of every month, based on
the first letter of the client's last
name: A-G available on the 5th; H-O
available on the 11th; P-Z available on
the 15th.
Vermont **                      Vermont benefits are available on the
first of every month.
Virginia                        On September 1, 2012, benefit
distribution was moved from 1 day a
month to 5 days, and then eventually to
the current 1st to the 9th day of every
month, based on the last digits of the
client's case number.
Washington                      Benefits are staggered over the first 10
days of the month based on the last
digit of the households' assistance
unit number. Weekends and holidays do
not affect the schedule. However,
beginning February 1, 2017, an
expansion of distribution was fully
implemented. Going forward, it will be
the first 20 days of the month.
West Virginia                   Benefits are made available over the
first 9 days of every month, based on
the first letter of the client's last
name.
Wisconsin                       Benefits are made available over the
first 15 days of every month, based on
the eighth digit of the client's SSN.
Wyoming                         SNAP is distributed on the first 4 days
of the month.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:
** States with asterisks are those that only distribute benefits on 1
day a month. There are seven that still do so. Warren County, New
Jersey distributes only 1 day a month, although the rest of the state
distributes over 5 days. Also, there are four states that distribute
SNAP just 2 or 3 days a month.
Additional Distribution Information:
There is no limit on the number of days for stagger. The only condition
in regulation is that no single household's issuance should exceed 40
days between issuances.
Currently, benefit recipients may only be issued their benefits one time
a month, or within 40 days.

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: One-Month Change in Total Participation
(Prepared by the Food Research and Action Center (FRAC))
(Data as of January 6, 2017)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percent Change September
State                     September 2016              October 2016          2016 vs. October 2016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kentucky                     657,389                    671,628                        2.2
Arkansas                     399,538                    403,376                        1.0
South Carolina                     746,646                    752,030                        0.7
Texas                   3,864,686                  3,891,234                        0.7
Wyoming                      33,806                     33,977                        0.5
Kansas                     246,179                    247,281                        0.4
Nevada                     441,986                    443,138                        0.3
Montana                     119,863                    120,065                        0.2
Vermont                      78,034                     78,092                        0.1
Massachusetts                     771,436                    771,512                        0.0
Washington                     952,711                    951,845                       ^0.1
Colorado                     467,426                    466,789                       ^0.1
Idaho                     176,217                    175,976                       ^0.1
Pennsylvania                   1,858,232                  1,855,129                       ^0.2
Arizona                     964,979                    963,303                       ^0.2
Mississippi                     555,278                    554,225                       ^0.2
Hawaii                     173,669                    173,289                       ^0.2
Florida                   3,287,446                  3,279,009                       ^0.3
West Virginia                     351,391                    350,474                       ^0.3
Georgia                   1,688,832                  1,683,945                       ^0.3
Indiana                     710,738                    708,476                       ^0.3
Oregon                     712,084                    709,684                       ^0.3
Iowa                     378,478                    377,126                       ^0.4
Minnesota                     465,211                    463,461                       ^0.4
New York                   2,950,208                  2,938,258                       ^0.4
New Jersey                     857,779                    854,146                       ^0.4
Missouri                     770,944                    767,403                       ^0.5
Alabama                     830,742                    826,790                       ^0.5
Wisconsin                     712,582                    709,134                       ^0.5
Oklahoma                     621,462                    618,434                       ^0.5
California                   4,252,654                  4,230,399                       ^0.5
South Dakota                      95,655                     95,153                       ^0.5
Connecticut                     424,431                    422,181                       ^0.5
Maryland                     720,566                    716,620                       ^0.5
Delaware                     149,158                    148,340                       ^0.5
New Hampshire                      95,393                     94,823                       ^0.6
Maine                     183,299                    182,095                       ^0.7
Ohio                   1,564,498                  1,553,901                       ^0.7
Virginia                     811,949                    806,332                       ^0.7
Utah                     214,505                    212,903                       ^0.7
Michigan                   1,434,550                  1,423,008                       ^0.8
North Dakota                      54,622                     54,124                       ^0.9
Tennessee                   1,083,880                  1,071,344                       ^1.2
Illinois                   1,931,575                  1,907,969                       ^1.2
North Carolina                   1,470,079                  1,450,485                       ^1.3
New Mexico                     480,493                    473,398                       ^1.5
Rhode Island                     168,973                    166,365                       ^1.5
District of Columbia                     132,308                    126,322                       ^4.5
Louisiana          1,042,876                    943,685                       ^9.5
Nebraska                     177,912                    153,419                      ^13.8
Alaska                      84,825                     71,768                      ^15.4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total.........................             43,493,149                 43,215,557                       ^0.6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The following areas receive Nutrition Assistance Grants which provide benefits analogous to the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program: Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana[ Islands]. In addition,
2015 and 2016 data are preliminary and are subject to significant revision.
* State where October 2016 SNAP data include disaster assistance (D-SNAP).

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: One-Year Change in Total Participation
(Prepared by the Food Research and Action Center (FRAC))
(Data as of January 6, 2017)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percent Change  October
State                      October 2015               October 2016         2015 vs.  October 2016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Louisiana            879,541                    943,685                        7.3
Montana                     113,462                    120,065                        5.8
Wyoming                      32,729                     33,977                        3.8
Texas                   3,777,317                  3,891,234                        3.0
New Mexico                     460,048                    473,398                        2.9
Alaska                      69,996                     71,768                        2.5
North Dakota                      53,271                     54,124                        1.6
Nevada                     439,498                    443,138                        0.8
Delaware                     147,127                    148,340                        0.8
Oklahoma                     613,397                    618,434                        0.8
Pennsylvania                   1,873,447                  1,855,129                       ^1.0
South Dakota                      96,692                     95,153                       ^1.6
Massachusetts                     786,492                    771,512                       ^1.9
New York                   2,996,649                  2,938,258                       ^1.9
Iowa                     384,685                    377,126                       ^2.0
West Virginia                     359,001                    350,474                       ^2.4
Arizona                     991,567                    963,303                       ^2.9
Colorado                     481,892                    466,789                       ^3.1
Connecticut                     439,210                    422,181                       ^3.9
Rhode Island                     173,148                    166,365                       ^3.9
Virginia                     844,204                    806,332                       ^4.5
Minnesota                     485,317                    463,461                       ^4.5
Utah                     222,981                    212,903                       ^4.5
Ohio                   1,629,349                  1,553,901                       ^4.6
California                   4,436,189                  4,230,399                       ^4.6
Hawaii                     182,226                    173,289                       ^4.9
Illinois                   2,007,492                  1,907,969                       ^5.0
New Jersey                     899,481                    854,146                       ^5.0
Georgia                   1,774,540                  1,683,945                       ^5.1
Vermont                      82,364                     78,092                       ^5.2
South Carolina                     793,218                    752,030                       ^5.2
Maine                     192,404                    182,095                       ^5.4
Kentucky                     713,911                    671,628                       ^5.9
Michigan                   1,513,129                  1,423,008                       ^6.0
Alabama                     881,402                    826,790                       ^6.2
Wisconsin                     756,434                    709,134                       ^6.3
Oregon                     759,386                    709,684                       ^6.5
Kansas                     265,478                    247,281                       ^6.9
New Hampshire                     101,894                     94,823                       ^6.9
Idaho                     189,385                    175,976                       ^7.1
Maryland                     779,303                    716,620                       ^8.0
Tennessee                   1,168,238                  1,071,344                       ^8.3
Washington                   1,043,008                    951,845                       ^8.7
Missouri                     843,876                    767,403                       ^9.1
District of Columbia                     140,654                    126,322                      ^10.2
Indiana                     799,663                    708,476                      ^11.4
Florida                   3,708,499                  3,279,009                      ^11.6
Mississippi                     628,354                    554,225                      ^11.8
Arkansas                     457,380                    403,376                      ^11.8
North Carolina                   1,647,808                  1,450,485                      ^12.0
Nebraska                     176,363                    153,419                      ^13.0
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total.........................             45,368,265                 43,215,557                       ^4.7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The following areas receive Nutrition Assistance Grants which provide benefits analogous to the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program: Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana[ Islands]. In addition,
2015 and 2016 data are preliminary and are subject to significant revision.
* State where October 2016 SNAP data include disaster assistance (D-SNAP).

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: Five-Year Change in Participation
(Prepared by the Food Research and Action Center (FRAC))
(Data as of January 6, 2017)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percent Change  October
State                      October 2011               October 2016         2011 vs.  October 2016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nevada                     351,686                    443,138                       26.0
New Mexico                     432,289                    473,398                        9.5
California                   3,867,094                  4,230,399                        9.4
Connecticut                     396,517                    422,181                        6.5
Illinois                   1,831,037                  1,907,969                        4.2
Pennsylvania                   1,785,240                  1,855,129                        3.9
Louisiana            916,060                    943,685                        3.0
Delaware                     144,612                    148,340                        2.6
Hawaii                     169,405                    173,289                        2.3
Wyoming                      33,252                     33,977                        2.2
Florida                   3,225,957                  3,279,009                        1.6
West Virginia                     347,064                    350,474                        1.0
Maryland                     709,681                    716,620                        1.0
Oklahoma                     624,112                    618,434                       ^0.9
Rhode Island                     168,694                    166,365                       ^1.4
Montana                     121,992                    120,065                       ^1.6
Colorado                     480,566                    466,789                       ^2.9
New York                   3,060,107                  2,938,258                       ^4.0
Alaska                      74,792                     71,768                       ^4.0
New Jersey                     890,859                    854,146                       ^4.1
Iowa                     398,574                    377,126                       ^5.4
Texas                   4,174,348                  3,891,234                       ^6.8
South Dakota                     103,282                     95,153                       ^7.9
Massachusetts                     838,603                    771,512                       ^8.0
North Dakota                      59,383                     54,124                       ^8.9
Alabama                     910,034                    826,790                       ^9.1
District of Columbia                     140,003                    126,322                       ^9.8
Georgia                   1,870,781                  1,683,945                      ^10.0
Virginia                     896,420                    806,332                      ^10.0
Oregon                     798,772                    709,684                      ^11.2
Ohio                   1,766,584                  1,553,901                      ^12.0
Nebraska                     174,941                    153,419                      ^12.3
North Carolina                   1,655,694                  1,450,485                      ^12.4
Minnesota                     531,728                    463,461                      ^12.8
Washington                   1,095,139                    951,845                      ^13.1
South Carolina                     867,258                    752,030                      ^13.3
Mississippi                     645,220                    554,225                      ^14.1
Wisconsin                     828,362                    709,134                      ^14.4
Arizona                   1,138,220                    963,303                      ^15.4
Tennessee                   1,280,908                  1,071,344                      ^16.4
New Hampshire                     114,744                     94,823                      ^17.4
Vermont                      94,604                     78,092                      ^17.5
Arkansas                     490,487                    403,376                      ^17.8
Kansas                     302,633                    247,281                      ^18.3
Missouri                     950,725                    767,403                      ^19.3
Kentucky                     842,885                    671,628                      ^20.3
Indiana                     901,967                    708,476                      ^21.5
Michigan                   1,884,542                  1,423,008                      ^24.5
Idaho                     233,194                    175,976                      ^24.5
Utah                     285,695                    212,903                      ^25.5
Maine                     251,189                    182,095                      ^27.5
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total.........................             46,224,722                 43,215,557                       ^6.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The following areas receive Nutrition Assistance Grants which provide benefits analogous to the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program: Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana[ Islands]. In addition,
2015 and 2016 data are preliminary and are subject to significant revision.
* State where October 2016 SNAP data include disaster assistance (D-SNAP).

Share of Population Participating in SNAP
(Prepared by the Food Research and Action Center (FRAC))
(Data as of January 6, 2017)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Population Estimate         SNAP Participants,
State                         (2015)                  October 2016           Share of Population
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Mexico                   2,085,109                    473,398                       22.7
Louisiana          4,670,724                    943,685                       20.2
West Virginia                   1,844,128                    350,474                       19.0
District of Columbia                     672,228                    126,322                       18.8
Mississippi                   2,992,333                    554,225                       18.5
Oregon                   4,028,977                    709,684                       17.6
Alabama                   4,858,979                    826,790                       17.0
Georgia                  10,214,860                  1,683,945                       16.5
Tennessee                   6,600,299                  1,071,344                       16.2
Florida                  20,271,272                  3,279,009                       16.2
Oklahoma                   3,911,338                    618,434                       15.8
Rhode Island                   1,056,298                    166,365                       15.7
Delaware                     945,934                    148,340                       15.7
South Carolina                   4,896,146                    752,030                       15.4
Nevada                   2,890,845                    443,138                       15.3
Kentucky                   4,425,092                    671,628                       15.2
New York                  19,795,791                  2,938,258                       14.8
Illinois                  12,859,995                  1,907,969                       14.8
Pennsylvania                  12,802,503                  1,855,129                       14.5
North Carolina                  10,042,802                  1,450,485                       14.4
Michigan                   9,922,576                  1,423,008                       14.3
Texas                  27,469,114                  3,891,234                       14.2
Arizona                   6,828,065                    963,303                       14.1
Maine                   1,329,328                    182,095                       13.7
Arkansas                   2,978,204                    403,376                       13.5
Ohio                  11,613,423                  1,553,901                       13.4
Washington                   7,170,351                    951,845                       13.3
Missouri                   6,083,672                    767,403                       12.6
Vermont                     626,042                     78,092                       12.5
Wisconsin                   5,771,337                    709,134                       12.3
Hawaii                   1,431,603                    173,289                       12.1
Iowa                   3,123,899                    377,126                       12.1
Maryland                   6,006,401                    716,620                       11.9
Connecticut                   3,590,886                    422,181                       11.8
Montana                   1,032,949                    120,065                       11.6
Massachusetts                   6,794,422                    771,512                       11.4
South Dakota                     858,469                     95,153                       11.1
California                  39,144,818                  4,230,399                       10.8
Indiana                   6,619,680                    708,476                       10.7
Idaho                   1,654,930                    175,976                       10.6
Alaska                     738,432                     71,768                        9.7
Virginia                   8,382,993                    806,332                        9.6
New Jersey                   8,958,013                    854,146                        9.5
Colorado                   5,456,574                    466,789                        8.6
Kansas                   2,911,641                    247,281                        8.5
Minnesota                   5,489,594                    463,461                        8.4
Nebraska                   1,896,190                    153,419                        8.1
North Dakota                     756,927                     54,124                        7.2
New Hampshire                   1,330,608                     94,823                        7.1
Utah                   2,995,919                    212,903                        7.1
Wyoming                     586,107                     33,977                        5.8
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total.........................            321,418,820                 43,215,557                       13.4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The following areas receive Nutrition Assistance Grants which provide benefits analogous to the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program: Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana[ Islands]. In addition,
2015 and 2016 data are preliminary and are subject to significant revision.
* State where October 2016 SNAP data include disaster assistance (D-SNAP).

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Weidman, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN WEIDMAN, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE FOOD
TRUST, PHILADELPHIA, PA

Mr. Weidman. Thank you, Chairman Conaway and Ranking Member
Peterson, for inviting me to testify. My name is John Weidman.
I am Deputy Executive Director for The Food Trust, a
Pennsylvania-based nonprofit working nationally to improve
access to healthy food.
This year through a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, we have launched the Center for Healthy Food
Access, a national collaborative effort aimed at improving the
health of children. I am here today to talk about strategies
The Food Trust has been employing to improve health and
encourage healthy eating among SNAP participants.
We believe that to have the greatest impact, it takes a
comprehensive approach that includes access, education, and
incentives. In Pennsylvania, we have been improving access by
opening farmers' markets, working with corner stores to stock
healthier products, and incentivizing new supermarket
development. Our team of nutrition educators is providing
innovative and engaging programing through SNAP-Ed to teach
children and adults how to eat healthy, cook, and shop on a
budget. And we run a successful Food Bucks Program that
provides $2 worth of free produce for every $5 spent with SNAP
at farmers' markets and a local supermarket.
Based on research, this comprehensive approach is working.
A peer-reviewed study published in the journal Pediatrics found
that our SNAP-Ed program reduced childhood overweight by 50
percent. More recently, data collected on the BMI of
Philadelphia children is showing that after decades of rising
childhood obesity rates, we are finally seeing them drop. The
strategies that are being implemented, access to healthy food,
nutrition education, SNAP incentives, are happening all around
the country and they are not only changing eating habits and
preventing diet-related disease, but they are also creating
jobs and spurring economic development.
I want to share a brief story about Nicole Speller, a
participant in one of our free 6 week SNAP-Ed cooking workshops
that take place in over 500 community sites across southeastern
Pennsylvania. Nicole had decided to make a change and improve
her health. She also happened to be a fantastic cook, and each
week she would share the recipe she was learning with her
neighbors and her church. Upon completing the workshop series,
Nicole started her own healthy cooking class at her church.
This is just one example of how SNAP-Ed is helping to create a
culture of health, and it is happening in innovative ways in
every state in the nation.
Of course, understanding how to eat healthy is only part of
the problem. Accessing healthy food continues to be a challenge
for millions of Americans. Over the last decade, we have seen
incredible success through public-private partnerships to
incentivize grocery stores to meet the need for better access.
In Pennsylvania, through the leadership of now-Congressman
Dwight Evans, we have the Pennsylvania Fresh Financing
Initiative, which funded 88 grocery store projects in urban and
rural areas, and created 5,000 jobs. Based on this successful
model, there is now the Federal HFFI and programs in many other
states.
Most recently through Governor Kasich's Ohio Fresh Food
Program, Vinton County, a rural county in southeast Ohio, is
now slated for a new grocery store to open after the only store
in the entire county had previously closed. This store will now
serve seniors and working families who have been unable to
satisfy the very basic human need of going to the store to buy
food.
The same grocers who we work with on HFFI programs also
stress the need of the importance of nutrition education. It
makes sense if grocers open a store and stock it with fresh
produce, they need nutrition education to drive demand for
healthy food. This is why both access and education go hand-in-
hand, not only to drive better health outcomes, but also to
ensure that stores are profitable and serve as economic
anchors.
Last, I want to discuss incentives that help make healthy
choices more affordable. In Philadelphia, 73 percent of Philly
Food Bucks users report eating more fruits and vegetables, and
SNAP sales at our farmers' markets have increased 300 percent
since we launched the program. In Michigan, the Double Up Food
Bucks Program is available throughout the state at farmers'
markets and supermarkets, and around the country, hospitals are
now participating in Veggie
programs, allowing physicians
to prescribe fruits and vegetables to low-income patients. The
USDA FINI Program has supported the expansion of these SNAP
incentive programs. Making healthier food more affordable makes
it easier for low-income families to make healthier choices.
Many parents might try putting a plate of fresh carrots in
front of a toddler. If he doesn't like it, they can just fix
him something else to eat. But imagine if you only have enough
money to afford one plate of food. The decision to try new
things becomes much more difficult.
In closing, there is no silver bullet to prevent diet-
related disease like obesity and diabetes, but the costs are
real. A recent study calculated the cost of diet-related
disease at $427 billion. A comprehensive approach that combines
access, nutrition education, incentives, and includes public-
private partnerships holds the most promise for stemming these
rising healthcare costs. Congress has moved forward to address
obesity and diabetes through innovative programs like SNAP-Ed,
FINI, and HFFI. SNAP is the foundation of this comprehensive
approach and keeps millions of families from going hungry, and
it is a critical economic pillar in low-income urban and rural
communities. Without SNAP, stores would close, jobs would be
lost, families would go hungry, and it would increase the need
for food stamps. Quite a vicious cycle, if there ever was one,
but by expanding access to healthy food, nutrition education,
and SNAP incentives in the next farm bill, we can improve
health, increase revenues for American farmers, create jobs in
urban and rural areas, and control rising healthcare costs.
Thank you for asking me to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weidman follows:]

Prepared Statement of John Weidman, Deputy Executive Director, The Food
Trust, Philadelphia, PA
Thank you, Chairman Conaway and Ranking Member Peterson, for
inviting me to testify. My name is John Weidman, and I am the Deputy
Executive Director of The Food Trust, a Pennsylvania based nonprofit
that works nationally to improve access to affordable nutritious food.
We were founded in 1992, and 2017 marks our 25th Anniversary. This
year, through a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation we have
launched the Center for Healthy Food Access: a national collaborative
effort aimed at improving the health of children in America. I am here
today to talk about the strategies that The Food Trust has been
employing to improve health and encourage healthy eating among SNAP
participants. We believe that to have the greatest impact it takes a
comprehensive approach that includes improving access, providing
nutrition education, and utilizing SNAP incentives. In Pennsylvania, we
have been improving access by opening and maintaining farmers[']
markets in low-income neighborhoods, working with small food stores to
stock healthier products, and incentivizing new supermarket development
through the Pennsylvania Fresh Food Financing Initiative, the national
model for Healthy Food Financing programs. Our team of dieticians and
nutrition educators is providing innovative and engaging programming
through the SNAP-Ed program to teach children and adults how to eat
healthy, how to cook, and how to shop on a budget. And we run a
successful Food Bucks program that provides $2 worth of free fruits and
vegetables for every $5 spent with SNAP at Philadelphia farmers[']
markets and a local supermarket chain.
Based on research that has been conducted in Philadelphia, this
comprehensive approach is working. A peer-reviewed study published in
the journal Pediatrics found that our SNAP-Ed funded school nutrition
education program reduced childhood overweight by 50%.\1\ More
recently, data collected on the Body Mass Index (BMI) of Philadelphia
children is showing that after decades of rising childhood obesity
rates, we are finally seeing them drop.\2\ The strategies that are
being implemented in Pennsylvania--access to healthy food, nutrition
education, and SNAP Incentives--are happening all around the country,
and they are not only changing eating habits and preventing diet-
related diseases like heart disease and diabetes, but they are also
creating jobs and spurring economic development in struggling urban and
rural communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Foster, G.D., Sherman, S., Borradaile, K.E., Grundy, K.M.,
Veur, S.S., Nachmani, J., Karpyn, A., Kumanyika, S., Shults, J. (2008).
A Policy-Based School Intervention to Prevent Overweight and Obesity.
Pediatrics, 121(4). doi:10.1542/peds.2007-1365.
\2\ Robbins, J.M., Mallya G., Wagner A., Buehler J.W. Prevalence,
Disparities, and Trends in Obesity and Severe Obesity Among Students in
the School District of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2006-2013. Prev.
Chronic. Dis. 2015; 12; 150185. DOI; http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/
pcd12.150185.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to share a brief story about Nicole Speller, a participant
in one of our free 6 week SNAP-Ed cooking workshops that take place in
over 500 community sites: libraries, community centers, and churches
across southeastern Pennsylvania. Nicole had decided to make a change
and improve her health. She also happened to be a fantastic cook, and
each week she would share the recipes and nutrition tips she was
learning with her neighbors and her church group. Upon completing the
workshop series, Nicole started her own healthy cooking class at her
church. This is just one example of how SNAP-Ed is helping to create a
culture of health, and it is happening in innovative ways in every
state in the nation. In addition to our cooking workshops, we also use
Share Our Strength's excellent Cooking Matters program to teach how to
shop healthy in the supermarket and make healthy choices on a budget.
We also work directly with thousands of school children each year to
teach them about food, farming, and eating healthy.
Of course, understanding how to eat healthier is only part of the
problem for many SNAP participants. Accessing healthy food continues to
be a challenge for millions of Americans. Over the last decade, we have
seen incredible success through public-private partnerships to
incentivize grocery stores, farmers['] markets, and other healthy food
retail solutions to meet the need for better access. In Pennsylvania,
thanks in large part to now-Congressman Dwight Evans, our Fresh Food
Financing Initiative funded 88 grocery store projects in urban and
rural areas and created 5,000 jobs. Based on this successful model, we
now have the Federal Healthy Food Financing Initiative (HFFI) and
programs in New York, Illinois, Mississippi, Colorado, and other
states. Most recently, through Governor Kasich's Ohio Fresh Food
Program, Vinton County--a rural county in southeast Ohio--is now slated
for a new grocery store to open after the only store in the county had
previously closed. This store will now serve seniors and working
families who have been unable to satisfy the very basic human need of
going to the store to buy food.
While the HFFI model was developed working directly with grocers
who want to improve access in under-served areas, they also stress the
importance of nutrition education. It makes sense: if grocers open a
store and stock it with fresh produce, they need nutrition education
programs to drive demand for purchasing healthy food. For this reason,
some grocers are now hiring registered dieticians to guide consumers in
the store. Grocers understand the need to improve eating habits, but at
the end of the day they cannot stock food that does not sell. This is
why both access and education go hand-in-hand, not only to drive better
health outcomes, but also to ensure that stores are profitable and
serve as economic anchors for small towns and urban neighborhoods.
In addition to the vital role the Federal Government plays,
partnerships with the private sector are a critical component of the
solution. Consumer demand for healthy products is growing, and many
operators and manufacturers are shifting their product portfolios in a
healthier direction. At the same time, retailers are developing
innovative ways to sell these products. Grocers, bodega owners, and
farmers have been indispensable partners in all of the efforts I have
been discussing. We are partnering with food manufacturers such as
Campbell Soup Company, which is spearheading a 10 year initiative in
Camden, New Jersey, to improve health and reduce food insecurity. GSK
(GlaxoSmithKline), another corporate partner, is funding a city-wide
initiative called Get HYPE Philly! that is focused on youth leadership
development, healthy eating and exercise, and education and job skills.
We need more of these innovative partnerships in the years ahead.
Last, I want to discuss incentives that encourage SNAP participants
to try healthier foods and that make healthier choices more affordable.
As I mentioned, The Food Trust launched our Philly Food Bucks program
in 2011, and it has been a huge success. Seventy-three percent of
Philly Food Bucks users report eating more fruits and vegetables, and
SNAP sales at farmers['] markets have increased 300% since the start of
the program. Based in Michigan, the Fair Food Network has greatly
expanded their Double Up Food Bucks program in farmers' markets and
grocery stores across the country. Wholesome Wave, based in
Connecticut, is bringing SNAP incentives to health care, allowing
physicians to ``prescribe'' fruits and vegetables to low-income
patients for redemption at local farmers['] markets. In 2014, USDA
launched FINI, the Food Insecurity Nutrition Incentive program, which
has supported research, piloting, and expansion of SNAP incentive
programs. Making healthier food more affordable makes it easier for
low-income families to take risks when trying new foods. Many parents
might try putting a plate of fresh carrots and peas in front of a
toddler. If he sticks out his tongue and says yuck, they can just fix
him something else to eat. (This is based on personal experience. I
have a 3 year old). But imagine if you only have enough money to afford
one plate of food--the decision to try new things becomes much more
difficult.
In closing, there is no silver bullet to prevent diet-related
diseases like obesity and diabetes, but the costs are real. A recent
study by the Milken Institute calculated the direct medical costs for
diet-related disease in 2014 at $427.8 billion.\3\ Soda and sugary
drinks are a big driver of the problem and Congress has moved forward
to address obesity and diabetes through innovative programs like SNAP-
Ed, FINI and HFFI. A comprehensive approach that combines access,
nutrition education, and SNAP incentives holds the most promise for
stemming these rising healthcare costs and building new, healthier
habits. SNAP is the foundation of this comprehensive approach. It keeps
millions of families from going hungry and is a critical economic
pillar for lower income urban and rural communities. Without SNAP,
stores would close, jobs would be lost, more families would drop into
poverty, and more people would need food stamps. A vicious cycle, if
there ever was one. By expanding access to healthy food, nutrition
education, and incentives in the next farm bill we can improve health,
increase revenues for American farmers, create jobs in urban and rural
areas, and control rising healthcare costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Waters, H., & DeVol, R. (2016). Weighing Down America: The
Health and Economic Impact of Obesity. Retrieved from Milken Institute:
http://assets1c.milkeninstitute.org/assets/Publication/ResearchReport/
PDF/Weighing-Down-America-WEB.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, I look forward to your
questions.

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Dr. Wansink?

STATEMENT OF BRIAN WANSINK, Ph.D., JOHN S. DYSON
PROFESSOR OF MARKETING AND DIRECTOR, CORNELL
UNIVERSITY FOOD AND BRAND LAB, ITHACA, NY

Dr. Wansink. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to
present my perspective on the pros and cons of restricting SNAP
purchases. I will be addressing three questions today: first,
what happens when food purchases are restricted; second, who
has the most potential to shop healthier; and third, how can
this be best encouraged? Thank you.
First, as a behavioral scientist and Director of the
Cornell Food and Brand Lab, I focus on changing behaviors in a
practical way. But as former USDA Executive Director from the
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, the Dietary
Guidelines, I focused on changing eating behaviors in a
scalable way. What I want to emphasize is our best and worst
eating habits start in the grocery store. If we can change what
people bring home, we change what they eat.
Now how do food restrictions influence people? Well, I have
two exhibits. First, how does shopping behavior change after
versus before people receive SNAP benefits? Well, there is a
new 6 year study of SNAP recipients in Rhode Island that shows
that spending on SNAP eligible products went up once they
received the benefits, but the general purchase of SNAP
ineligible benefits, the soft drinks and things like this, did
not go down. What they do is they trace some of this to people
buying more convenient products when they get SNAP benefits.
Exhibit 2 looks at incentives. When we specifically
financially incentivize shoppers to buy more fruits and
vegetables, what happens? In one 6 month study of 208 families
in Utica, New York, we gave shoppers ten percent more money
back in a debit card when they bought healthy foods like fruits
and vegetables. When low-income shoppers were given this, they
spent $33 more per week with $12 of that being on healthier
foods, but $21 being on less healthy foods such as snack foods.
The money they saved on healthy foods, they also spent on less
healthy foods.
Now these are both preliminary reports. They do show that
when people are incentivized to buy healthy foods, they do, but
they also buy less healthy foods.
What I want to look at is who has the biggest potential to
eat better? Now we make a mistake when we only look at all SNAP
recipients as a homogenous group of shoppers. Instead, people
are in a pyramid like this. It goes in a hierarchy of healthy
disposition. If you see something like this, there are people
at the top who are very vigilant shoppers. These are people who
know the number of calories in a Coke, the number of calories
in Fritos. They care about what they eat. No change is going to
influence what they buy. At the very bottom, you have health
disinterested shoppers. Again, these are people who are either
resigned or they are disinterested in shopping healthier, and
again, no change is going to have much impact on what they buy.
Who we can influence is this middle group, the health
predisposed shoppers, because these are the people who want to
eat better, but they just need the help and the nudge to do so.
Now if we look at what is going to work best for these
health predisposed shoppers, the question is how do we do this?
Will the restriction work? And second, will something else work
better?
Now I said earlier it is not clear whether the hassles of
related retailing shopper dignity would merit a change, but
there might be a solution to this. So for instance, one option
would be to give a SNAP recipient an option. They can use 100
percent of their SNAP benefits to purchase whatever they
wanted, or if they agreed themselves to restricting--let's just
say to produce. Maybe they get a bonus. They get 125 percent
more. Now we are not sure how this would work, and it does
merit testing as mentioned earlier, but a second option is far
easier to implement and can be scaled very quickly. It involves
providing simple guidelines to retailers, maybe even a
certification on how to make it easier for SNAP shoppers, all
shoppers, to buy healthier foods by making it more convenient,
attractive, and normal to do so.
There is a precedent for this healthier by design shopping
program that is beginning to work in food deserts. Last year,
the National Association of Convenience Stores developed and
launched a new tool kit of evidence-based tactics that could be
used to increase the sales of healthier foods. It is one reason
why when you buy gas, you often find a basket of bananas next
to the cash register. That is because of this program. These
are small, easy changes to make, and they are win-win benefits
for both retailers, SNAP recipients, and us. But systematically
giving other retailers the guidance on how to make these
healthy nudges and credit them for doing so would benefit SNAP
shoppers just as well as it is benefitting us.
Another way this retail program is underway is the Nordic
solution to sustainability and obesity, it is related to the
EAT Foundation and GreeNudge. And over there, supermarkets are
being guided to make small changes in signage, service, and
structure, and it has increased fruits and vegetables
consumption for that.
Now in summary, and this is a third alternative, but I will
give three things. SNAP recipients get benefits and restricted
benefits, but they do not necessarily buy only healthier foods.
They buy everything else. Second, there are three segments of
shoppers; and third, there are different ways to best encourage
this health predisposed segment.
Thanks for this opportunity to talk with you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wansink follows:]

Prepared Statement of Brian Wansink, Ph.D., John S. Dyson Professor of
Marketing and Director, Cornell University Food and Brand Lab, Ithaca,
NY
Good morning, Chairman Conway, Ranking Member Peterson, Members of
the Committee: Thank you for giving me the opportunity to present my
perspective on the pros and cons of restricting SNAP purchases. I will
be addressing three questions today: (1) What happens when food
purchases are restricted? (2) Who has the most potential to shop
healthier, and (3) How can this be best encouraged?
When Happens When Food Purchases are Restricted?
As a behavioral scientist and Director of the Cornell Food and
Brand Lab, I focus on changing eating behaviors in a practical way. As
the former USDA Executive Director for the Center for Nutrition Policy
and Promotion--the Dietary Guidelines--I focused on changing eating
behaviors in a scalable way.
When Food Stamps were first introduced, their purpose was to fill
bellies with calories. Seventy years later we have another important
opportunity. Fill bellies with the right calories. With increasing
health care costs threatening the future of the American economy, one
place we can begin turning this around--starting tonight--is with what
we eat in our homes. Of all the health concerns that face Americans,
diet-related disease and obesity are the ones that we can tackle most
immediately.
What is critical to remember, however, is this: Our best and worse
eating habits start in the grocery store. If we can change what people
bring home from the grocery store or market, we can change how they
eat.
Do people shop differently when they're given extra money--such as
a rebate or SNAP benefits? Two preliminary studies give us some insight
here.
Exhibit No. 1. How does shopping behavior change after versus
before people receive SNAP benefits? A new 6 year study of SNAP
recipients in Rhode Island showed that the spending on SNAP eligible
products went up once they received benefits, but the general purchase
of SNAP ineligible benefits did not go down (Hastings and Shaprio
2017). Further unpublished analyses (learned through conversation) also
suggest that purchase of convenient-to-eat foods goes up once a person
receives SNAP benefits. They trade their SNAP benefits for convenience.
Exhibit No. 2 looks at incentives. What if we specifically
financially incentivize shoppers to buy more fruits and vegetables? In
one 6 month study of 208 families in Utica, NY, we gave shoppers a 10%
bonus--10% more money back on their debit card--when they bought
healthy foods such as fruits and vegetables. When low-income shoppers
(poverty ratio less than 1.3) were given this extra money as a subsidy,
they spent $33 more per week on healthier foods--including fruits and
vegetables, but they also spent $21 more per week on less healthy
foods, such as snack foods (Cawley, et al., 2016). Some of the money
they saved on the healthy foods, they appeared to spend on less healthy
foods.
Although both of these are single, preliminary white papers in the
National Bureau of Economic Research, they point at the idea that extra
money--in the form of SNAP benefits or subsidies--changes the way
people shop. They do buy more of the healthy, incentivized foods, but
they also buy more of the less healthy foods. They just use their own
money instead.
A key question, however, is ``Who has the most potential to eat
better?''
The Hierarchy of Health Predisposition
When I was the Executive Director of the USDA's Center for
Nutrition Policy and Promotion, I saw people off-handedly dismiss
potentially useful ideas for new initiatives if they would not benefit
100% of the population under discussion.
In trying to solve difficult problems, it is very useful to not
view 100% of all people--such as all SNAP benefit recipients--as the
same. Some people already eat very healthy, some people do not want to
eat healthy, and some people want to, but they need help. When trying
to predict how a SNAP shopper would respond to a restriction, it is
useful to understand that there is a Hierarchy of Health
Predisposition.
Not all SNAP shoppers shop alike and we can view them--like all
shoppers--on how predisposed they are to wanting to make a healthier
shopping decision. We can view them as belonging to one of three fluid
groups within a Hierarchy of Health Predisposition. The top segment of
this hierarchy are Health Vigilant shoppers. They are highly informed,
conscious of calories, and they are influenced by nutrition
information. At the bottom extreme, Health Disinterested shoppers have
little interest in changing their eating choices because of either the
effort, sacrifice, or perceived futility of doing so. The segment in
the middle are the Health Predisposed shoppers. They would prefer to
make healthier food choices, but they have difficulty consistently
doing so unless it involves very little sacrifice on their part. This
Predisposed segment is the one that buys the 100 calorie packages of
snacks and the sugar-free yogurt. For all people, this segment is
larger on New Years Day than it was in December; it was larger this
past Monday morning than it was during the prior Friday night's
shopping trip.
The Hierarchy of Health Predisposition

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

One reason nutrition guidance systems (such traffic lights or
Guiding Stars) have had only modest influences on the sales of healthy
food may be because they mainly resonate with only the top of the
Hierarchy. Health Disinterested shoppers ignore these programs, and
Heath Predisposed shoppers inconsistently follow them. If the only
segment they reach are the Vigilant shoppers, interventions like this
will have hardly any impact on sales since this segment is already
shopping in a healthy way.
This is important because SNAP restrictions may not have the same
impact on healthy shopping behavior that we desire. The Health Vigilant
shoppers will already be shopping healthy, and they do not need them.
At the other extreme, Healthy Disintereseted shoppers might simply
rechannel their own money toward what they would have bought anyway.
What this importantly raises is the question as to whether there other
ways to guide SNAP shoppers to eat healthier--particularly those in
this middle section.
Non-Restrictive Options to Encourage Healthier SNAP Shopping Patterns
One extreme way to try and encourage SNAP shoppers to eat better is
to restrict what they can purchase. Some people might say this is not
practical for retailers. Other people might say this is not respectful
of the dignity or free choice of SNAP shoppers.
What is not asked when it comes to restricting SNAP purchases is,
``Will it even work?'' As just noted, for the Health Vigilant, it
wouldn't have any impact because they already eat healthy. At the other
end, for the Health Disinterested, it may not work because they will
simply spend their cash on what they would have otherwise bought
anyway. There are two open questions: (1) Will a restriction work with
the Health Predisposed--this middle segment, and (2) Would something
else work better?
First, as said earlier, it is not clear if the retail hassles and
the shopper dignity and free choice issues related to a restriction
would merit a change. There may be a solution to this, however. Suppose
a nutritionally predisposed shopper had one of two options. One option
would be to have 100% of their SNAP benefits to purchase whatever they
wanted (foods that are currently eligible). A second option would be
that they could agree to self-restrict themselves from buying certain
foods in exchange for, say, 125% of their SNAP benefits. In effect, if
they agreed to restrict their SNAP benefits to buy only predetermined
healthy foods--say fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean meat and
dairy--they would get more 25% (or however much) more buying power.
Such a system would still give people an option--they could either
choose the 100% unrestricted plan or they could choose the 125%
restricted plan--and it would help those who wanted to eat better to
more easily do so. Of course, we have no evidence of how effective this
would be in practice, but it is an idea that merits pilot testing. It
lets people be free to choose while also providing them an incentive to
eat better. The SNAP recipient chooses what they want.
A second option is far easier to implement and can be scaled
quickly. It involves providing simple guidelines to retailers--perhaps
even a certification--on how to make it easier for SNAP shoppers (and
all shoppers) to buy healthier foods by making it more convenient,
attractive, and normal (the CAN framework) to do so. This notion of
``Healthy Shopping by Design'' is fashioned off of the Smarter
Lunchroom Movement which is a USDA-sponsored initiative that trains
food service directors on the dozens of ways they can guide students
toward making healthier selections in the school lunchroom (Hanks, et
al., 2013). The 66-point scorecard shows whether the way they set up,
serve, and promote foods make kids fit or fat. For instance, a score of
25 out of 66 indicates there is easy room for improvement, but also
points at the 41 other changes they could make (Appendix).
There is precedent for a Healthy Shopping by Design program that is
beginning to work in food deserts. In 2016, the National Association of
Convenience Stores, working with the Cornell Food and Brand Lab
developed and launched a new toolkit titled, ``Ideas That Work to Grow
Better-for-You Sales,'' and they include evidence-based tactics to
increase the sales of healthier foods. It is one reason you can often
buy a banana when you buy gas--they are sitting right next to the cash
register (Lenard and Schare 2016). These are small easy changes to
make, but they are win-win and benefit both retailers and (food desert)
shoppers.
Systematically giving other retailers the guidance of how to make
healthy nudges, and the credit for doing so could change healthy
shopping for SNAP shoppers just as the Smarter Lunchroom Movement is
changing lunchtime for school children (Wansink 2017; 2014). In Norway,
this is currently underway as a Nordic Solution to sustainability and
obesity (which is related to the EAT Foundation and GreeNudge). Over
there, supermarkets are being guided how to make small changes to the
signage, structure, and service, and the results have been increased
fruit and vegetable sales for all (Wansink, Karvold, and Tran 2017).
Summary
1.  Giving SNAP recipients more benefits or restricted benefits may
not lead them to only buy healthier food (they will also
buy more convenient foods and less healthier foods).

2.  There are three segments of shoppers: the Health Vigilant, the
Health Predisposed, and the Health Disinterested. The
easiest win will be to focus efforts programming on the
Health Predisposed segment.

3.  There are at least two ways to try and influence the Health
Predisposed segment. One might be giving them 100% of their
unrestricted benefits, or 130% of restricted benefits. A
second would be to work with retailers to show them how
they can be even more profitable by making it convenient,
attractive, and normal for SNAP shoppers--indeed all
shoppers--to shop healthier. Just as this program is
responsible for putting bananas by the convenience store
checkouts, and more vegetables in Norwegian shopping carts,
it could be successful on a larger scale with supermarkets
and other stores accepting SNAP benefits.

Thank you for this opportunity to share my perspective with you.
References
Cawley, John, Andrew S. Hanks, David R. Just, and Brian Wansink
(2016), ``Incentivizing Nutrition Diets: A Field Experiment of Relative
Price Changes and How They Are Framed,'' National Bureau of Economics
Research, Working paper 21929.
Hanks, Andrew S., David R. Just, and Brian Wansink (2013),
``Smarter Lunchrooms Can Address New School Lunchroom Guidelines and
Childhood Obesity,'' Journal of Pediatrics, 162: 4 (April), 867-869.
Hastings, Justine and Jesse M. Shapiro (2017), ``How are SNAP
Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail Panel,'' National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working paper.
Lenard, Jeff and Carolyn Schnare (2016), ``Eight Low-Cost--and
Proven--Tactics for How C-Store Operators and Grow Their Healthy
Offer,'' NACS Magazine, August, 30-36.
NACS (2016), ``NACS Toolkit Helps C-Stores Grown Better-for-You
Sales,'' May 26 http://www.nacsonline.com/Media/Daily/Pages/
ND0526161.aspx#.WKPMM
neZNPs.
Wansink, Brian (2014), Slim by Design--Mindless Eating Solutions
for Everyday Life, New York, NY: William Morrow.
Wansink, Brian, Knut Karevold, and Huy Tran (2017), ``Supermarket
Interventions to Sell Sustainable Fruits and Vegetables: The Nordic
Solution to Healthier Shopping,'' Cornell Food and Brand Lab, working
paper.
Wansink, Brian (2017), ``Healthy Profits: An Interdisciplinary
Retail Framework that Increases the Sales of Healthy Foods, Journal of
Retailing, in press.
Appendix. Example of Scorecards that Encourage Healthier Choices

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Exhibit 1
How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail Panel
Justine S. Hastings, Jesse M. Shapiro
Working Paper 23112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23112

This work has been supported (in part) by awards from the Russell
Sage Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Policies for
Action program, and the Laura and John Arnold Foundation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author(s) alone and should not be construed
as representing the opinions of these Foundations. This project
benefited from the suggestions of Ken Chay, Raj Chetty, David Cutler,
Amy Finkelstein, Xavier Gabaix, Peter Ganong, Ed Glaeser, Nathan
Hendren, Hilary Hoynes, Larry Katz, David Laibson, Kevin Murphy, Mandy
Pallais, Devin Pope, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Andrei Shleifer,
from audience comments at Brown University, Clark University, Harvard
University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the
Quantitative Marketing and Economics Conference, and from comments by
discussant J.P. Dube. We thank our dedicated research assistants for
their contributions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of
potential relevance for this research. Further information is available
online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23112.ack.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment
purposes. They have not been peer-reviewed or been subject to the
review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official NBER
publications.
2017 by Justine S. Hastings and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 notice, is given to the source.
Abstract
We use a novel retail panel with more than 6 years of detailed
transaction records to study the effect of participation in the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) on household spending.
We frame our approach using novel administrative data from the state of
Rhode Island. The marginal propensity to consume SNAP-eligible food
(MPCF) out of SNAP benefits is 0.5 to 0.6. The MPCF out of cash is much
smaller. These patterns obtain even for households for whom SNAP
benefits are economically equivalent to cash in the sense that benefits
do not cover all food spending. We reject the hypothesis that
households respect the fungibility of money in a semiparametric setup.
A post-hoc model of mental accounting rationalizes these facts and
others.

Justine S. Hastings,                 Jesse M. Shapiro,
Brown University,                    Economics Department,
Department of Economics,             Box B,
64 Waterman Street,                  Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912,                Providence, RI 02912,
and NBER,                            and NBER,

[emailprotected]
;
[emailprotected]
.

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-
appendix/w23112.
1  Introduction
This paper studies how receipt of benefits from the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) affects household spending. SNAP is
of special interest to economists for at least two reasons. First, the
program is economically important: it is the second-largest means-
tested program in the United States after Medicaid (Congressional
Budget Office 2013), enrolling 19.6 percent of households in fiscal
2014.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ There were 22,743,911 participating households in fiscal 2014
(FNS 2016a) and 116,211,092 households in the U.S. on average from
2010-2014 (U.S. Census Bureau 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the program's stated objectives sit awkwardly with economic
theory. On signing the bill to implement the predecessor Food Stamp
Program, President Lyndon Johnson declared that the program would
``enable low-income families to increase their food expenditures''
(Johnson 1964). The Food and Nutrition Service of the USDA says that
SNAP is important for ``helping low-income families put food on the
table'' (FNS 2012). Yet although SNAP benefits can only be spent on
food, textbook demand theory (Mankiw 2000; Browning and Zupan 2004)
predicts that, for the large majority of SNAP recipients who spend more
on food than they receive in benefits,\2\ SNAP benefits are
economically equivalent to cash.\3\ As typical estimates of the
marginal propensity to consume food (MPCF) out of cash income are close
to 0.1,\4\ the textbook treatment says that SNAP benefits should mostly
subsidize non-food spending.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Hoynes, et al., (2015) find that spending on food at home is at
or above the SNAP benefit level for 84 percent of SNAP recipient
households. Trippe and Ewell (2007) report that 73 to 78 percent of
SNAP recipients spend at least ten percent more on food than they
receive in SNAP benefits.
\3\ Consider a household with monthly income y and SNAP benefits b.
If the household spends
on SNAP-eligible food then she has
y^max (0,
^b) available to buy other goods. Let U
(
,n) denote the household's strictly monotone,
differentiable, and strictly quasiconcave utility function defined over
the dollar amount of SNAP-eligible food consumption
and
other consumption n. Suppose that there is a solution

*
= arg max
U
(
,y^max(0,
^b)) such that

*
>b.
The first-order necessary condition for this program is a necessary and
sufficient condition for a solution to the program max
f
U
(
;y+b^
) in which the benefits are given in cash.
Therefore

*
= arg max

f
U(
,y+b^
).
\4\ Castner and Mabli (2010) estimate an MPCF out of cash income of
0.07 for SNAP participants. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) estimate an
MPCF out of cash income of 0.09-0.10 for populations with a high
likelihood of participating in the Food Stamp Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Estimating the effect of SNAP benefits on spending is challenging
because it requires good measurement of household spending and suitably
exogenous variation in program participation or benefits. Survey-based
measures of household spending are error-prone and sensitive to the
mode of elicitation (Ahmed, et al., 2006; Browning, et al., 2014;
Battistin and Padula 2016). Important components of SNAP eligibility
and benefit rules are set nationally, and major program changes have
often coincided with other policy changes or economic shocks
(Congressional Budget Office 2012), making it difficult to separate the
effect of SNAP from the effect of these contextual factors.
In this paper we analyze a novel panel consisting of detailed
transaction records from February 2006 to December 2012 for nearly \1/
2\ million regular customers of a large U.S. grocery retailer. The data
contain information on method of payment, including whether payment was
made using a government benefit card. We use the panel to study the
effect of transitions on and off of SNAP, and of legislated changes in
SNAP benefits, on household spending.
We adopt three approaches to isolating the causal effect of SNAP on
spending: a panel event-study design using trends prior to SNAP
adoption to diagnose confounds, an instrumental variables design
exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of program exit,
and a differences-in-differences design exploiting legislated changes
to benefit schedules.
We motivate each of these approaches with findings from novel Rhode
Island administrative data. The data show that household income and
size change in the months preceding a household's transition on to
SNAP, motivating our panel event-study design. The data also show that
SNAP spell lengths are typically divisible by 6 months because of the
recertification process, motivating our instrumental-variables design.
National administrative records show discrete jumps in SNAP benefits
associated with legislated program changes in 2008 and 2009, motivating
our differences-in-differences design.
By construction our retail panel includes purchases at a single
grocery chain. Rhode Island administrative data show that it is
possible to reliably infer transitions on to SNAP using data from a
single grocery chain, by focusing on consecutive periods of non-SNAP
use followed by consecutive periods of SNAP use. Additional data,
including a survey conducted by the retailer, show that SNAP
participation is only weakly related to a household's choice of
retailer.
Graphical analysis of our panel event-study design shows that after
adoption of SNAP, households in the retailer panel increase SNAP-
eligible spending by about $110 a month, equivalent to a bit more than
\1/2\ of their monthly SNAP benefit. There is no economically
meaningful trend in SNAP-eligible spending prior to adoption of SNAP.
Graphical analysis of our instrumental-variables and differences-in-
differences designs also implies an MPCF out of SNAP in the range of
0.5 to 0.6.
We exploit large swings in gasoline prices during our sample period
to estimate the MPCF out of cash for the retail panelists. We observe
gasoline spending at the retailer and confirm that increases in
gasoline prices lead to significant additional out-of-pocket expenses
for panelist households. We estimate that every $100 per month of
additional gasoline spending reduces food spending by less than $10, in
line with past estimates of the MPCF out of cash for the SNAP-recipient
population (e.g., Castner and Mabli 2010) but far below the estimated
MPCF out of SNAP.
Turning to SNAP-ineligible spending at the retailer, we estimate an
MPC of 0.02 out of SNAP benefits, and a (statistically
indistinguishable) MPC of 0.04 out of cash.
We develop an economic model of food spending by households for
whom SNAP benefits do not cover all food spending and are therefore
fungible with cash. We show how to test the hypothesis of fungibility,
allowing for the endogeneity of cash income and SNAP benefits, and for
the possibility that different households' consumption functions do not
share a common parameterization or parametric structure. Our tests
consistently reject the null hypothesis that households treat SNAP
benefits as fungible with other income.
We extend our economic model to include mental accounting following
the approach in Farhi and Gabaix (2015). The extension is post-hoc. By
design, it rationalizes the finding that the MPCF is greater out of
SNAP benefits than out of cash. It also predicts that, following SNAP
receipt, households will allocate relatively less effort to bargain-
hunting in the food domain than in the non-food domain. We find that
SNAP receipt reduces the store-brand share of expenditures and the
share of items on which coupons are redeemed, but only for SNAP-
eligible foods.
We also discuss the responses from qualitative interviews conducted
at a food pantry as part of a Rhode Island pilot proposal to modify
SNAP benefit timing. Respondents were not scientifically sampled, and
it is not appropriate to derive general conclusions from these
interviews. Nevertheless, we find that they provide useful context for
our analysis.
This paper contributes to a large literature on the effects of SNAP
and the predecessor Food Stamp Program on food spending, recently
reviewed by Bitler (2015) and Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2016). There are
four strands to this literature. The first strand studies the effect of
converting food stamp benefits to cash. Moffitt (1989) finds that a
cashout in Puerto Rico did not affect food spending. Wilde and Ranney
(1996) find that behavior in two randomized cashout interventions is
not consistent with fungibility; Schanzenbach (2002) finds that
behavior in these same interventions is consistent with fungibility.\5\
The second strand, reviewed in Fox, et al. (2004), either compares
participants to nonparticipants or relates food spending to the size of
a household's benefit, either across households or over time. Wilde
(2001) and Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009), among others, criticize this
strand of the literature for using a source of variation in program
benefits that is likely related to non-program determinants of
spending.\6\ The third strand studies randomized evaluations of program
extensions or additions. Collins, et al. (2016) study a randomized
evaluation of the Summer Electronic Benefit Transfer for Children
program and use survey data to estimate an MPCF out of program benefits
of 0.58.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Fox, et al. (2004) question the validity of the findings from
Puerto Rico and one of the randomized interventions, arguing that the
best evidence indicates that cashout reduces food spending.
\6\ Wilde, et al. (2009) address the endogeneity of program
benefits by exploiting variation in whether household food spending is
constrained by program rules. Li, et al. (2014) use panel data to study
the evolution of child food insecurity in the months before and after
family entry into the food stamp program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fourth strand exploits policy variation in program availability
and generosity. Studying the initial rollout of the Food Stamp Program
using survey data, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) estimate an MPCF out
of food stamps of 0.16 to 0.32, with confidence interval radius ranging
from 0.17 to 0.27. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) estimate an MPCF out
of cash income of 0.09 to 0.10 and cannot reject the hypothesis that
the MPCF out of food stamps is equal to the MPCF out of cash income.
Studying the effect of a 2009 SNAP benefit expansion using survey data,
Beatty and Tuttle (2015) estimate an MPCF out of SNAP benefits of 0.53
to 0.64 (they do not report a confidence interval on these values) and
an MPCF out of cash income of 0.15.\7\ Closest to our study, Bruich
(2014) uses retail scanner data with method-of-payment information to
study the effect of a 2013 SNAP benefit reduction, estimating an MPCF
out of SNAP benefits of 0.3 with confidence interval radius of 0.15.\8\
Bruich (2014) does not report an MPCF out of cash income. We estimate
an MPCF out of SNAP benefits of 0.5 to 0.6 with confidence interval
radius as low as 0.015, and an MPCF out of cash income of no more than
0.1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Nord and Prell (2011) estimate the effect of the 2009 benefit
expansion on food security and food expenditures. Ratcliffe, et al.
(2011) and Yen, et al. (2008) estimate the effect of SNAP and food
stamps, respectively, on food insecurity, using state-level policy
variables as excluded instruments.
\8\ Andreyeva, et al. (2012) and Garasky, et al. (2016) use retail
scanner data to describe the food purchases of SNAP recipients, but not
to estimate the causal effect of SNAP on spending.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This paper contributes new evidence of violations of fungibility in
a large-stakes real-world decision with significant policy relevance.
That households mentally or even physically separate different income
sources according to spending intentions is well-documented in
hypothetical-choice scenarios (e.g., Heath and Soll 1996; Thaler 1999)
and ethnographic studies (e.g., Rainwater, et al., 1959). Much of the
recent literature documenting this behavior in real-world markets
focuses on consumer choice settings with little direct policy relevance
(e.g., Milkman and Bashears 2009; Hastings and Shapiro 2013; Abeler and
Marklein forthcoming). Important exceptions include Kooreman's (2000)
study of a child tax credit in the Netherlands, Feldman's (2010) study
of a change in U.S. Federal income tax withholding, and Benhassine, et
al.'s (2015) study of a labeled cash transfer in Morocco.
Methodologically, this paper shows how to test for the fungibility
of money without assuming that the consumption function takes a
particular parametric form or that the consumption function is
identical for all households.\9\ Our approach nests Kooreman's (2000),
but avoids the concern that a rejection of fungibility is due to
misspecification of functional forms (Ketcham, et al., 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Whereas classical tests of consumer rationality (Varian 1983;
Blundell, et al., 2003) require observing price changes, we provide a
set of intuitive sufficient conditions on the model and the measurement
process that permit testing based on income variation alone.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the paper presents new evidence from novel administrative
data on SNAP recipients in Rhode Island, including the first evidence
we are aware of from state administrative data on how household wage
income evolves before and after entry into SNAP.\10\ Although we
present these findings primarily as background, they are of interest in
their own right as evidence on the contextual factors associated with
SNAP adoption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Other recent studies analyzing linked unemployment insurance
and SNAP data include Anderson, et al., (2012) and Leung and O'Leary
(2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2  Background and Evidence from Administrative and Survey Data
2.1  Rhode Island Administrative Data
We use Rhode Island state administrative records housed in a secure
facility at the Rhode Island Innovative Policy Laboratory at Brown
University. Personally identifiable information has been removed from
the data and replaced with secure identifiers that make it possible to
link different records associated with the same individual or
household. These records are not linked to our retail panel.
We obtain the state's SNAP records from October 2004 through June
2016. These data define the months of benefit receipt and the
collection of individuals associated with every household on SNAP in
every month. We assume that a household's composition is unchanged
prior to its first benefit receipt and that it does not change from its
most recent composition between the end of any given period of benefit
receipt and the start of the next period. We exclude from our analysis
any household whose membership we cannot uniquely identify in every
month,\11\ or whose adult composition changes during the sample period.
The final sample consists of 185,534 unique households.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ This can occur either because we lack a unique identifier for
a member individual or because a given individual is associated with
multiple households in the same month.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
From SNAP records we compute, for each household and month, the
total number of children in the household under 5 years old. From the
records of the state unemployment insurance system we compute, for each
household and quarter,\12\ the sum of total unemployment insurance
benefits received from and total earnings reported to the state
unemployment insurance system by all individuals who are in the
household as of the quarter's end.\13\ We refer to this total as
household income, but we note that it excludes income not reported to
the Rhode Island unemployment insurance system, such as social security
benefits and out-of-state earnings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Data on earnings are missing from our database for the fourth
quarter of 2004 and the second quarter of 2011.
\13\ We exclude from our analysis any household-quarter in which
the household's total quarterly earnings exceed the 99.9999th
percentile or in which unemployment insurance benefits in any month of
the quarter exceed three times the 4 week equivalent of the 2016
maximum weekly benefit of $707 (Rhode Island Department of Labor and
Training 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also obtain records of all debits and credits to SNAP Electronic
Benefit Transfer (EBT) cards for the period September 2012 through
October 2015. From these we identify all household-months in which the
household received a SNAP benefit and all household-months in which the
household spent SNAP benefits at a large, anonymous retailer in Rhode
Island (``Rhode Island Retailer'') chosen to be similar to the retailer
that provided our retail panel. Although these data can be linked to
the SNAP records using a household identifier, we do not exploit that
link in the analysis that follows.
2.2  Changes in Household Circumstances Around SNAP Adoption
Household income and household size are major determinants of SNAP
eligibility (FNS 2016b). We therefore hypothesize that entry into SNAP
is associated with a decline in household income and a rise in
household size. Figure 1 shows that this hypothesis is confirmed in our
administrative data. The figure shows panel event-study plots of
household income and number of children as a function of time relative
to SNAP adoption, which we define to occur on the first quarter or
month, respectively, of a household's first SNAP spell. In the period
of SNAP adoption, household income declines and the number of children
rises, on average.
Past research shows that greater household size and lower household
income are associated, respectively, with greater and lower at-home
food expenditures among the SNAP-recipient population (Castner and
Mabli 2010).\14\ It is therefore unclear whether these contextual
factors should contribute a net rise or fall in food expenditures in
the period of SNAP adoption. Because Figure 1 shows that these factors
trend substantially in the periods preceding SNAP adoption, we can
assess their net effect by studying trends in spending prior to
adoption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Past research also finds that unemployment--a likely cause of
the decline in income associated with SNAP adoption--is associated with
a small decline in spending on food for home consumption. Using cross-
sectional variation in the Continuing Survey of Food Intake by
Individuals, Aguiar and Hurst (2005) estimate that unemployment is
associated with nine percent lower at-home food expenditure. Using
pseudo-panel variation in the Family Expenditure Survey, Banks, et al.
(1998) estimate that unemployment is associated with a 7.6 percent
decline in the sum of food consumed in the home and domestic energy.
Using panel variation in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Gough
(2013) estimates that unemployment is associated with a statistically
insignificant one to four percent decline in at-home food expenditure.
Using panel variation in checking account records, Ganong and Noel
(2016) estimate that the onset of unemployment is associated with a 3.1
percent decline in at-home food expenditure. Aggregate data seem to
confirm these findings: real average annual at-home food expenditure
fell by 1.6 percent from 2006 to 2009, during which time the
unemployment rate more than doubled (Kumcu and Kaufman 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 1 therefore motivates our panel event-study research design,
in which we use trends in spending prior to SNAP adoption to diagnose
the direction and plausible magnitude of confounds.
2.3  Length of SNAP Spells and the Certification Process
When a state agency determines that a household is eligible for
SNAP, the agency sets a certification period at the end of which
benefits will terminate if the household has not documented continued
eligibility.\15\ The certification period may not exceed 24 months for
households whose adult members are elderly or disabled, and may not
exceed 12 months otherwise (FNS 2014). In practice, households are
frequently certified for exactly these lengths of time, or for other
lengths divisible by 6 months (Mills, et al., 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Federal rules state that ``the household's certification
period must not exceed the period of time during which the household's
circumstances (e.g., income, household composition, and residency) are
expected to remain stable'' (FNS 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 2 shows the distribution of SNAP spell lengths in Rhode
Island administrative data. The figure shows clear spikes in the
density at spell lengths divisible by 6 months.
Figure 2 motivates our instrumental variables research design,
which exploits the 6 month divisibility of certification periods as a
source of plausibly exogenous timing of program exit.
2.4 Legislated Changes in SNAP Benefit Schedules
Appendix Figure 1 shows the average monthly SNAP benefit per U.S.
household from February 2006 to December 2012, which coincides with the
time frame of our retail panel. The series exhibits two discrete jumps,
which correspond to two legislated changes in the benefit schedule: an
increase in October 2008 due to the 2008 Farm Bill and an increase in
April 2009 due to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
Appendix Figure 1 motivates our differences-in-differences research
design, which exploits these legislated benefit increases.
2.5  Inferring SNAP Adoption from Single-Retailer Data
Households can spend SNAP at any authorized retailer. We will
conduct our analysis of food spending using data from a single retail
chain. Changes in a household's choice of retailer could be mistaken
for program entry and exit in single-retailer data. We use our EBT
panel to evaluate the importance of these mistakes and to determine how
best to infer program transitions in single-retailer data.
For each K . 1,-,12  and for each household in our EBT panel, we
identify all cases of K consecutive months without SNAP spending at the
Rhode Island Retailer followed by K consecutive months with SNAP
spending at the Rhode Island Retailer. We then compute the share of
these transition periods in which the household newly enrolled in SNAP
within 2 months of the start of SNAP spending at the retailer, where we
define new enrollment as receipt of at least $10 in SNAP benefits
following a period of at least 3 consecutive months with no benefit.
Figure 3 plots the share of households newly enrolling in SNAP as a
function of the radius K of the transition period. For low values of K,
many transitions reflect retailer-switching rather than new enrollments
in SNAP. The fraction of transitions that represent new enrollments
increases with K. For K = 6 and above, the fraction constituting new
enrollments is over 86 percent. When we focus on households who do the
majority of their SNAP spending at the retailer in question--arguably a
sample more comparable to the households in our retail panel--this
fraction rises to 96 percent.
Figure 3 motivates our definition of SNAP adoption in the retailer
data.
2.6  SNAP Participation and Choice of Retailer
Even if we isolate suitably exogenous changes in SNAP participation
and benefits, our analysis of single-retailer data could be misleading
if SNAP participation directly affects retail choice.
Ver Ploeg, et al. (2015) study the types of stores at which SNAP
recipients shop using nationally representative survey data collected
from April 2012 through January 2013. For 46 percent of SNAP
recipients, the primary grocery retailer is a supercenter, for 43
percent it is a supermarket, for three percent it is another kind of
store, and for eight percent it is unknown. The corresponding values
for all U.S. households are 45 percent, 44 percent, four percent, and
seven percent. As with primary stores, the distribution of alternate
store types is nearly identical between SNAP recipients and the
population as a whole. SNAP recipients' choice of store type is also
nearly identical to that of low-income non-recipients. While this
evidence does not speak directly to the causal effect of SNAP on choice
of store type, it seems to cast doubt on the hypothesis that SNAP
receipt per se is a major factor determining where households shop.
As further evidence, a companion note to this paper analyzes
Nielsen Homescan data and finds little relationship at the state-year
level between changes in the market shares of major retailers and
changes in the number of SNAP recipients in the state.
In the next section we present further evidence on retailer
substitution using survey data collected by the retailer that supplied
our panel.
3  Retailer Data and Definitions
3.1  Purchases and Demographics
We obtained anonymized transaction-level data from a large U.S.
grocery retailer with gasoline stations on site. The data comprise all
purchases in five states made using loyalty cards by households who
shop at one of the retailer's stores at least every other month. We
observe 6.02 billion purchases made on 608 million purchase occasions
by 486,570 households from February 2006 through December 2012. We
exclude from our analysis the 1,214 households who spend more than
$5,000 in a single month.
For each household, we observe demographic characteristics
including age, household composition, and ZIP [C]ode. We use these data
in robustness checks and to study heterogeneity in our estimates.
For each item purchased, we observe the quantity, the pre-tax
amount paid, a flag for the use of WIC, and the dollar amount of
coupons or other discounts applied to the purchase. For each purchase
occasion, we observe the date, a store identifier, and a classification
of the store into a retailer division, a grouping based on the store's
brand and distribution geography. We also observe the main payment
method used for the purchase, defined as the payment method (e.g.,
cash, check, government benefit) accounting for the greatest share of
expenditure. For purchase occasions in March 2009 and later, we
additionally observe the exact breakdown of spending by payment method.
We classify a purchase occasion as a SNAP purchase occasion if the
main payment method is a government benefit and WIC is not used. Using
the detailed payment data for purchase occasions in March 2009 and
later, we calculate that SNAP is used in only 0.23 percent of the
purchase occasions that we do not classify as SNAP purchase occasions.
The appendix table shows that our key results are not sensitive to
excluding WIC users from the sample.
We define a SNAP month as any household-month with positive total
spending across SNAP purchase occasions.\16\ Of the household-months in
our panel, 7.8 percent are SNAP months. Of the households in our panel,
43 percent experience at least 1 SNAP month.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Using our detailed payment data for March 2009 and later, we
can alternatively define a SNAP month as any month in which a household
uses SNAP. This definition agrees with our principal definition in all
but 0.27 percent of household-months.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.2  Product Characteristics
The retailer provided us with data on the characteristics of each
product purchased, including an indicator for whether the product is
store-brand, a text description of the product, and the product's
location within a taxonomy.
We classify products as SNAP-eligible or SNAP-ineligible based on
the retailer's taxonomy and the guidelines for eligibility published on
the USDA website.\17\ Among all non-fuel purchases in our data, 71
percent of spending goes to SNAP-eligible products, 25 percent goes to
SNAP-ineligible products, and the remainder goes to products that we
cannot classify.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Grocery and prepared food items intended for home consumption
are generally SNAP-eligible (FNS 2017). Alcohol, tobacco, pet food, and
prepared food intended for on-premise consumption are SNAP-ineligible
(FNS 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We use our detailed payment data for purchases made in SNAP months
in March 2009 or later to validate our product eligibility
classification. Among all purchases made at least partly with SNAP in
which we classify all products as eligible or ineligible, in 98.6
percent of cases the expenditure share of SNAP-eligible products is at
least as large as the expenditure share paid with SNAP. Among purchases
made entirely with SNAP, in 98.7 percent of cases we classify no items
as SNAP-ineligible. Among purchases in which all items are classified
as SNAP-ineligible, in more than 99.9 percent of cases SNAP is not used
as a payment method.
3.3  Shopping Effort
For each household and month we compute the store-brand share of
expenditures and the share of items for which coupons are redeemed for
both SNAP-eligible and SNAP-ineligible purchases. Prior evidence
suggests that both of these can serve as a proxy for households'
efforts to save money.\18\ We adjust these measures for the composition
of purchases as follows. For each item purchased, we compute the store-
brand share of expenditure among other households buying an item in the
same product category in the same retailer division and the same
calendar month and week. The expenditure-weighted average of this
measure across purchases by a given household in a given month is the
predicted store-brand share, i.e., the share of expenditures that would
be store-brand if the household acted like others in the panel who buy
the same types of goods. Likewise, we compute the share of other
households buying the same item in the same retailer division, month,
and week who redeem coupons, and compute the average of this measure
across purchases by a given household in a given month to form a
predicted coupon use. We subtract the predicted from the actual value
of each shopping effort measure to form measures of adjusted store-
brand share and adjusted coupon redemption share.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Store-brand items tend to be less expensive than national-
brand alternatives, and correspondingly are more popular among lower-
income households (Bronnenberg, et al., 2015). Coupon use rose during
the Great Recession, reflecting households' greater willingness to
trade time for money (Nevo and Wong 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.4  Monthly Spending and Benefits
For each household in our panel we calculate total monthly spending
on SNAP-eligible items, fuel, and SNAP-ineligible items excluding fuel.
We calculate each household's total monthly SNAP benefits as the
household's total spending across all SNAP purchase occasions within
the month.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Our concept of total SNAP benefits has a correlation of 0.98
with the exact amount of SNAP spending calculated using detailed
payment information in SNAP months March 2009 and later.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our data corroborate prior evidence (e.g., Hoynes, et al., 2015)
that, for most households, SNAP benefits do not cover all SNAP-eligible
spending. For 93 percent of households who ever use SNAP, average SNAP-
eligible spending in non-SNAP months exceeds average SNAP benefits in
SNAP months. SNAP-eligible spending exceeds SNAP benefits by at least
$10 in 93 percent of SNAP months and by at least five percent in 92
percent of SNAP months. The appendix table reports estimates of key
parameters for the subset of households for whom, according to various
definitions, SNAP benefits are inframarginal to total food spending.
3.5  SNAP Adoption
Motivated by the analysis in section 2.5, we define a SNAP adoption
as a period of 6 or more consecutive non-SNAP months followed by a
period of 6 or more consecutive SNAP months. We refer to the first SNAP
month in an adoption as an adoption month. We define a SNAP adopter as
a household with at least one SNAP adoption. Our panel contains a total
of 24,456 SNAP adopters.
Panel A of Figure 4 shows the share of SNAP adopters with positive
SNAP spending in each of the 12 months before and after a household's
first SNAP adoption. Panel B of Figure 4 shows average SNAP benefits
before and after adoption. Following adoption, the average household
receives about $200 in monthly SNAP benefits. For comparison, the
average U.S. SNAP benefit per household in fiscal 2009, roughly at the
midpoint of our sample period, was $276 (FNS 2016a).
We conduct the bulk of our analysis using the sample of SNAP
adopters. The appendix tablepresents our key results for alternative
samples.
3.6  Retailer Share of Wallet
Spending patterns suggest that panelists buy a large fraction of
their groceries at the retailer. Mabli and Malsberger (2013) estimate
average 2010 spending on food at home by SNAP recipients of $380 per
month using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Hoynes et al.
(2015) find that average per-household food expenditures are 20 to 25
percent lower in the Consumer Expenditure Survey than in the
corresponding aggregates from the National Income and Product Accounts.
In the 6 months following a SNAP adoption, average monthly SNAP-
eligible spending in our data is $469.
Panelists also seem to buy a large fraction of their gasoline at
the retailer: average monthly fuel spending at the retailer is $97 in
the 6 months following SNAP adoption, as compared to Mabli and
Malsberger's (2013) estimate of $115.
Survey data from the retailer suggest that SNAP use is associated
with a reduction in the retailer's share of overall category spending.
During the period June 2009 to December 2011, the retailer conducted an
online survey on a convenience sample of customers. The survey asked:

About what percentage of your total overall expenses for
groceries, household supplies, or personal care items do you,
yourself, spend in the following stores?

Respondents were presented with a list of retail chains including the
one from which we obtained our data. Excluding responses in which the
reported percentages do not sum to 100, we observe at least one
response from 961 of the households in our panel. Among survey
respondents that ever use SNAP, the average reported share of wallet
for the retailer is 0.61 for those surveyed during non-SNAP months (N =
311 survey responses) and 0.53 for those surveyed during SNAP months (N
= 80 survey responses).\20\ The same qualitative pattern obtains among
SNAP adopters, and in responses to a retrospective question about
shopping frequency.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ The difference in means is statistically significant (t =
2.15, p = 0.032).
\21\ The question asks, ``In your opinion, do you think you,
yourself have been shopping more, less, or about the same amount at the
retailer over the past 3 months?'' Among households surveyed in a SNAP
month, 60 percent report that their frequency of shopping at the
retailer has stayed ``about the same.'' Among those saying that it has
not stayed the same, a majority (59 percent) say that it has decreased.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taken at face value, these findings suggest that retailer
substitution will tend, if anything, to bias downward the estimated
effect of SNAP participation on food spending. In the appendix table we
verify that our results are robust to restricting attention to
households with relatively few supermarkets in their county, for whom
opportunities to substitute across retailers are presumably more
limited.
4  Descriptive Evidence
4.1  Marginal Propensity To Consume Out of SNAP Benefits
Figure 5 shows the evolution of monthly spending before and after
SNAP adoption for our sample of SNAP adopters. Each plot shows
coefficients from a regression of spending on a vector of indicators
for months relative to the household's first SNAP adoption. Panel A
shows that SNAP-eligible spending increases by approximately $110 in
the first few months following SNAP adoption. Recall from Figure 4 that
the average household receives monthly SNAP benefits of approximately
$200 following SNAP adoption. Taking the ratio of the increase in
spending to the benefit amount, we estimate an MPCF out of SNAP
benefits between 0.5 and 0.6.
Panel B shows that SNAP-ineligible spending increases by
approximately $5 following SNAP adoption, implying an MPC of a few
percentage points. The increase in SNAP-ineligible spending is smaller
in both absolute and proportional terms than the increase in SNAP-
eligible spending. The online appendix shows directly that the share of
spending devoted to SNAP-eligible items increases significantly
following SNAP adoption. This finding is not consistent with the
hypothesis that SNAP leads to a proportional increase in spending
across all categories due to substitution away from competing
retailers.
Following the analysis in section 2.2, trends in spending prior to
adoption should provide a sense of the influence of changes in
contextual factors on spending. Panel A shows very little trend in
SNAP-eligible spending prior to SNAP adoption. Panel B shows, if
anything, a slight decline in SNAP-ineligible spending prior to
adoption, perhaps due to economic hardship. Neither of these patterns
seems consistent with the hypothesis that the large increase in SNAP-
eligible spending that occurs at SNAP adoption is driven by changes in
contextual factors.
Figure 6 shows the evolution of monthly spending during a monthly
clock that begins at SNAP adoption and resets every 6 months. Panels A
and B show that SNAP participation and benefits fall especially quickly
in the first month of the clock, consistent with the finding in section
2.3 that SNAP spell lengths tend to be divisible by 6 months.
Participation and benefits also fall more quickly in the sixth month,
perhaps reflecting error in our classification of adoption dates.
Panel C of Figure 6 shows that the pattern of SNAP-eligible
spending closely follows that of SNAP benefits. Benefits decline by
about $12 more in the first month of the cycle than in the second.
Correspondingly, SNAP-eligible spending declines by $6 to $7 more in
the first month than in the second. Taking the ratio of these two
values implies an MPCF out of SNAP benefits between 0.5 and 0.6,
consistent with the evidence in Figure 5.
Appendix Figure 2 plots the evolution of SNAP-eligible spending
around the legislated benefit changes described in section 2.4. The
plot shows that likely SNAP recipients' SNAP-eligible spending
increases relative to that of likely non-recipients around the periods
of benefit increases. The online appendix reports the results of a
differences-in-differences analysis of these changes in the spirit of
Bruich (2014) and Beatty and Tuttle (2015). We estimate an MPCF out of
SNAP benefits of 0.53, and if anything a negative effect of benefit
expansions on SNAP-ineligible spending.
4.2  Marginal Propensity To Consume Out of Cash
Two pieces of indirect evidence suggest that an MPCF out of SNAP of
0.5 to 0.6 is too large to be consistent with households treating SNAP
benefits as fungible with other income.
The first is that, for the average SNAP recipient, food at home
represents only 22 percent of total expenditure (Castner and Mabli
2010). Engel's Law (Engel 1857; Houthakker 1957) holds that the budget
share of food declines with total resources, and hence that the budget
share exceeds the MPCF. Engel's Law is not consistent with a budget
share of 0.22 and an MPCF of 0.5 to 0.6.
The second is that prior estimates of the MPCF out of cash for low-
income populations are far below 0.5. Castner and Mabli (2010) estimate
an MPCF of 0.07 for SNAP recipients. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009)
estimate an MPCF of 0.09-0.10 for populations with a high likelihood of
entering the Food Stamp Program. Assessing the literature, Hoynes and
Schanzenbach (2009) note that across ``a wide range of data (cross
sectional, time series) and econometric methods'' past estimates of the
MPCF out of cash income are in a ``quite tight'' range from 0.03 to
0.17 for low-income populations.
For more direct evidence, we study the effect on spending of the
large changes in gasoline prices during our sample period. These
changes affect the disposable income available to households and
therefore give us a window into the MPCF out of cash income.
Panel A of Figure 7 shows the time-series relationship between
gasoline prices and fuel expenditure for SNAP adopters at different
quartiles of the distribution of average fuel expenditure. Those
households in the upper quartiles exhibit substantial changes in fuel
expenditure when the price of gasoline changes. For example, during the
run-up in fuel prices in 2007, part of an upward trend often attributed
to increasing demand for oil from Asian countries (e.g., Kilian 2010),
households in the top quartile of fuel spending increased their
spending on fuel by almost $100 per month. Households in lower
quartiles increased their fuel spending by much less.
Panel B of Figure 7 shows the time-series relationship between
gasoline prices and SNAP-eligible expenditure for the same groups of
households. The relationship between the two series does not appear
consistent with an MPCF out of cash income of 0.5 to 0.6. For example,
if the MPCF out of cash income were 0.5 we would expect households in
the top quartile of fuel spending to decrease SNAP-eligible spending
significantly during the run-up in fuel prices in 2007. In fact, we see
no evidence of such a pattern, either looking at the top quartile in
isolation, or comparing it to the lower quartiles.
The absence of a strong response of SNAP-eligible spending to fuel
prices is consistent with prior evidence of a low MPCF out of cash. It
is not consistent with the hypothesis that changes in income drive
large changes in the retailer's share of wallet, as such income effects
would lead to a relationship between gasoline prices and measured SNAP-
eligible spending.
4.3  Quantitative Summary
Table 1 presents two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of a
series of linear regression models. In each model the dependent
variable is the change in spending from the preceding month to the
current month. The endogenous regressors are the change in the SNAP
benefit and the change in the additive inverse of fuel spending. The
coefficients on these endogenous regressors can be interpreted as MPCs.
Each model includes calendar month fixed effects. (Household fixed
effects are implicit in the first-differencing of the variables in the
model.)
All models use the interaction of the change in the price of
regular gasoline and the household's average monthly number of gallons
of gasoline purchased as an excluded instrument. This instrument
permits estimating the MPC out of cash following the logic of Figure 7.
Models (1), (2), and (3) of Table 1 all use the change in SNAP-
eligible spending as the dependent variable. The models differ in the
choice of excluded instruments for SNAP benefits. In model (1), the
instrument is an indicator for whether the month is an adoption month.
In model (2), it is an indicator for whether the month is the first
month of the 6 month SNAP clock. These instruments permit estimating
the MPCF out of SNAP following the logic of Figures 5 and 6,
respectively. In model (3), both of these instruments are used.
Estimates of models (1), (2), and (3) indicate an MPCF out of SNAP
between 0.55 and 0.59 and an MPCF out of cash close to 0. In model (3),
confidence intervals exclude an MPCF out of SNAP below 0.57 and an MPCF
out of cash above 0.1. In all cases, we reject the null hypothesis that
the MPCF out of SNAP is equal to the MPCF out of cash.
Model (4) parallels model (3) but uses SNAP-ineligible spending as
the dependent variable. We estimate an MPC out of SNAP of 0.02 and an
MPC out of cash of 0.04. We cannot reject the hypothesis that these two
MPCs are equal.
The appendix table shows that the conclusion that the MPCF out of
SNAP exceeds the MPCF out of cash holds when we exclude households for
whom SNAP benefits may not be economically equivalent to cash, and
restrict to single-adult households to limit the role of intra-
household bargaining.
The online appendix reports that the implied MPCF out of SNAP is
slightly higher in the household's first SNAP adoption than in
subsequent SNAP adoptions. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the
MPCF is equal between first and subsequent adoptions. The online
appendix also reports estimates of the MPCF out of SNAP and cash for
various demographic groups.
5  Model and Tests for Fungibility
5.1  Model
In each month t . 1,-,T , household i receives SNAP benefits
b
it
% 0 and disposable cashincome y
it
> 0. The
household chooses food expenditure fit and nonfood expenditure nit to
solve
(1)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

where j
it
is a preference shock and U
i
() is a
utility function strictly increasing in
and n. The variables
(b
it
,y
it
, x
it
) are random with support
V
i
.
Assumption 1. For each household i, optimal food spending can be
written as
(2)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

where f
i
() is a function with range [0,y
it
+
b
it
].
A sufficient condition for assumption 1 is that, for each household
i, at any point (b,y,j) . V
i
the function U
i

(
,y+b^
;j) is smooth and strictly concave in

and has a stationary point

*
> b. Then
optimal food spending exceeds the level of SNAP benefits even if
benefits are disbursed as cash, so the ``kinked'' budget constraint in
(1) does not affect the choice of f
it
.
For each household and month, an econometrician observes data
(

it
,b
it
,y
it
,z
it
)
where z
it
is a vector of instruments. A concern is that
x
it
is determined partly by contextual factors such as job
loss that directly affect y
it
and b
it
.
Assumption 2. Let n
it
=
(y
it
+b
it
)^E(y
it
+b
it
D
z
it
). For each household i, the instruments z
it

satisfy
(3)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Proposition 1. Under assumptions 1 and 2, for each household i
(4)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

for some function q
i
().
Proof. Let P
i
denote the CDF of
(j
it
,v
it
). Then

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

where the first equality follows from assumption 1 and the second from
assumption 2. See Blundell and Powell (2003, p. 330).
Example. (Cobb-Douglas) Suppose that for each household i there is
b
i
. (0,1) such that:
(5)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

with b
i
(y+b)+j > b and (1^b
i
) (y+b) > j at all
points in V
i
. Then assumption 1 holds with
(6)

and, under assumption 2, proposition 1 applies with
(7)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

for a
i
6 E(j
it
).
Remark 1. In his study of a child tax credit in the Netherlands,
Kooreman (2000) assumes a version of (6), which he estimates via
ordinary least squares using cross-sectional data under various
restrictions on a
i
, b
i
, and j
it
.
5.2  Testing for Fungibility
Index a family of perturbations to the model by g. Let

g
it
be food spending under perturbation g, with
(8)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

for

i
() the function defined in assumption 1. We
may think of g as the excess sensitivity of food spending to SNAP
benefits. The null hypothesis that the model holds is equivalent under
(8) to g = 0.
Let Y
it
= E(y
it
+
b
it
Dz
it
) and B
it
=
E(b
it
Dz
it
) and observe that
(9)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

where E(e
it
DY
it
,B
it
) = 0. The nuisance
terms q
i
() have been ``partialled out'' of (9) as in
Robinson (1988). The target g can be estimated via OLS regression of
(
g
it
^ E
(
g
it
DY
it
)) on (B
it
^E
(B
it
DY
it
)).
Remark 2. It is possible to allow for measurement error in

it
that depends on
(y
it
+b
it
). Say that for known function m(),
unobserved measurement error h
it
independent of
z
it
, and unknown function l
it
() we have that
measured food spending f
it
follows
(10)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Then under perturbations m((
g
it
) =
m(

it
) + gb
it
an analogue of (9) holds,
replacing
g
it
with m(
g
it
).
Examples include additive measurement error, where m() is the identity
function, and multiplicative measurement error, where m() is the
natural logarithm. The latter case has a simple interpretation as one
in which the econometrician observes spending at a single retailer
whose share of total household food spending is given by exp (l
it

(y
it
+b
it
,h
it
)).
Remark 3. The reasoning above is unchanged if b
it
and
y
it
are each subject to an additive measurement error that
is mean-independent of z
it
. In this case, we can simply let
Y
it
and B
it
represent the conditional
expectations of the corresponding mismeasured variables.
5.3  Implementation and Results
With (9) in mind, estimation proceeds in three steps:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

We let
g
it
be SNAP-eligible spending, b
it

be SNAP benefits, and y
it
be the additive inverse of fuel
spending. We let the instruments z
it
be given by the number
of SNAP adoptions experienced by household i as of calendar month t,
and the product of the average price of regular gasoline with the
household's average monthly number of gallons of gasoline purchased.
In step 1, we estimate (Y
it
,B
it
) via first-
differenced regression of (y
it
+b
it
) and b
it

on z
it
.
In step 2, we consider four specifications for estimating
(E(
g
it
DY
it
) ,
E(B
it
DY
it
)). In the first, we estimate these via
first-differenced regression of
g
it
and B
it

on Y
it
, pooling across households. In the second, we
estimate these via first-differenced regression of
g
it

and B
it
on Y
it
, separately by household. In the
third, we estimate these via first-differenced regression of

g
it
and B
it
on indicators for the
quintiles of Y
it
, separately by household. In the fourth, we
estimate these via locally weighted polynomial regression of

g
it
and B
it
on Y
it
,
separately by household. Thus, the first specification implicitly
treats q
i
as linear and homogeneous across households, the
second treats q
i
as linear and heterogeneous across
households, and the third and fourth allow q
i
to be
nonlinear and heterogeneous across households.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Table 2 presents the results. Across all three specifications, our
estimates of g are 0.5 or greater, and in all cases we can reject the
null hypothesis that g = 0 with a high level of confidence.
6  Interpretation
We speculate that households treat SNAP benefits as part of a
separate mental account, psychologically earmarked for spending on
food. In this section we discuss results of qualitative interviews
conducted at a food pantry in Rhode Island. We then present
quantitative evidence that we think suggests a mental accounting
explanation, and present a post-hoc model of mental accounting that
rationalizes this evidence.
6.1  Qualitative Interviews with SNAP-Recipient Households
As part of preparation related to a state proposal to pilot a
change to SNAP benefit distribution, Rhode Island Innovative Policy
Laboratory staff conducted a series of qualitative interviews at a
large food pantry in Rhode Island in May, July, and August 2016.
Interviewees were approached in the waiting room of the pantry and were
offered a $5 gift card to a grocery retailer in exchange for
participating. Interviews were conducted in English and Spanish.
Interviewees were selected from those waiting to be served at the
food pantry and were not sampled scientifically. Interviews were
conducted primarily to inform the implementation of the pilot program
and the responses should not be taken to imply any generalizable
conclusions. We report them here as context for our quantitative
evidence.
Of the 25 interviews conducted, 19 were with current SNAP
recipients. Of these, all but three reported spending non-SNAP funds on
groceries each month, with an average out-of-pocket spending of $100
for those reporting positive out-of-pocket spending.
Each interviewee was asked the following two questions, which we
refer to as SNAP and CASH:

(SNAP) Imagine that in addition your current benefit, you
received an extra $100 in SNAP benefits at the beginning of the
month. How would this change the way that you spend your money
during the month? [emphasis added]
(CASH) Imagine that you received an additional $100 in cash
at the beginning of the month. How would this change the way
that you spend your money during the month? [emphasis added]

Of the 16 SNAP-recipient interviewees who report nonzero out-of-pocket
spending on groceries, 14 chose to answer questions SNAP and CASH.
Interviewers recorded verbal responses to each question as
faithfully as possible. The most frequently occurring word in response
to the SNAP question is ``food,'' which occurs in eight of the 14
responses. Incorporating mentions of specific foods or food-related
terms like ``groceries,'' the fraction mentioning food rises to ten out
of 14 responses. The word ``food'' occurs in three of the 14 responses
to CASH; more general food related terms occur in five of the 14
responses to CASH.
Several responses seem to suggest a difference in how the household
would spend $100 depending on the form in which it arrives. For
example, in response to question SNAP one interviewee said ``[I would]
buy more food.'' In response to CASH the same interviewee said ``[I
would buy] more household necessities.'' Another interviewee said in
response to SNAP that ``[I would buy] more food, but the same type of
expenses. If I bought $10 of sugar, now [I would buy] $20.'' In
response to CASH, the same interviewee said that ``[I would spend it
on] toilet paper, soap, and other necessary home stuff, or medicine.''
A third interviewee said in response to SNAP that ``I would buy more
food and other types of food . . .'' and in response to CASH that ``I
could buy basic things that I can't buy with [SNAP].'' \22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ The bracketed term is a translation for the Spanish word
cupones. This word is literally translated as ``coupons'' but is often
used to refer to SNAP. (See, for example, Project Bread 2016.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some responses suggest behavior consistent with inframarginality.
For example one interviewee's answer to SNAP included the observation
that ``I would probably spend $100 less out of pocket,'' although this
interviewee also mentions increasing household expenditures on seafood
and produce. Another interviewee answered SNAP with ``[I] would spend
all in food, and also buy soap [and] things for [my] two kids.''
6.2  Quantitative Evidence on Shopping Effort
If SNAP recipients consider SNAP benefits to be earmarked for food,
they may view a dollar saved on food as less valuable than a dollar
saved on non-food purchases. To test this hypothesis, we study the
effect of SNAP on bargain-seeking behavior.
Figure 8 shows the evolution of the adjusted store-brand share
before and after SNAP receipt for our sample of SNAP adopters. Each
plot shows coefficients from a regression of the adjusted store-brand
share on a vector of indicators for months relative to SNAP adoption.
Among SNAP-eligible items, panel A shows a trend towards a greater
store-brand share prior to SNAP adoption, perhaps reflecting the
deterioration in households' economic well-being that normally triggers
entry into a means-tested program. Once households adopt SNAP, there is
a marked and highly statistically significant drop in the store-brand
share. Because we have adjusted store-brand share for the composition
of purchases, this decline is driven not by changes in the categories
of goods purchased, but by a change in households' choice of brand
within a category.
Panel B of Figure 8 shows an analogous plot for SNAP-ineligible
items. The adjusted storebrand share of SNAP-ineligible expenditure
rises before SNAP adoption and does not decline significantly following
adoption. Regression analysis presented in the online appendix shows
that we can confidently reject the hypothesis that the change in
adjusted store-brand share at SNAP adoption is equal between SNAP-
eligible and SNAP-ineligible products.
Figure 9 shows analogous evidence for coupon use. Following SNAP
adoption, the average adjusted coupon redemption share declines for
both SNAP-eligible and SNAP-ineligible products, but the decline is
more economically and statistically significant for SNAP-eligible
products than for SNAP-ineligible products. Because we have adjusted
the coupon redemption share for the basket of goods purchased, these
patterns are not driven by changes in the goods purchased, but rather
by households' propensity to redeem coupons for a given basket of
goods. Regression analysis presented in the online appendix shows that
we can reject the hypothesis that the change in the adjusted coupon
redemption share at SNAP adoption is equal between SNAP-eligible and
SNAP-ineligible products.
6.3  Post-Hoc Model of Mental Accounting
To fix ideas and rationalize the preceding evidence, we specify a
model of mental accounting based on Farhi and Gabaix (2015). Return to
the setup of section 5, considering for ease of notation a single
household and time period, and ignoring the preference shock j. Let
preferences over food consumption
and non-food consumption n
be Cobb-Douglas, and suppose that the household can exert effort
s
f
% 0 and s
n
% 0, respectively, to reduce the
cost of a given unit of consumption in the food and non-food domains,
respectively. Finally, suppose that the household exhibits a distaste
for deviating from a psychological default level of food spending,
determined in part by the earmarking of SNAP benefits. Formally, write
the household's problem as
(11)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Here, the function c (), which is smooth and strictly increasing in its
argument, describes the cost of shopping effort. The function d (),
which is smooth, strictly decreasing and strictly convex, describes the
return to shopping effort in terms of prices paid. The parameter k > 0
indexes the importance of sticking to the household's default plan to
spend amount b of SNAP benefits and amount by of cash income on food.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In this sense, the model in (11) can rationalize both the tendency
to consume food out of SNAP in greater proportion than out of cash
income, and the tendency to reduce bargain-hunting in the food domain
(relative to the non-food domain) after receipt of SNAP. The model is
post-hoc in that the specification of the target spending (by + b) is
arbitrary and does not derive from portable psychological primitives.
7  Conclusions
We use data from a novel retail panel to study the effect of the
receipt of SNAP benefits on household spending behavior. Novel
administrative data motivates three approaches to causal inference. We
find that the MPCF out of SNAP benefits is 0.5 to 0.6 and larger than
the MPCF out of cash. We argue that these findings are not consistent
with households treating SNAP funds as fungible with non-SNAP funds,
and we support this claim with formal tests of fungibility that allow
different households to have different consumption functions.
We speculate that households treat SNAP benefits as part of a
separate mental account. Responses to hypothetical choice scenarios in
qualitative interviews suggest that some households plan to spend SNAP
benefits differently from cash. Quantitative evidence shows that, after
SNAP receipt, households reduce shopping effort for SNAP-eligible
products more so than for SNAP-ineligible products. A post-hoc model of
mental accounting based on Farhi and Gabaix (2015) rationalizes these
facts.

References

Abeler, Johannes and Felix Marklein. Forthcoming. Fungibility,
labels, and consumption. Journal of the European Economic Association.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2005. Consumption versus expenditure.
Journal of Political Economy 113(5): 919-948.
Ahmed, Naeem, Matthew Brzozowski, and Thomas F. Crossley. 2006.
Measurement errors in recall food consumption data. Institute for
Fiscal Studies Working Paper 06/21.
Anderson, Theresa, John A. Kirlin, and Michael Wiseman. 2012.
Pulling together: Linking unemployment insurance and Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program administrative data to study effects of
the Great Recession. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service.
Andreyeva, Tatiana, Joerg Luedicke, Kathryn E. Henderson, and Amanda
S. Tripp. 2012. Grocery store beverage choices by participants in
Federal food assistance and nutrition programs. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 43 (4): 411-418.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sarah Tanner. 1998. Is there a
retirement-savings puzzle? American Economic Review 88(4): 769-788.
Battistin, Erich and Mario Padula. 2016. Survey instruments and the
reports of consumption expenditures: Evidence from the Consumer
Expenditure Surveys. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A
(Statistics in Society) 179(2): 559-581.
Beatty, Timothy K.M. and Charlotte J. Tuttle. 2015. Expenditure
response to increases in in-kind transfers: Evidence from the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 97(2): 390-404.
Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas,
and Victor Pouliquen. 2015. Turning a shove into a nudge? A ``labeled
cash transfer'' for education. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 7(3): 86-125.
Bitler, Marianne P. 2015. The health and nutrition effects of SNAP:
Selection into the program and a review of the literature on its
effects. In J. Bartfeld, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J.P. Ziliak
(eds.), SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being: 134-
160. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Blundell, Richard W., Martin Browning, and Ian A. Crawford. 2003.
Nonparametric Engel curves and revealed preference. Econometrica 71(1):
205-240.
Blundell, Richard and James L. Powell. 2003. Endogeneity in
nonparametric and semiparametric regression models. In M. Dewatripont,
L.P. Hansen, and S.J. Turnovsky (eds.), Advances in Economics and
Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress 2: 312-
357. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse
M. Shapiro. 2015. Do pharmacists buy Bayer? Informed shoppers and the
brand premium. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(4): 1669-1726.
Browning, Edgar K. and Mark A. Zupan. 2004. Microeconomics: Theory
and Applications. 8th ed. Hoboken: Wiley.
Browning, Martin, Thomas F. Crossley, and Joachim Winter. 2014. The
measurement of household consumption expenditures. Annual Review of
Economics 6(1): 475-501.
Bruich, Gregory A. 2014. The effect of SNAP benefits on
expenditures: New evidence from scanner data and the November 2013
benefit cuts. Harvard University. Mimeo. Accessed at http://
scholar.harvard.edu/files/bruich/files/bruich_2014b.pdf on May 5, 2016.
Castner, Laura and James Mabli. 2010. Low-income household spending
patterns and measures of poverty. Washington, D.C.: Mathematica Policy
Research.
Collins, Ann M., Ronette Briefel, Jacob Alex Klerman, Anne Wolf,
Gretchen Rowe, Chris Logan, Ayesha Enver, Syeda Fatima, Anne Gordon,
and Julia Lyskawa. 2016. Summer Electronic Benefit Transfer for
Children (SEBCT) Demonstration: Summary Report. Accessed at http://
www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/ops/sebtcfinalreport.pdf on
January 5, 2016.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. The Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program. Accessed at https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/
112th-congress-2011-2012/reports/04-19-SNAP.pdf on May 5, 2016.
____. 2013. Accessed at https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/
113th-congress-2013-2014/graphic/43935-means-tested-infographic0.pdf on
May 5, 2016.
Engel, Ernst. 1857. Die Productions- und Consumtionsverhaltnisse des
Konigreichs Sachsen. Zeitschrift des statistischen Bureaus des
Koniglich Sachsischen Ministerium des Inneren 8-9: 1-54.
Fan, Jianqing and Irene Gijbels. 1996. Local Polynomial Modelling
and Its Applications. London, UK: Chapman and Hall.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. Optimal taxation with
behavioral agents. NBER Working Paper No. 21524.
Feldman, Naomi E. 2010. Mental accounting effects of income tax
shifting. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1): 70-86.
FNS. 2012. Building a healthy America: A profile of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program. Accessed at http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/
default/files/BuildingHealthyAmerica.pdf on May 5, 2016.
____. 2014. FNS Handbook 501, Chapter 5. Accessed at http://
www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/
FNSHANDBOOK_501_Chap5_4_2014_new.pdf on January 5, 2016.
____. 2016a. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. Accessed at
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-
snap on May 25, 2016.
____. 2016b. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP):
Eligibility. Accessed at http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility on
January 5, 2016.
____. 2017. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP):
Eligible Food Items. Accessed at http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligible-
food-items on January 14, 2017.
Fox, Mary Kay, William Hamilton, and Biing-Hwan Lin. 2004. Effects
of food assistance and nutrition programs on nutrition and health:
Volume 3, literature review. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic
Research Service.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel. 2016. How does unemployment affect
consumer spending? Harvard University Working Paper, January 2016.
Garasky, Steven, Kassim Mbwana, Andres Romualdo, Alex Tenaglio, and
Manan Roy. 2016. Foods typically purchased by Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) households. U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Food and Nutrition Service.
Gough, Margaret. 2013. How do unemployment and recessions affect
time in food preparation and food expenditures within the family?
Population Association of America Annual Meeting Conference Paper.
Hastings, Justine S. and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. Fungibility and
consumer choice: Evidence from commodity price shocks. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128(4): 1449-1498.
Heath, Chip and Jack B. Soll. 1996. Mental budgeting and consumer
decisions. Journal of Consumer Research 23(1): 40-52.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. 1957. An international comparison of
household expenditure patterns, commemorating the centenary of Engel's
law. Econometrica 25(4): 532-551.
Hoynes, Hilary W., Leslie McGranahan, and Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach. 2015. SNAP and food consumption. In J. Bartfeld, C.
Gundersen, T. Smeeding, and J. P. Ziliak (eds.), SNAP Matters: How Food
Stamps Affect Health and Well Being: 107-133. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2009. Consumption
responses to in-kind transfers: Evidence from the introduction of the
Food Stamp Program. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(4):
109-139.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2016. U.S. food
and nutrition programs. In R. Moffit (ed.), Economics of Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume I: 219-302. Chicago;
London: The University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, Lyndon B. 1964. Remarks upon signing the Food Stamp Act.
Accessed at http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=26472 on May 5,
2016.
Ketcham, Jonathan D., Nicolai V. Kuminoff, and Christopher A.
Powers. 2016. Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence from
plan choice in the Medicare Part D program: Comment. American Economic
Review 106(12): 3932-3961.
Kilian, Lutz. 2010. Explaining fluctuations in gasoline prices: A
joint model of the global crude oil market and the U.S. retailer
gasoline market. The Energy Journal 31(2): 87-112.
Kooreman, Peter. 2000. The labeling effect of a child benefit
system. American Economic Review 90(3): 571-583.
Kumcu, Aylin and Phillip Kaufman. 2011. Food spending adjustments
during recessionary times. Amber Waves September 1, 2011. Accessed at
http://www.ers.usda.gov/amber-waves/2011-september/food-
spending.aspx#.V2gqeXoqsYS on June 20, 2016.
Leung, Pauline and Christopher J. O'Leary. 2015. Should UI
eligibility be expanded to low-earning workers? Evidence on employment,
transfer receipt and income from administrative data. Upjohn Institute
Working Paper 15-236.
Li, Yiran, Bradford Mills, George C. Davis, and Elton Mykerezi.
2014. Child food insecurity and the food stamp program: What a
difference monthly data make. Social Service Review 88(2): 332-348.
Mabli, James and Rosalie Malsberger. 2013. Recent trends in spending
patterns of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program participants and
other low-income Americans. Monthly Labor Review, September 2013.
Mankiw, Gregory N. 2000. Principles of Microeconomics. Boston:
Cengage Learning.
Milkman, Katherine L. and John Bashears. 2009. Mental accounting and
small windfalls: Evidence from an online grocer. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 71(2): 384-394.
Mills, Gregory, Tracy Vericker, Heather Koball, Kye Lippold, Laura
Wheaton, and Sam Elkin. 2014. Understanding the rates, causes, and
costs of churning in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP)--Final report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Service.
Moffitt, Robert. 1989. Estimating the value of an in-kind transfer:
The case of food stamps. Econometrica 57(2): 385-409.
Nevo, Aviv and Arlene Wong. 2015. The elasticity of substitution
between time and market goods: Evidence from the Great Recession. NBER
Working Paper No. 21318.
Nord, Mark and Mark Prell. 2011. Food security improved following
the 2009 ARRA increase in SNAP benefits. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Project Bread. 2016. Can I Get SNAP? Accessed at http://
www.gettingfoodstamps.org/espanol/canigetsnap.html on January 7, 2016.
Rainwater, Lee, Richard P. Coleman, and Gerald Handel. 1959.
Workingman's Wife: Her Personality, World and Life Style. New York:
Oceana Publications.
Ratcliffe, Caroline, Signe-Mary McKernan, and Sisi Zhang. 2011. How
much does the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program reduce food
insecurity? American Journal of Agricultural Economics 93(4): 1082-
1098.
Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training. 2016. 2016 UI and TDI
Quick Reference. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20160104022814/
http://www.dlt.ri.gov/lmi/news/quickref.htm on December 22, 2016.
Robinson, Peter M. 1988. Root-N-consistent semiparametric
regression. Econometrica 56(4): 931-954.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore. 2002. What are food stamps worth?
Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No.
468.
Thaler, Richard H. 1999. Mental accounting matters. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making 12(3): 183-206.
Thompson, Samuel B. 2011. Simple formulas for standard errors that
cluster by both firm and time. Journal of Financial Economics 99(1): 1-
10.
Trippe, Carole and Daisy Ewell. 2007. An analysis of cash food
expenditures of food stamp households. Washington, D.C.: Mathematica
Policy Research.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010. County Business Patterns. Accessed at
http://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2010/econ/cbp/2010-cbp.html on June
15, 2016.
____. 2016. Accessed at http://www.census.gov/quickfacts/table/
PST045215/00 on May 5, 2016.
Varian, Hal R. 1983. Non-parametric tests of consumer behaviour.
Review of Economic Studies 50(1): 99-110.
Ver Ploeg, Michele, Lisa Mancino, Jessica E. Todd, Dawn Marie Clay,
and Benjamin Scharadin. 2015. Where do Americans usually shop for food
and how do they travel to get there? Initial findings from the National
Household Food Acquisition and Purchase Survey. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Wilde, Parke E. 2001. The food stamp benefit formula: Implications
for empirical research on food demand. Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics 26(1): 75-90.
Wilde, Parke E. and Christine Ranney. 1996. The distinct impact of
food stamps on food spending. Journal of Agricultural and Resource
Economics 21(1): 174-185.
Wilde, Parke E., Lisa M. Troy, and Beatrice L. Rogers. 2009. Food
stamps and food spending: An Engel function approach. American Journal
of Agricultural Economics 91(2): 416-430.
Yen, Steven T., Margaret Andrews, Zhuo Chen, and David B. Eastwood.
2008. Food Stamp Program participation and food insecurity: An
instrumental variables approach. American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 90(1): 117-132.

Table 1: Estimated Marginal Propensities To Consume

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Table 2: Tests of Fungibility

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 1: Household income and size before and after SNAP adoption
Panel A: Household Income

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: Number of Children Under Five Years of Age

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Data are from Rhode Island administrative records from
October 2004 through June 2016. See section 2.1 for details on
sample definition and variable construction. Each panel plots
coefficients from a regression of the dependent variable on a
vector of lead and lagged indicators for periods relative to
SNAP adoption, defined as the first period in which the
household receives SNAP. The period immediately prior to
adoption (``^1'') is the omitted category. Each regression
includes time period fixed effects, household fixed effects,
and indicators for observations more than 1 year before or
after adoption. In panel A, a time period is a calendar quarter
and the unit of analysis is a household-quarter. In panel B, a
time period is a month and the unit of analysis is the
household-month. In both panels, the error bars are R2
coefficient standard errors and standard errors are clustered
by household. Dotted lines show the sample mean of the
dependent variable across observations within 1 year (4
quarters or 12 months) of SNAP adoption. Each coefficient
series is shifted by a constant so that the observation-count-
weighted mean of the regression coefficients is equal to the
sample mean of the corresponding dependent variable.
Figure 2: Distribution of Lengths of SNAP Spells

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Data are from Rhode Island administrative records from
October 2004 through June 2016. See section 2.1 for details on
sample definition and variable construction. The plot shows a
histogram of the distribution of SNAP spell lengths, where a
spell is defined as a set of consecutive months in which the
household is entitled to a SNAP benefit in each month according
to state program records. Spells longer than 36 months are
excluded from the sample.
Figure 3: Inferring SNAP Adoption from Single-Retailer Data

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Data are from Rhode Island EBT transaction records
from September 2012 through October 2015. See section 2.1 for
details on sample definition and variable construction. The
figure plots the fraction of transition periods of a given
radius in which the household newly enrolled in SNAP within 2
months of the start of SNAP spending at the Rhode Island
Retailer. We define new enrollment as the receipt of at least
$10 in SNAP benefits following a period of at least 3
consecutive months with no benefit. A transition period of
radius K is a period in which a household exhibits K
consecutive months without SNAP spending at the Rhode Island
Retailer followed by K consecutive months with SNAP spending at
the Rhode Island Retailer. Households who mainly spend SNAP at
the Rhode Island Retailer are those who spend at least \1/2\ of
their total EBT expenditures between September 2012 and October
2015 at the Rhode Island Retailer.
Figure 4: SNAP Use and Benefits Before and After SNAP Adoption
Panel A: SNAP Use
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: SNAP Benefits
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: The sample is the set of SNAP adopters. Panel A plots
the share of households with positive SNAP spending in each of
the 12 months before and after the household's first SNAP
adoption. Panel B plots the average SNAP benefit in each of the
12 months before and after the first SNAP adoption.
Figure 5: Monthly Expenditure Before and After SNAP Adoption, By SNAP
Eligibility of Product
Panel A: SNAP-Eligible Spending
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: SNAP-Ineligible Spending
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of
SNAP-eligible or SNAP-ineligible spending on a vector of lead
and lagged indicators for month relative to the household's
first SNAP adoption, with the month prior to SNAP adoption
(``^1'') as the omitted category. The unit of observation for
each regression is the household-month. Error bars are R2
coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are clustered by
household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed
effects, household fixed effects, and two indicators for
observations before and after 12 months of SNAP adoption. The
dotted lines show the sample mean of household monthly
expenditure across observations within 12 months of SNAP
adoption. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so
that the observation-count-weighted mean of the regression
coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the corresponding
dependent variable.
Figure 6: Participation, Benefits, and Spending Over the 6 Month SNAP
Clock
Panel A: SNAP Use
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: SNAP Benefits
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel C: SNAP-Eligible Spending
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of
the dependent variable on a vector of indicators for the
position of the current month in a monthly clock that begins in
the most recent adoption month and resets every 6 months or at
the next SNAP adoption, whichever comes first. The unit of
observation for each regression is the household-month. The
sample is the set of SNAP adopters. Error bars are R2
coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are clustered by
household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed
effects. The omitted category consists of the first 6 months
(inclusive of the adoption month) after the household's most
recent SNAP adoption, all months after the first 24 months
(inclusive of the adoption month) following the household's
most recent adoption, and all months for which there is no
preceding adoption. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the
change in an indicator for whether the household-month is a
SNAP month. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the change in
monthly SNAP benefits. In Panel C, the dependent variable is
the change in monthly SNAP-eligible spending.
Figure 7: Monthly Expenditure and the Price of Gasoline
Panel A: Fuel Spending
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: SNAP-Eligible Spending
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Panel A plots average monthly fuel spending by
quartile of average monthly fuel spending. Panel B plots
average monthly SNAP-eligible spending by quartile of average
monthly fuel spending. The unit of observation is the
household-month and the sample is the set of SNAP adopters who
ever purchase fuel. The lower portion of both plots shows the
price of gasoline, computed as the quantity-weighted average
spending per gallon on regular grade gasoline among all
households before any discounts or coupons.
Figure 8: Store-Brand Share Before and After SNAP Adoption, By SNAP
Eligibility of product
Panel A: SNAP-Eligible Products
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: SNAP-Ineligible Products
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of
adjusted store-brand share of expenditures on a vector of lead
and lagged indicators for month relative to the household's
first SNAP adoption, with the month prior to SNAP adoption
(``^1'') as the omitted category. The unit of observation for
each regression is the household-month. Error bars are R2
coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are clustered by
household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed
effects, household fixed effects, and two indicators for
observations before and after 12 months of SNAP adoption. The
dotted line shows the sample mean of the store-brand share of
expenditure across observations within 12 months of SNAP
adoption. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so
that the observation-count-weighted mean of the regression
coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the store-brand
share of expenditure in the given SNAP eligibility group.
Figure 9: Coupon Use Before and After SNAP Adoption, By SNAP
Eligibility of Product
Panel A: SNAP-Eligible Products
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Panel B: SNAP-ineligible products
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Each figure plots coefficients from a regression of
the adjusted coupon redemption share on a vector of lead and
lagged indicators for month relative to the household's first
SNAP adoption, with the month prior to SNAP adoption (``^1'')
as the omitted category. The unit of observation for each
regression is the household-month. Error bars are R2
coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are clustered by
household. Each regression includes calendar month fixed
effects, household fixed effects, and two indicators for
observations before and after 12 months of SNAP adoption. The
dotted line shows the sample mean of the share of purchases
using a coupon across observations within 12 months of SNAP
adoption. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant so
that the observation-count-weighted mean of the regression
coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the share of
purchases using a coupon in the given SNAP eligibility group.
Appendix Table: Results for Alternative Samples and Specifications
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix Figure 1: Legislated Changes in SNAP Benefits
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: This figure plots the average monthly SNAP benefit per
U.S. household between February 2006 and December 2012. The
series was obtained directly from the United States Department
of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service via http://
www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/
SNAPZip69throughCurrent.zip. The vertical lines at October 2008
and April 2009 denote the implementation dates of changes in
SNAP benefits due to the farm bill and American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA), respectively.
Appendix Figure 2: Monthly SNAP Benefits and SNAP-Eligible Spending
Around Benefit Changes
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: The sample includes all households in the retailer
panel that have at least 2 consecutive SNAP months during the
panel. The figure plots coefficients from a regression of SNAP
benefits and SNAP-eligible spending on interactions between the
share of calendar months between February 2006 and December
2007 during which each household used SNAP and calendar month
indicators, with the January 2008 interaction normalized to
zero. The unit of observation is the household-month and only
months from January 2008 to December 2009 are included in the
regression. Error bars and shaded region represent R2
coefficient standard errors. Standard errors are clustered by
household. Each regression includes household and calendar
month fixed effects. Each coefficient series is seasonally
adjusted by subtracting from each coefficient the corresponding
coefficient from an auxiliary regression of the dependent
variable on interactions between the share of months between
February 2006 and December 2007 during which each household
used SNAP and year and seasonal month indicators. The auxiliary
regressions include household, year, and seasonal month fixed
effects and are estimated using only data from January 2010 to
December 2012. Each coefficient series is shifted by a constant
so that the observation-count-weighted mean of the regression
coefficients is equal to the sample mean of the corresponding
dependent variable among households who used SNAP in every
month between February 2006 and December 2007. Vertical lines
at October 2008 and April 2009 denote the implementation dates
of changes in SNAP benefits due to the farm bill and American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), respectively.
Exhibit 2
Incentivizing Nutritious Diets: A Field Experiment of Relative Price
Changes and How They Are Framed
John Cawley, Andrew S. Hanks, David R. Just, Brian Wansink
Working Paper 21929
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21929

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) grant 1RC1HD063370-01. The NIH played no
other role in the conduct of the study. Cawley gratefully acknowledges
support from an Investigator Award in Health Policy Research from the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The Cornell University Institutional
Review Board approved the design of this study (Protocol
ID#1110002491). For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Heather
Royer and participants at the American Society of Health Economists
biennial conference, the NBER Summer Institute, the International
Health Economics Association conference, the TIGER conference in
Toulouse France, and seminar participants at the Indiana University,
McGill University, University of Oxford, the University of
Pennsylvania, and the University of Sydney. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of
potential relevance for this research. Further information is available
online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21929.ack.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment
purposes. They have not been peer-reviewed or been subject to the
review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official NBER
publications.
2016 by John Cawley, Andrew S. Hanks, David R. Just, and Brian
Wansink. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including  notice, is given to the source.
Abstract
This paper examines how consumers respond to price incentives for
nutritious relative to less-nutritious foods, and whether the framing
of the price incentive as a subsidy for nutritious food or a tax on
non-nutritious food influences consumers' responses. Analyzing
transaction data from an 8 month randomized controlled field experiment
involving 208 households, we find that a 10% relative price difference
between nutritious and less nutritious food does not significantly
affect overall purchases, although low-income households respond to the
subsidy frame by buying more of both nutritious and less-nutritious
food.

John Cawley,                         David R. Just,
2312 MVR Hall,                       Cornell University,
Department of Policy Analysis and    210C Warren Hall,
Management and Department of        Ithaca, NY 14850,
Economics,
Cornell University,
[emailprotected]
;
Ithaca, NY 14853,
and NBER,

[emailprotected]
;
Andrew S. Hanks                      Brian Wansink,
Ohio State University                Cornell University,
130A Campbell Hall                   475H Warren Hall,
1787 Neil Ave.                       Ithaca, NY 14850,
Columbus, OH 43210
[emailprotected]
.

[emailprotected]
;

Introduction
Diet-related chronic disease is a global problem. Worldwide, the
annual deaths due to high blood pressure total 7.5 million, high blood
glucose (diabetes) 3.4 million, overweight and obesity 2.8 million, and
high cholesterol 2.6 million (WHO, 2009). In the U.S., 37% of the adult
population has cardiovascular disease, 16% has high total blood
cholesterol, 34% has hypertension, 11% has diabetes, and it is
estimated that 41% will be diagnosed with some form of cancer during
their lifetime (USDA, 2010). Moreover, 35.1% of adults and 16.9% of
youths in the U.S. are obese (Ogden, et al., 2014). Even in low-income
countries, the top ten risk factors for preventable death include high
blood pressure, high blood glucose, and high cholesterol (WHO, 2009).
The problems with many modern diets, which contribute to these high
rates of chronic disease (McCullough, et al., 2002), are that they
contain too much saturated fats, cholesterol, added sugars, added
sodium, and refined grains, and too little whole grains and fresh
fruits and vegetables (USDA, 2010).
As a result of the high rates of chronic disease, there have been
calls for taxes on energy-dense less-nutritious foods from many medical
and public health organizations, such as the World Health Organization
(2015), U.S. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (2015), British
Medical Association (2015), Institute of Medicine (2009), and the
International Obesity Task Force (2005), which urged all European Union
member countries to enact taxes on energy-dense foods. There have also
been numerous calls in medical journals for taxes to incentivize a
healthy diet (e.g., Brownell and Frieden, 2009, and Jacobson and
Brownell, 2000). Taxes on energy-dense foods are arguably the most
commonly-advocated anti-obesity policy.
Policymakers worldwide have responded to this call for action.
Numerous countries, such as Australia, Canada, Denmark, Fiji, Finland,
France, Hungary, Norway, and Mexico, have recently implemented taxes on
energy-dense, less-nutritious foods (see e.g., World Health
Organization, 2015, Sassi, et al., 2013, and Thow, et al., 2011). In
the U.S., 34 states tax soft drinks sold in grocery stores, at an
average rate of 4.02%, and 15 states tax snacks sold in grocery stores
at an average rate of 1.2% (Chriqui, et al., 2008). In early 2015,
Berkeley, California became the first U.S. city to impose an excise tax
on sugar-sweetened beverages (Cawley and Frisvold, 2015).
To some extent, an individual's diet and any resulting chronic
disease or premature mortality can be seen as a private, individual
decision. However, there are two economic rationales for government
intervention to incentivize healthier diets. First, there are external
costs of a poor diet that operate through private and public health
insurance (Cawley, 2015). Premiums that fund private health insurance,
and the taxes that fund public health insurance, are not a function of
diet, and as a result, the costs of treating diet-related chronic
disease are borne not only by those with the disease but also by others
in the same insurance pools and by taxpayers. The exact magnitude of
these external costs is not known, but they are undoubtedly large given
the enormous medical care costs. Indeed, it is estimated that the
annual direct medical care costs total $273 billion for cardiovascular
disease (CDC, 2015a), $315.8 billion for obesity (Cawley, Meyerhoefer,
et al., 2015), $116 billion for diabetes (CDC, 2015b), and $263.8
billion for cancer (this includes both direct and indirect costs; CDC
2015c). To pool these separate estimates would result in some degree of
double-counting, but the overall cost of these diseases is clearly very
high.
Behavioral economics offers a second rationale for government
intervention to incentivize healthier diets. Individuals may have time-
inconsistent preferences; they may want to eat a nutritious diet so as
to be healthy in the future, but in the short run may be tempted by
immediate gratification (Laibson, 2014). Some have argued that optimal
taxes should reflect not only externalities but also internalities
associated with time-inconsistent preferences, and that in such cases
sin taxes can make those who engage in such activities happier because
it helps them help themselves (Gruber and Mullainathan, 2005).
Whether or not food taxes and subsidies are effective is an
empirical question. However, it is challenging to estimate the effect
of existing food taxes on purchases and consumption. In the U.S.,
state-level taxes are so small that it is very difficult to measure
their effects (Fletcher, Frisvold, and Tefft, 2010; Chaloupka, et al.,
2011; Fletcher, et al., 2011). For national taxes, it is difficult to
disentangle the effect of the tax from time effects; i.e., it is hard
to identify a geographic control group. For both, policy endogeneity is
a problem.
As an alternative approach, researchers have used field experiments
to measure consumer responsiveness to price changes. For example, the
USDA's Healthy Incentives Pilot for recipients of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) offered a 30  rebate to the
Electronic Benefit Transfer card for each dollar spent on fruits and
vegetables. The program resulted in 0.22 cups/day more fruits and
vegetable consumed by participating adults (USDA, 2013). Other field
experiments paired their price changes with related interventions such
as signs or marketing, the effect of which is confounded with the price
change. For example, a set of experiments conducted by researchers at
the University of Minnesota manipulated prices in cafeterias and
vending machines (but also increased signage) and found that a 50%
subsidy for fruits and salads tripled sales, but sales fell to baseline
after the subsidy was removed (French, et al., 1997; Jeffrey, et al.,
1994). Elbel, et al. (2013) opened their own store in a hospital, and
imposed a 30% tax on unhealthy foods, which they juxtaposed next to
healthier alternatives. They estimate that the tax increased the
probability of consumers choosing healthier alternatives by 11
percentage points. The generalizability is unclear given that the store
was a researcher-created environment that involved deliberate
juxtapositioning of healthier and less healthy options.
This paper contributes to the literature that uses field
experiments to measure consumer responsiveness to changes in food
prices. A review of the literature by Epstein, et al. (2012) finds only
four studies that manipulated prices of foods in supermarkets; all
provided discounts for healthy foods, and three of the four examined
only purchases of a subset of available foods. Other experiments
manipulating food prices took place in laboratories, cafeterias and
restaurants, farmer[s'] markets, and vending machines (Epstein, et al.,
2012). In a recent study, nutritious foods were subsidized 12.5% or 25%
and less-nutritious items were taxed 12.5% or 25%, depending on the
treatment, in a simulated online market place with 6000 food items.
Calories purchased of taxed foods decreased and calories purchased of
subsidized foods increased, but overall calories did not change between
baseline and price change interventions, suggesting substitution of
calories towards foods neither taxed nor subsidized. Yet, there is
evidence of improved nutrient quality of foods purchased in the subsidy
condition (Epstein, et al., 2015).
Another relevant recent study is that of List, Samek, and Zhu
(2015). They conducted a field experiment at a grocery store in a high-
poverty area of Chicago. They enlisted 222 participants for a 6.5 month
study and examined the effect of two treatments: $1 incentive to
purchase at least 5 cups of fresh fruits and vegetables on their
shopping trip, and information on preparing fruits and vegetables. They
find little effect from the information, but find large effects of the
incentives (it doubles purchases of fresh fruits and vegetables) that
persist after the incentives end.
The contribution of this research is to estimate the responsiveness
of consumers to a price change--with no other interventions such as
additional signage or juxtapositioning of alternatives--in the
consumer's usual retail environment. In other words, we observe
consumers buying their usual items in the supermarket in which they
typically shop. We observe all food purchases made at the supermarket
(and provide incentives for subjects to do all of their food shopping
at the supermarket), and we rely on an objective system that classifies
food as nutritious and less-nutritious and which is already in place in
the supermarket.
We conduct a randomized controlled field experiment in order to
measure the impact of a 10% relative price difference between
nutritious and less-nutritious food in order to answer three research
questions: (1) Are consumers' food purchases responsive to less-
nutritious food being made 10% more expensive than nutritious food? (2)
Does that responsiveness depend on whether the price change is framed
as a tax on less-nutritious food, a subsidy for nutritious food, or
both? (3) Do the answers differ by the education or income of the
consumer?
We hypothesize that the relative price change will decrease
purchases of less-nutritious foods and increase purchases of nutritious
foods. We also hypothesize that those told that the 10% price
difference is a tax will respond more, relative to those who are told
that the 10% price difference is a subsidy; this is motivated by
prospect theory, which posits that people interpret gains and losses
relative to a reference point (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). In
particular, people may respond more when the tradeoff is framed as a
loss rather than a foregone reward (Gachter, et al., 2009; Homonoff,
2015), which suggests that people may be more responsive to the frame
of a tax on less-nutritious food than that of a subsidy for nutritious
food.
Additionally, we hypothesize that responses to the relative price
change may differ by socioeconomic status, measured by income and
education, though the direction of the response is unclear. Consumer
response may differ by income for several reasons. Mullainathan and
Shafir (2013) argue that poverty consumes mental bandwidth, which
implies that lower-income individuals may pay less attention to the
price change. On the other hand, other evidence suggests that lower-
income individuals may be more responsive to the relative price change.
Low-income individuals who receive public assistance (such as food
stamps or social security) exhibit ``first of the month effects''--
their spending on food decreases as the month progresses (Hastings and
Washington, 2010; Shapiro, 2005). This suggests that they may be credit
constrained and perhaps price reductions could have substantial income
effects. Furthermore, other research suggests that the income
elasticity of body weight is greater for low-income individuals (Akee,
et al., 2013; Schmeiser, 2009).
Second, consumer response may also differ by education. The better
educated tend to demand more health and be more efficient producers of
their own health (Grossman, 1972) and thus may have a more elastic
demand for nutritious food. In addition, the better educated may simply
better understand the treatment or respond to changing prices in
general.
Data and Methods
The Field Experiment
Controlled field studies with random assignment have the potential
to clearly identify causal effects (List, 2009, 2011) and can have high
levels of both internal and external validity (Roe and Just 2009).
Thus, these types of studies can be uniquely effective for measuring
the impact of potential policy instruments.
Identifying Nutritious and Less-Nutritious Foods
Any experiment designed to manipulate the prices of nutritious and
less-nutritious foods faces the challenge of defining those two
categories. We relied upon a supermarket shelf-label nutrition guidance
system that had already been in place in the supermarket for several
years prior to this experiment.* \2\ This proprietary system, called
Guiding Stars, scores foods based on their nutritional value. More
specifically, it takes into account vitamins, minerals, fiber and whole
grains (which raise the score) and saturated fat, trans fat,
cholesterol and added sugar and sodium (which lower the score).
Ultimately, foods are rated on a scale from zero stars (poor
nutritional value) to three stars (best nutritional value), and this
score is displayed on the supermarket shelf label below each food item
(retail price and unit price). Over 60,000 food items are rated. The
few foods that are not rated are new (and thus not yet rated), seasonal
(not consistently available), or have no calorie or nutrient content
(such as dried spices or dried coffee or tea). For more information on
Guiding Stars, see Fischer, et al. (2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: There is no footnote no. 1 in this working paper,
as submitted.
\2\ Sales data suggest that consumers use and respond to the
Guiding Stars information; see Cawley, Sweeney, Just, et al. (2015).
However, this information was in place well before and throughout the
experiment and is thus not confounded with the treatment effects we
estimate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For our experiment, we defined less-nutritious food as that which
receives zero stars, and defined nutritious food as that which receives
any stars (one, two, or three). An incentive scheme could offer more
finely-tuned subsidies based on whether the item received one, two, or
three stars, but that would also involve the tradeoff of increased
complexity that could cause confusion for study participants. We chose
to make the intervention simple to understand, and divided foods into
those with zero stars (which were made relatively more expensive) and
those with one or more stars (which were made relatively cheaper).\3\
Of the rated food items observed in our data, 29% have at least one
star and are thus classified as nutritious.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The prices of unrated items were not altered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participation and Incentives
Between May 1 and June 30, 2010, we recruited 239 loyalty card
shoppers to participate in the study. Individuals were recruited via
face-to-face contact at the entrances to two grocery stores in upstate
New York. These stores are part of a regional supermarket chain that is
located in the Northeast U.S. In order to ensure a diverse set of
participants, subjects were recruited at various days and times, as
well as at two different stores of the same chain in neighborhoods of
differing socioeconomic status. In addition, to be eligible for
inclusion in the study, participants had to have children under the age
of 18 years living at home, do at least 75% of their shopping at the
supermarket chain, and do a majority of the household's shopping.
After enrollment, subjects were sent an e-mail with a link to
complete a survey on their household characteristics and shopping
patterns. After repeated requests, fourteen subjects did not complete
the survey and were dropped. One household later attrited from the
study and so we drop data for that household. In 16 households, two
individuals claimed to each do \1/2\ of the household's shopping. Both
were enrolled but purchases were aggregated to the household level. As
a result, we have complete information, survey responses and
expenditure data, for 208 households.
Soon after enrollment, participating households received two
cards.\4\ A scanner card (with the subject's name and photograph) was
used to track purchases at the supermarket checkout lane. A debit card
was used to deliver incentives and subsidies, which were electronically
credited on a weekly basis. We observed households' food purchases
(through their use of the scanner card) for a total of 33 weeks,
including an 8 week baseline period before the relative prices of
nutritious and less-nutritious foods were altered.\5\ To encourage
households to conduct all of their food shopping at the participating
supermarket, during this baseline period, they received a 10% discount
on purchases of all rated food items, defined as any foods rated with
0, 1, 2, or 3 stars.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ In the 16 households in which two members enrolled in the
study, each enrollee received his/her own set of cards.
\5\ Households signed up 5-8 weeks before the treatment period;
thus, we have baseline data for every household for at least 4 weeks
and up to 8 weeks for some households.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Treatment Conditions
At the conclusion of the baseline period, subjects were randomized
into one of four groups. The control group (N=52 households) continued
to receive a 10% discount on all rated food items. For the treatment
group (N=156), nutritious food was made 10% cheaper than less-
nutritious food. How this price wedge was framed differed based on the
treatment group into which the subject was randomized. The tax group
(N=51) was told that they received a 15% discount on all rated food
items, but were taxed 10% (and thus received only a 5% discount) on
less-nutritious food. The subsidy group (N=55) was told it received a
5% discount on all rated food items, plus an additional 10% subsidy on
nutritious food, for a total of 15% off nutritious food. The tax/
subsidy group (N=50) was told that it received a 10% discount on all
rated food items, plus an additional 5% subsidy on nutritious food (for
a total subsidy of 15%) but was taxed 5% on less-nutritious food (for a
net subsidy of 5%). In all three treatment conditions, nutritious food
was subsidized 15% and less-nutritious food was subsidized 5%; thus
each group faced a 10% price wedge between nutritious and less-
nutritious food. The only way the treatments differed was in how that
relative price difference was framed.
Households were notified of their respective treatment via e-mail
and phone calls. Out of concern that subjects may not check their e-
mail or voice messages, the enrolled representative from each household
was also individually contacted by phone and notified directly; this
process took 12 days. We removed these 2 weeks from analysis because
some subjects during that time may not have yet been aware of their
treatment condition.
In a voluntary field experiment, it is not possible to impose taxes
on less-nutritious foods greater than the participation incentive, or
subjects would likely buy these foods elsewhere and such expenditures
would not be recorded as part of the study. To address this, the
participation incentive was always greater than the tax imposed,
ensuring that shoppers could not be worse off by shopping at the study
stores. Because the participation incentive was also offered during the
baseline period, we are able to identify the effect of price changes
using the relative price changes between nutritious and less-nutritious
foods that were imposed between the baseline and treatment periods. See
Table 1 for the relative price changes at baseline and during the
treatment period, and details of the framing of the treatment.
To clarify, prices on the supermarket shelves were not altered. The
participating supermarket was understandably unwilling to allow the
researchers to manipulate shelf prices for all of their customers.
Instead, subjects' purchases were tracked using the scanner cards, and
the discounts, net of taxes, were uploaded weekly to the debit card. To
ensure the salience of the price changes, each subject received a
weekly e-mail notifying them of the amount of incentive or subsidy they
had received, and reminding them which foods were taxed and which were
subsidized. We acknowledge that this may affect the generalizability of
these results, an issue we return to in the Discussion. The treatment
period lasted for 25 weeks and ended without prior notice. See Figure 1
for a detailed timeline of the study.
Data
Itemized grocery purchases of each subject were tracked by the
supermarket for the entire 33 weeks of the study using the scanner
cards. The item-level transaction data include: date, quantity of item,
expenditures on item, Guiding Stars score of each item (0, 1, 2, or 3
stars), and the description of the item. These transactions were
aggregated by household and week, with weeks defined as Monday through
Sunday. We merge the information from the baseline survey with the
transaction data.
We focus on two main outcomes: the household's expenditures
(defined before any subsidies or taxes applied by the experiment) and
quantity purchased. Quantity purchased is measured in units, which is a
limited measure because it does not account for size differences. For
example, a \1/2\ gallon and a gallon of milk each count as one unit, as
do two different-sized boxes of the same cereal. Thus, this measure of
quantity is a noisy measure of the quantity of food purchased. We
examine these two outcomes for all food purchases, as well as
separately for nutritious food and less-nutritious food.
If a household did not buy any food in that category in that week,
the values of expenditures and quantity purchased are set to zero. The
exception to this occurred during the first 3 weeks of the baseline
period when households were still being enrolled in the study. During
these 3 weeks, weeks with no expenditures were treated as missing until
the household recorded their first shopping trip.
Hypotheses and Empirical Methods
We test the following hypotheses:

H1: Increasing the price of less-nutritious food relative to
the price of nutritious food will decrease purchases of less-
nutritious food and increase purchases of nutritious food;
H2: Framing the relative price change as a subsidy for
nutritious food will increase the extent to which the price
change increases purchases of nutritious food;
H3: Framing the relative price change as a tax on less-
nutritious food will increase the extent to which the relative
price change decreases purchases of less-nutritious food;
H4: These effects will vary by income and education.

In order to test these hypotheses, we estimate difference-in-
differences models of expenditures and quantities. Randomization into
the treatment and control groups allows for interpretation of the
difference-in-differences estimator as a causal effect of the
treatment. We first estimate these models assuming no framing effects
and thus pool all three treatment conditions--tax, subsidy, and tax/
subsidy--into a single treatment condition. We then subsequently
estimate the models testing for framing effects, with each of the three
frames as a separate treatment.
To estimate the average effect of the price change, ignoring the
possibility of framing effects, we estimate the following two-way fixed
effects model:
(1)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The data are aggregated by household (h) and week (w). The difference-
in-differences estimator is b
0
. This coefficient measures
the change between the baseline and treatment period for the treatment
group relative to the control group. In order to control for time-
invariant unobserved heterogeneity among households, the model controls
for household fixed effects I
h
. In order to control for time
effects, such as the seasonal availability of fresh fruits and
vegetables and changes in demand due to holidays, the model controls
for week fixed effects I
w
. The OLS regression model is
estimated for all food purchases, as well as separately for purchases
of nutritious food and less-nutritious food. The null hypothesis is
that the 10% price wedge has no impact on purchases: b
0
=0.
To account for possible correlation in errors for the same household
over time, standard errors are clustered by household.
In order to test whether the framing of the price change affects
consumers' response to the price change, we estimate the following
model, which estimates a separate difference-in-differences effect for
each of the three treatment groups (tax, subsidy, tax and subsidy):
(2)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The null hypothesis is that the framing of the treatment as either a
tax on less-nutritious food, a subsidy of nutritious food, or both,
does not alter the treatment effect; i.e., that
b
1
=b
2
=b
3
.
To test whether the treatment effect varies by income, we estimate
models (1) and (2) separately for those whose household income is (a)
below or (b) above 130% of the Federal Poverty Line (FPL), which is the
eligibility threshold for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) and is close to the eligibility threshold for Medicaid (133% of
FPL).
To test whether the treatment effect varies by education, we
estimate the model separately for those whose educational attainment is
(a) a high school degree or less or (b) some college or more.
We emphasize that, given our overall sample size, we have limited
statistical power for subgroups. When we divide the sample by income,
we have 36 households below and 155 households above 130% of the FPL.
When we divide the sample by education, we have 18 participants with a
high school education or less, and 182 participants with some college
or more education (see Table 2). These subtotals do not sum to our
total of 208 households because of non-response to the questions about
income and education.
Empirical Results
Summary Statistics
Tables 2 and 3 list summary statistics for the study participants,
with columns for the whole sample, control group, all treatment groups
pooled, and each treatment group separately. Table 2 reports sample
sizes for the socioeconomic subgroups. Tables 3a and 3b report summary
statistics for additional household characteristics, such as income,
number of children at home, household size, marital status, and race/
ethnicity, which are all controlled for in our model through the
inclusion of household fixed effects.
The summary statistics indicate that our sample is relatively well
educated (91% have more than a high school education) and white
(93.7%). This is a reflection of the fact that our sample consists of
individuals in upstate New York and the participating supermarket chain
is relatively high-end. By construction, all families have at least one
child under the age of 18 years in the household.
Table 4 lists unconditional weekly expenditures on foods (overall,
all rated, less nutritious, nutritious) for the entire sample and by
group (control, all treatment, each treatment group). Household weekly
food expenditures at this supermarket averaged $89.83 during the
baseline period, and $100.88 during the treatment period. In
comparison, data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey indicate that on
average U.S. households spent $76 per week on food purchased for at-
home consumption in 2013 (BLS, 2015). Notably the BLS estimate is
unconditional, whereas our sample consists of households with at least
one child under the age of 18 years, and are thus likely to be above-
average in terms of food expenditures.
The increase in average weekly food expenditures for all treatment
groups ($10.95) is roughly equal to that for the control group
($11.32); this unconditional difference-in-differences suggests that
the treatment did not significantly affect overall expenditures on
food. The increase in expenditures on nutritious food was also similar
for all treatment groups pooled ($4.69) and the control group ($3.30).
Overall Effect of Relative Price Change
Table 5 lists results of the difference-in-differences models for
expenditures and quantities. Our hypothesis is that the 10% relative
price change increased the quantity demanded of nutritious food, and
decreased the quantity demanded of less-nutritious food. Table 5 shows
that the point estimates of the coefficients are consistent with these
hypotheses, but the coefficients are not statistically significant. For
example, we find that creating a 10% price difference between
nutritious and less-nutritious foods raised spending on nutritious food
by $1.11 per week and lowered spending on less nutritious food by $1.55
per week, neither of which is statistically significant. On net,
spending on all food rated by Guiding Stars (whether nutritious or less
nutritious) fell by $0.44 per week, which was not statistically
significant. In terms of quantities, the 10% relative price difference
increased weekly purchases of nutritious food by 0.95 units and lowered
weekly purchases of less nutritious food by 0.87 units; overall
purchases of foods rated by Guiding Stars rose by .08 units. None of
those changes are statistically significant.
In summary, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of no
effect of the relative price change on purchases of nutritious and
less-nutritious foods.
Effect of Framing of Relative Price Change
Next we test whether the effect of the relative price change
differed by the way in which it was framed: as a tax on less-nutritious
food, a subsidy for nutritious food, or both. It is possible that,
because of loss aversion, the tax frame may exhibit a greater treatment
effect than the subsidy frame. Moreover, given the difference in
salience, we may see a greater increase in purchases of nutritious food
for the subsidy frame, but a greater decrease in purchases of less-
nutritious food for the tax frame.
Table 6 presents the results of the difference-in-difference models
that estimate separate effects by frame. In no case are the treatment
effects significantly different across frames (whether tax versus
subsidy, tax versus tax/subsidy, or subsidy versus tax/subsidy). In
addition, no estimated treatment effect for nutritious or less-
nutritious food is significantly different from zero. However, some
point estimates are substantial; e.g., the effect of the relative price
change for those in the tax frame to increase their weekly purchases of
nutritious food by $4.52 (relative to a mean of $36.55) and for those
in the tax/subsidy frame to decrease their weekly purchases of less
nutritious food by $4.40 (relative to a mean of $49.59).
In summary, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of no
framing effect for the relative price change.
Differences by Income and Education
In our next analyses, we test whether the overall price treatment
effects differed by income or education. For the sake of simplicity, we
report results for expenditures (but not those for quantities). Table 7
presents results of the overall price treatment effects separately for
households with incomes below and above 130% of the Federal Poverty
Line.
Although the difference in results across income was not
statistically significant, the point estimates suggest that the
treatment was associated with lower-income households spending $7.03
more per week on nutritious food and $7.11 more per week on less-
nutritious food. In contrast, higher-income households spent $1.27 less
on nutritious food per week and $4.02 less on less-nutritious food per
week. None of these point estimates are statistically significant.
Table 8 presents the results of models estimated separately by
education. Again, we find no statistically significant difference
between the effect of the relative price change for the two
socioeconomic groups. Moreover, the difference in point estimates is
considerably smaller across education groups than across income groups.
We next test whether framing effects differed by income or
education. Table 9 reports results for the model that estimates
treatment effects by frame, with the model estimated separately by
income category. There are large and statistically significant
differences in the effects of the frame by income. Specifically, low-
income households that were given the subsidy frame (i.e., told that
the 10% relative price change represented a subsidy for nutritious
food) significantly increased their purchases of less-nutritious food
(by $21.23 per week). The increase in purchases of nutritious foods was
$11.58, but not statistically significant. Overall, purchases of foods
rated by Guiding Stars rose $32.81 per week on average for this group.
In contrast, higher-income households that were given the subsidy
frame decreased their weekly purchases of both nutritious food ($4.55)
and less-nutritious food ($7.55), although these are not significantly
different from zero. The effects of the price change on less nutritious
foods and all rated foods are, however, significantly different for the
low-income and high-income groups given the subsidy frame.
In addition, within each income group, there is a significant
difference in framing effects. As stated above, the low-income
individuals given the subsidy frame significantly increased their
purchases of less-nutritious food (by $21.23 per week); in contrast,
the low-income individuals given the tax frame decreased their
purchases of less-nutritious food (by $9.04, which is not statistically
significant). That difference across frames is statistically
significant. The responses of the tax and subsidy frame among the low-
income participants also significantly differed for expenditures on all
rated items, unrated items, and all items. They did not significantly
differ in their treatment effect on expenditures on nutritious foods.
Table 10 presents results for models that estimate treatment
effects by frame, with the models estimated separately by education
category. There are no statistically significant differences in framing
effects by education. Moreover, within educational group there are no
statistically significant differences in framing effects; i.e., we
cannot reject the null hypothesis that the effect was the same for each
treatment group or frame.
In summary, we find significant differences in framing effects by
income. Specifically, the treatment effect is much greater for the low-
income households given the subsidy frame than those given the tax
frame; they buy more of even what the relative price change was seeking
to discourage: less-nutritious food.
Extension: Permutation Tests
Given our sample size (208 households' weekly purchases over 8
months) we seek additional confirmation of both the result of
significant treatment effects among low-income households given the
subsidy frame, and the inability to reject the null of no effect for
the overall sample. To that end, we conducted permutation tests
(Kaiser, 2007) in which households were randomly re-labeled as being in
one of the three treatment groups or the control group, after which the
expenditure models were re-estimated. This was repeated 1,000 times and
we compare the statistical significance of the treatment effect in our
primary models to the distribution of treatment effects estimated in
the 1,000 permutations. A p value of (e.g.) 0.05 indicates that only 5%
of the permutations yielded more statistically significant results than
our primary models, which would suggest that the original result was
not due to chance.
The results of the permutation tests are provided in Appendix
Tables 1-3. In general, these results confirm both of our major
findings. First, for the overall sample we cannot reject the null
hypothesis of no effect of the price change treatment. Appendix Table 1
shows that, for both nutritious and less-nutritious foods, 70% or more
of the permutations yielded more statistically significant treatment
effects than the ones estimated in our primary model. Table 2 shows
that the permutation tests are also consistent with our inability to
reject the null hypothesis of no effect of framing for the overall
sample. Appendix Table 3 shows that the permutation test confirms our
finding of a significant positive effect of the treatment for low-
income households given the subsidy frame; specifically, the
permutation test p value is 0.056, indicating that the finding in our
primary model is more significant than 94.4% of the permutations based
on random re-labeling of groups. The result for the purchase of
nutritious foods by the low-income households given the subsidy frame
falls just short of statistical significance (p=.102).
Overall, the results of the permutation test confirm the earlier
results--we cannot reject the null of a zero treatment effect for the
overall sample, and we find evidence that low-income households given
the subsidy frame buy significantly more less-nutritious foods.
Extension: Share of Purchases that was Nutritious
As another extension, we examine the proportion of expenditures on
nutritious foods (the denominator includes expenditures on all rated
foods). Table 11 presents results for the difference-in-differences
model in which the dependent variable is the percent of expenditures
that was on nutritious foods. The effect of the relative price change
was to increase the share of expenditures devoted to nutritious food by
1.08 percentage points, relative to a mean of 42.5%. However, this
increase was not statistically significant. Subsequent columns in the
table list the effects for high and low-income, and the high and low
education groups. In each case the change in the percent of nutritious
purchases resulting from the tax is small and not statistically
significant.
Extension: Purchases of Unrated Foods
As described in the Data section, the Guiding Stars system rates
virtually all foods in the supermarket. Those that are not rated
include items that are new and have simply not yet been rated, or
seasonal and therefore not consistently available. However, foods that
have no calorie content are also not rated. This includes some items
that are relatively uninteresting from a health perspective (e.g.,
dried spices) but it also includes bottled water, alcoholic beverages,
and dried tea and coffee. These are of interest because after the
relative price change consumers may shift away from sugar-sweetened
beverages to these other drink options. In order to test for any such
effects, we estimate difference-in-differences models of expenditures
and quantities purchased in that category. The results appear as
additional columns in each of the earlier tables. We also include a
column for All Items, which includes not just rated foods but also
unrated foods.
Table 5 shows that the main effect of the treatment is a very small
change in weekly expenditures on unrated items ($0.81), which is not
statistically significant. However, the treatment results in an
increase in the quantity of unrated foods purchased per week of 0.66
units, which is statistically significant. Table 6 provides information
on the effect of the framing of the relative price change. In five out
of six cases, the effect of the treatment on purchases of unrated food
items is not statistically significant; the exception is that those
given the subsidy frame purchased 0.92 more units of unrated food per
week. The results in Table 9 indicate that this effect is concentrated
among the lower-income households in the subsidy frame, who increased
their purchases of unrated food items by $5.78 per week.
Extension: Change in Treatment Effects over Time
The dynamics of treatment effects can be interesting; a large
initial effect that falls over time could be due to novelty or
salience, while a small initial effect that increases over time is
consistent with habit formation. To investigate this, we estimated our
model of the overall treatment effect (i.e., ignoring framing effects)
for each week, and plot the results in Figure 1. Although our sample
size precludes us from drawing strong conclusions, the negligible
effect in the first 7 weeks of the treatment, combined with the larger
treatment effects later in the treatment period, are consistent with
gradual habit formation.
Robustness Checks
To verify our initial results, we conduct a variety of additional
robustness checks. First, we re-estimate our models excluding the
baseline data and find very similar results. Second, we estimate our
original difference-in-differences models dropping the weeks with
holidays (Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year's); the main difference
is that the treatment effect is significant for low-income households'
spending on nutritious foods (it rises by $9.43 per week). This is
concentrated among the low-income households given the subsidy frame,
who increase their spending on nutritious food by $16.80 per week.
Third, most of the subjects are women, so we drop the men and re-
estimate the models using only the female subjects. The main difference
is that the results for higher-income households become more
significant; e.g., the high-income households in the subsidy frame
decrease their spending on nutritious food ($8.87 less per week), less
nutritious foods ($10.93 less per week), all rated foods ($19.80 less
per week) and all items ($20.45 less per week). Fourth, we sought to
investigate the large treatment effects exhibited by the low-income
households given the subsidy frame. In particular, we investigated
whether these households were buying non-perishables (stocking up for
future consumption) or were buying perishables (for immediate
consumption). Estimating our models separately for expenditures on
perishables and non-perishables, we find that the low-income households
given the subsidy frame generally bought more of everything, but the
increases were statistically significant for perishables that were
nutritious and less-nutritious, and for non-perishables that were less-
nutritious. In other words, the low-income households given the subsidy
frame were not just using the treatment as an opportunity to ``stock
up''; they were also buying more perishables for immediate consumption.
Extension: Subjects' Interpretations of the Relative Price Change
In order to better understand why there might be framing effects,
we examine the results of a survey we administered to study
participants after the treatment period ended. Participants were asked
how they interpreted the treatment. Specifically, they were presented
with seven statements describing the treatment, and were asked to rate
their agreement with each of them on a Likert scale that ranged from 1
(strongly disagree) to 9 (strongly agree). Table 12 presents the
unconditional mean responses for the entire sample as well as the
control group, the entire treatment group, and each treatment group
separately.
One important result that stands out is that participants, no
matter what their frame, tended to interpret the relative price change
as a subsidy for nutritious food rather than a tax on less-nutritious
food. For example, for the sample as a whole, the mean agreement that
the debit card payments were a ``reward for eating healthy food''
averaged 6.2 on the nine-point scale, whereas ``penalty for eating
unhealthy food'' averaged 2.9. In addition, for the sample as a whole,
the mean agreement that it represented a ``discount for eating healthy
foods'' was 6.4 out of 9, whereas the agreement that it was a ``tax on
unhealthy foods'' was 3.4 out of 9.
This is not to say that the framing had no effect on subjects'
perceptions. There was a statistically significant difference in the
mean agreement that the treatment was a ``penalty for eating unhealthy
food'' (3.4 in the tax frame versus 2.4 in the subsidy frame) as well
as in the mean agreement that the treatment was a ``tax on unhealthy
foods'' (3.7 in the tax frame versus 2.8 in the subsidy frame). Thus,
the frame did have a detectable effect on perceptions of the treatment,
but participants in all groups tended to interpret the treatment as
more of a subsidy of nutritious food than a tax on less-nutritious
food.
Extension: Subjects' Interpretations of their Change in Shopping During
Treatment
In the survey conducted after the treatment concluded, subjects
were also asked whether or not participating in the study influenced
their shopping. The unconditional means by group are reported in Table
12. Those in the treatment groups (all pooled) expressed greater
agreement with the statements that they were buying more starred
(nutritious) foods, more healthier foods, and a higher percentage of
healthier foods, but the difference between the treatment and control
groups is not statistically significant in any of those cases.
There are significant differences in the mean response to these
questions by frame. Specifically, those in the tax/subsidy frame tend
to express greater agreement that the study led them to buy more
nutritious foods, buy healthier foods, and buy a higher percentage of
healthier foods, relative to those in the subsidy frame. Notably, we
did not see such a difference in our data in the actual expenditures
and quantities purchased.
Discussion
This paper contributes to the literature on the effects of food
taxes and subsidies through an 8 month field experiment that created a
10% price wedge between nutritious and less-nutritious foods. We find
that, on the whole, expenditures and quantities purchased did not
change significantly in response to the price change. The point
estimates suggest that the treatment group spent slightly less on less-
nutritious food and slightly more on nutritious food, but these changes
were not statistically significant. Some of the point estimates are
substantial in magnitude, and their lack of statistical significance is
due in part to imprecision of the estimates and to limited statistical
power from 208 households.
Although we hypothesized that the framing of the relative price
change as either a subsidy for nutritious food or a tax on less-
nutritious food could alter the treatment effect, we find no
significant differences in effects by frame. We do, however, find
effects of framing by income. Specifically, lower income households to
whom the relative price change was framed as a subsidy bought
significantly more less-nutritious food (and more of all food) than
low-income households to whom it was framed as a tax. Permutation tests
are consistent with these results, suggesting that they are not due to
chance.
One possible explanation for lower-income households buying more of
all food, including the relatively more expensive less-nutritious food,
is that lower-income households may experience a large income effect of
a price decrease. In a related finding, List, et al. (2015) estimate
that a $1 reward for buying any fresh fruits and vegetables caused the
patrons of a grocery store in a low-income neighborhood of Chicago to
double their purchases of produce. Previous research has also
documented that food purchases drop significantly in the course of the
benefit month for low-income households (e.g., Hastings and Washington,
2010, Shaprio, 2005) and that income increases obesity for low-income,
but not other, households (see the review in Cawley, 2015). Another
possibility is that poverty consumes mental bandwidth for low-income
individuals (Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013) or causes distractions
sufficient to result in cognitive deficits (Mani, et al., 2013), such
that households may have misunderstood the subsidy for nutritious food
as a general ``food subsidy.''
Although we hypothesized that better educated individuals might
respond differently to the treatment, we find no evidence of
differences in the treatment effect or in the framing effects by
education.
Taxes on energy-dense foods are arguably the most commonly-
advocated anti-obesity policy. The results of this paper have several
implications for such policies to promote more nutritious diets. First,
taxes may need to be large to change behavior. In the U.S., taxes on
soda pop and snacks average one to four percent (Chriqui, et al.,
2014), but we find no significant impact on expenditures or purchases
from a ten percent relative price change. Second, price changes may
have different impacts by income; we find that subsidies for nutritious
food may lead low-income households to buy more of all food, including
more of the less-nutritious food that the policy is attempting to
discourage.
It should be noted that even if taxes do not change behavior, these
policy instruments can still internalize external costs, thereby
addressing a market failure. Moreover, if consumers do not
significantly alter their purchases, it implies that the tax results in
relatively little deadweight loss and thus is a relatively efficient
way for the government to collect revenue.
Strengths of this study include a randomized controlled field
experiment, with actual consumers making real purchases of actual
products in their usual retail environment. Such controlled field
experiments represent a strong design for estimating casual effects
(List, 2009). The present study is a relatively long experiment of this
type, with an 8 week baseline and 25 week treatment period.
The greatest limitation of the study is the limited statistical
power associated with observing 208 households for 33 weeks; this is
particularly acute when studying subsamples and testing for differences
between income or education groups. In some cases, we estimate
substantial point estimates but because of their imprecision they are
not statistically significant. Given our limits with statistical power,
we cannot rule out price elasticities common in the literature.\6\
However, the permutation tests are consistent with our main results of
a null effect for the overall sample but that low-income households
given the subsidy frame spend more on less-nutritious food. Another
limitation is a lack of data from after the intervention ended;
however, we find no significant main effects of the treatment, so there
is little reason to look for habit persistence after the treatment
ended.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The 95% confidence intervals for the implied price elasticities
of demand are quite large: ^3.5, ^10.3) for nutritious food and (2.5,
6.2) for less-nutritious foods.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Readers should exercise caution when generalizing from the results
associated with this relatively white, well-educated and high-income
sample from upstate New York. In addition, although we observe detailed
information on food purchases, we do not observe food consumption,
which would be informative about the health consequences of taxes on
energy-dense foods.
Furthermore, the effects estimated in this paper may be influenced
by the design of the experiment. Consumer responsiveness may have been
attenuated by the fact that the price changes were less salient than
usual. Our relative price changes were not reflected on supermarket
shelves; consumers had to note the number of Guiding Stars for the item
and take into account the subsidy or tax they received. This may have
led to less responsiveness because of the mental cost of calculating
the relative price change, or consumers may have overlooked the price
change at times because it was less salient (Finkelstein, 2009).
In addition, participation and subsidies, minus taxes, were paid
weekly, and this departure from immediacy may have also muted consumer
responsiveness. Given that participants knew they were participating in
a study, they may have perceived the price changes as temporary and not
bothered changing their usual food habits.
In this study consumers were directed to the Guiding Stars
nutrition guidance system to determine the amount of the tax or subsidy
(if any). Thus, there was not only a price effect but also potentially
an effect from nutrition information. This would also be true of any
salient tax placed on energy-dense foods, such as a ``fat tax'' or tax
on sugar-sweetened beverages. It also implies that the consumer
responses we estimate may be greater than those that would be observed
from a tax on certain foods that was implemented simply for revenue
reasons and was not directly linked to the nutrition of the items.
Important directions for future research include estimating the
impacts of greater price changes, testing for changes in treatment
effects over time (they may increase due to habit formation or decrease
due to diminishing salience or novelty), and continuing to refine how
to frame price changes to maximize their intended impact.

Works Cited

Akee, Randall, Emilia Simeonova, William Copeland, Adrian Angold,
and E. Jane Costello. 2013. ``Young Adult Obesity and Household Income:
Effects of Unconditional Cash Transfers.'' American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 5(2): 1-28.
Andreyeva, Tatiana, Michael W. Long, and Kelly D. Brownell. 2010.
``The impact of food prices on consumption: a systematic review of
research on the price elasticity of demand for food.'' American Journal
of Public Health, 100(2): 216.
Brownell, K.D., Frieden, T.R., 2009. Ounces of prevention--the
public policy case for taxes on sugared beverages. New England Journal
of Medicine 360, 18.
British Medical Association. 2015. Food for Thought: Promoting
Healthy Diets among Children and Young People.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. ``Consumer Expenditures in 2013.''
Accessed June 17, 2015. http://www.bls.gov/cex/csxann13.pdf.
Cawley, John. 2015. ``An Economy of Scales: A Selective Review of
Obesity's Economic Causes, Consequences, and Solutions.'' Journal of
Health Economics, 43: 244-268.
Cawley, John and David Frisvold. 2015. ``The Incidence of Taxes on
Sugar-Sweetened Beverages: The Case of Berkeley, California.'' NBER
Working Paper #21465.
Cawley, John, Chad Meyerhoefer, Adam Biener, Mette Hammer and Neil
Wintfeld. 2015. ``Savings in Medical Expenditures Associated with
Reductions in Body Mass Index Among Adults With Obesity, by Diabetes
Status.'' PharmacoEconomics, 33: 707-722.
Cawley, John, Matthew J. Sweeney, David R. Just, Harry M. Kaiser,
William D. Schultze, Jeffrey Sobal, Elaine Wethington, and Brian C.
Wansink. 2015. ``The Impact of a Supermarket Nutrition Rating System on
Purchases of Nutritious and Less Nutritious Foods.'' Public Health
Nutrition, 18(1): 8-14.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015a. ``Heart
Disease.'' http://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/faqs.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015b. ``Preventing
Chronic Diseases: Investing Wisely in Health Preventing Diabetes and
Its Complications.'' http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/publications/factsheets/
Prevention/pdf/diabetes.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015c. ``Addressing The
Cancer Burden: At A Glance.'' http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/
resources/publications/aag/dcpc.htm.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Lisa M. Powell, and Jamie F. Chriqui. 2011.
``Sugar-Sweetened Beverages and Obesity: The Potential Impact of Public
Policies.'' Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(3): 645-655.
Chouinard, Hayley H., David E. Davis, Jeffrey T. LaFrance, and
Jeffrey M. Perloff. ``Fat taxes: big money for small change.'' In Forum
for Health Economics & Policy, vol. 10, no. 2. 2007.
Chriqui J.F., Eidson S.S., Chaloupka F.J. 2014. State Sales Taxes on
Regular Soda (as of January 1, 2014)--BTG Fact Sheet. Chicago, IL:
Bridging the Gap Program, Health Policy Center, Institute for Health
Research and Policy, University of Illinois at Chicago.
Elbel, Brian, Glen B. Taksler, Tod Mijanovich, Courtney B. Abrams,
and L.B. Dixon. 2013. ``Promotion of Healthy Eating Through Public
Policy: A Controlled Experiment.'' Am. J. Prev. Med. 2013; 45(1): 49-
55.
Epstein, Leonard H., Eric Finkelstein, Hollie Raynor, Chantal
Nederkoorn, Kelly D. Fletcher, Noelle Jankowiak, and Rocco A. Paluch.
``Experimental analysis of the effect of taxes and subsides on calories
purchased in an on-line supermarket.'' Appetite 95 (2015): 245-251.
Epstein, Leonard H., Noelle Jankowiak, Chantal Nederkoorn, Hollie A.
Raynor, Simone A. French, and Eric Finkelstein. 2012. ``Experimental
research on the relation between food price changes and food-purchasing
patterns: a targeted review.'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
95: 789-809.
Fischer L.M., Sutherland L.A., Kaley L.A., et al., 2011.
``Development and implementation of the guiding stars nutrition
guidance program.'' American Journal of Health Promotion 26: e55-e63.
Fletcher, Jason M., David Frisvold, and Nathan Tefft. ``Can soft
drink taxes reduce population weight?.'' Contemporary Economic Policy
28, no. 1 (2010): 23-35.
Fletcher, Jason M., David E. Frisvold, and Nathan Tefft. 2011. ``Are
Soft Drink Taxes an Effective Mechanism for Reducing Obesity?'' Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(3): 655-662.
French S.A., Story M., Jeffery R.W., Snyder P., Eisenberg M.,
Sidebottom A., Murray D. 1997. ``Pricing strategy to promote fruit and
vegetable purchase in high school cafeterias.'' J. Am. Diet. Assoc.,
97:1008-10.
Gachter, Simon & Orzen, Henrik & Renner, Elke & Starmer, Chris,
2009. ``Are experimental economists prone to framing effects? A natural
field experiment,'' Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 70(3):
443-446.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. ``On the Concept of Health Capital and the
Demand for Health.'' Journal of Political Economy, 80(2): 223-249.
Gruber, Jonathan H. and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. ``Do Cigarette
Taxes Make Smokers Happier,'' Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy,
2005, v5(1), Article 4.
Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. List. (2004). Field Experiments.
Journal of Economics Literature, 42(4): 1009-1055.
Hastings, J. and Washington, E. 2010. ``The first of the month
effect: Consumer behavior and store responses.'' American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2): 142-162.
Homonoff, Tatiana A. 2015. ``Can Small Incentives Have Large
Effects? The Impact of Taxes versus Bonuses on Disposable Bag Use.''
Working paper, Cornell University.
Institute of Medicine. 2009. ``Local Government Actions to Prevent
Childhood Obesity.'' Institute of Medicine Report Brief. September 1
2009. url: http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2009/Local-Government-Actions-to-
Prevent-Childhood-Obesity.aspx. Accessed Jan. 24, 2012.
Jacobson M.F., Brownell K.D. 2000. Small taxes on soft drinks and
snack foods to promote health. American Journal of Public Health,
90(6): 854-7.
Jeffery R.W., French S.A., Raether C., Baxter J.E. 1994. ``An
environmental intervention to increase fruit and salad purchases in a
cafeteria.'' Prev. Med., 23: 788-92.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. ``Prospect theory: An analysis
of decision under risk.'' Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
Society (1979): 263-291.
Kaiser, J. 2007. ``An exact and a Monte Carlo proposal to the Fisher-
Pitman permutation tests for paired replicates and for independent
samples.'' Stata Journal 7: 402-412.
Laibson, D. 1997. ``Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.''
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(5), 443-477.
List, John A. 2009. An Introduction to Field Experiments in
Economics. Journal of Economics Behavior and Organization, 70: 439-442.
List, John A. 2011. ``Why Economists Should Conduct Field
Experiments and 14 Tips for Pulling One Off.'' Journal of Economic
Perspectives 25(3): 3-16.
List, John A., Anya Samek, and Terri Zhu. 2015. ``Incentives to Eat
Healthy: Evidence from a Grocery Store Field Experiment.'' CESR--
Schaeffer Working Paper No. 2015-025.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao.
2013. ``Poverty impedes cognitive function.'' Science 341(6149): 976-
980.
McCullough, Marjorie L., Diane Feskanich, Meir J. Stampfer, Edward
L. Giovannucci, Eric B. Rimm, Frank B. Hu, Donna Spiegelman, David J.
Hunter, Graham A. Colditz, and Walter C. Willett. 2002. ``Diet quality
and major chronic disease risk in men and women: moving toward improved
dietary guidance.'' The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 76(6):
1261-1271.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. Scarcity: Why having too
little means so much. Macmillan, 2013.
Ogden C.L., Carroll M.D., Kit B.K., Flegal K.M. 2014. ``Prevalence
of Childhood and Adult Obesity in the United States, 2011-2012.'' JAMA,
311(8): 806-814.
Roe, Brian E., and David R. Just. 2009. ``Internal and external
validity in economics research: Tradeoffs between experiments, field
experiments, natural experiments, and field data.'' American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 91(5): 1266-1271.
Sassi, F., A. Belloni and C. Capobianco. 2013. ``The Role of Fiscal
Policies in Health Promotion'', OECD Health Working Papers, No. 66,
OECD Publishing.
Schmeiser, M.D. 2009. ``Expanding wallets and waistlines: The impact
of family income on the BMI of women and men eligible for the earned
income tax credit.'' Health Economics, 18: 1277-1294.
Shapiro, J.M. 2005. ``Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from
the food stamp nutrition cycle.'' Journal of Public Economics, 89(2):
303-325.
Thow, A.M., Quested, C., Juventin, L., Kun, R., Khan, a. N., &
Swinburn, B. 2011. ``Taxing soft drinks in the Pacific: Implementation
lessons for improving health.'' Health Promotion International, 26(1):
55-64.
U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. 7th Edition,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, December 2010.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2013. Healthy Incentives Pilot (HIP)
Interim Report, by Susan Bartlett, et al., Project Officer: Danielle
Berman, Alexandria, VA: July 2013.
World Health Organization. 2009. Global health risks: mortality and
burden of disease attributable to selected major risks. (Geneva,
Switzerland: WHO).
World Health Organization. 2015. Using Price Policies to Promote
Healthier Diets. (Geneva, Switzerland: WHO).

Figure 1: Study Timeline
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Note: Weeks are defined as Monday through Sunday.
Figure 2: Estimated Coefficients for Overall Price Treatment by Week
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Notes: Week 11 is the first week of the intervention period
and begins on Mon, Sep. 20, 2010. Thanksgiving occurred during
week 20 and Christmas occurred during week 24.

Table 1: Comparison of Treatment and Control Groups
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Treatment
Control     Treatment    Treatment     Group 3:
Group       Group 1:     Group 2:   Subsidy and
Subsidy        Tax          Tax
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Discount on all Food          10%           5%          15%          10%
Items as a Reward
for Participation
Subsidy on                     --          10%           --           5%
Nutritious Foods
Tax on Less-                   --           --          10%           5%
Nutritious Foods
Reduction in the             None          10%          10%          10%
Relative Price of
Nutritious vs Less-
Nutritious Foods
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 2: Descriptive Measures of Household Demographic Variables Used in Regression
(standard deviations in parentheses)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All
Whole Sample     Control      Treatment      Subsidy         Tax      Tax/ Subsidy
Groups
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than high school             91.00%        92.00%        90.70%        90.60%        91.80%        89.60%
education
St. dev.                        (0.287)       (0.274)       (0.292)       (0.295)       (0.277)       (0.309)
N (> HS ed.)                     182            46           136            48            45            43
N (5 HS ed.)                      18             4            14             5             4             5
Above 130% of FPL                 81.20%        75.00%        83.20%        82.40%        82.60%        84.80%
St. dev.                        (0.392)       (0.438)       (0.375)       (0.385)       (0.383)       (0.363)
N (Above 130% of FPL)            155            36           119            42            48            39
N (At or below 130% of FPL)       36            12            24             9             8             7
Income > $80,000                  31.41%        27.08%        32.87%        25.49%        34.78%        39.13%
St. dev.                        (0.465)       (0.449)       (0.471)       (0.440)       (0.482)       (0.493)
N (Inc. > $80K)                   60            13            47            13            16            18
N (Inc.
1 child)                    121            31            90            29            29            32
N (= 1 child)                     85            21            64            24            22            18
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* p
$100K                             6.4%          2.6%          7.7%          5.9%          8.7%          8.7%
(0.244)       (0.148)       (0.267)       (0.238)       (0.285)       (0.285)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* p

Variables                                                                      e
N                   6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572    6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572
Unconditional         $36.55        $49.59        $86.14        $11.86     $98.50       16.132        18.853        34.985         3.609        38.744
mean of
dependent
variable
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participants in the intervention conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with weekly dummy
variables. For the sake of space, coefficients from the weekly dummy variables were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday
through Sunday, the baseline period ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In the
baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all households were enrolled in the study (by
week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted
from the analysis. As a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their treatment.
* p

Variables                                                                      e
N                   6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572    6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572         6,572
Unconditional         $36.55        $49.59        $86.14        $11.86     $98.50       16.132        18.853        34.985         3.609        38.744
mean of
dependent
variable
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participants in the intervention conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with weekly dummy
variables. For the sake of space, coefficients from the weekly dummy variables were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday
through Sunday, the baseline period ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In the
baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all households were enrolled in the study (by
week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted
from the analysis. As a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their treatment.
* p

Variables                                                                      e
N                   1,141         1,141         1,141         1,141         1,141    4,904         4,904         4,904         4,904         4,904
Unconditional         $28.28        $41.04        $69.32         $9.17     $78.85      $38.36        $50.70        $89.06        $12.25       $101.81
mean of
dependent
variable
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participants in the intervention conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with weekly dummy
variables. For the sake of space, coefficients from the weekly dummy variables were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday
through Sunday, the baseline period ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In the
baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all households were enrolled in the study (by
week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted
from the analysis. As a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their treatment.
* p

Variables                                                                      e
N                     567           567           567           567           567    5,759         5,759         5,759         5,759         5,759
Unconditional         $25.16        $39.92        $65.08         $8.76     $74.23      $37.73        $50.41        $88.14        $12.05       $100.67
mean of
dependent
variable
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participants in the intervention conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with weekly dummy
variables. For the sake of space, coefficients from the weekly dummy variables were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday
through Sunday, the baseline period ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In the
baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all households were enrolled in the study (by
week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted
from the analysis. As a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their treatment.
* p
1.3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Less        All Rated                    All                       Less         All Rated
Nutritious    Nutritious       Items         Unrated     Items    Nutritious     Nutritious        Items         Unrated      All Items
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subsidy            11.58     * a $21.23    * a, d $32.81  ** a $5.78    ** a, d   a ^$4.548    * a d ^$7.546  a, d ^$12.09        $0.414    d ^$11.68
$38.59
(6.914)      (10.780)       (16.990)       (2.802)   (18.990      (4.434)        (5.521)         (9.534)       (1.608)      (10.490)
)
Tax                $0.30      a ^$9.037      a ^$8.735     a ^$3.38     a ^$12.    a $3.832         $3.62         a $7.451        $0.588        $8.039
11
(8.190)      (12.470)       (20.380)       (4.138)   (23.370      (4.180)        (5.334)         (9.015)       (1.540)      (10.230)
)
Tax/Subsidy        $9.14         $8.14         $17.28      ** $5.13     $22.40      ^$2.831        ^$7.931        ^$10.76        ^$0.327      ^$11.09
(6.874)       (9.965)       (16.310)       (2.039)   (17.710      (5.338)        (6.790)        (11.800)       (1.750)      (13.080)
)
Weekly Dummy

Variables                                                                   e
N               1,141         1,141          1,141         1,141         1,141    4,904          4,904           4,904         4,904         4,904
Unconditional     $28.28        $41.04         $69.32         $9.17     $78.85      $38.36         $50.70          $89.06        $12.25       $101.81
mean of
dependent
variable
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participants in the intervention conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with weekly dummy
variables. For the sake of space, coefficients from the weekly dummy variables were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday
through Sunday, the baseline period ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In the
baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all households were enrolled in the study (by
week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted
from the analysis. As a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their treatment.
* p

Variables                                                                      e
N                     567           567           567           567           567    5,759         5,759         5,759         5,759         5,759
Unconditional         $25.16        $39.92        $65.08         $8.76     $74.23      $37.73        $50.41        $88.14        $12.05       $100.67
mean of
dependent
variable
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participants in the intervention conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with weekly dummy
variables. For the sake of space, coefficients from the weekly dummy variables were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday
through Sunday, the baseline period ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In the
baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all households were enrolled in the study (by
week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted
from the analysis. As a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their treatment.
* p

N                                            4,816           769         3,637           342         4,266
Unconditional Mean Shares                        0.425         0.406         0.433         0.369         0.431
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shares of less nutritious and nutritious foods were calculated using only rated food purchases, thus the sign of
the share is opposite when comparing nutritious and less nutritious foods. Participants in the intervention
conditions were all combined. Regression coefficients were estimated using a fixed effects regression with
weekly dummy variables. For the sake of space, coefficients for the constants and the weekly dummy variables
were not included in the table. Because weeks were classified as Monday through Sunday, the baseline period
ended with week 8, which is the full week prior to households receiving notice of their treatment group. In
the baseline period, values are set to missing prior to the first shopping trip in the first 3 weeks. Once all
households were enrolled in the study (by week 4), any missing value was set to zero. Since households
received their notices between September 7-15, weeks including these dates were omitted from the analysis. As
a result, the treatment period begins with week 11, which is after all households received notice of their
treatment.
* p
[emailprotected]
.

First Edition
Designed by Paul Kepple and Ralph Geroni at Headcase Design
Illustrations by Mitch Blunt
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied
for.
ISBN 978-0-06-213652-7
14 15 16 17 18 ov/rrd 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Contents
Introduction

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

One: Mindless Eating Solutions

Your Food Radius
Nobody Wants Us to Be Fat
Chinese Buffet Confidential
Starting Small to Get Slim
Sixteen Pounds from Happiness
Becoming Slim by Design

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Two: Your Slim-For-Life Home

Fat-Proofing the Rich and Famous
The Syracuse Study
Step One: The Kitchen Makeover
Step Two: Tablescape Redesign
Step Three: Snack-Proofing
Scoring Big at Home

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Three: Restaurant Dining By Design

In Praise of Leftovers
Show Me to a Slim Table
One Antidote for Fast-Food Fever
``Can I Take Your Order?''
Half-Plate Profits
Smaller and Taller
Bread and Water
Faster Food and Happier Meals
What Would Batman Eat?
Transforming a Town
Is Your Favorite Restaurant Making You Fat?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Four: Supermarket Makeovers

The Desserted Island of Denmark
Half-Cart Solutions
Healthy First and Green Line Guides
Wide Aisles and High Products
Groceries and Gum
Lights, Stars, Numerology!
Using the Half-Plate Rule
The Three Checkouts
Back to Bornholm
How Your Grocery Store Can Make You Slim

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Five: Office Space and Workplace

Move Away from the Desk
Rethinking Corporate Wellness
Break-Room Makeovers
Trimming the Google-Plex of Food
Cafeteria Cuisine
The Company Health Club
Coaching and Weight-Loss Programs
Would You Sign a Health Conduct Code?
Design Your New Boss's Job Description!
Think Summer Camp, Not Boot Camp

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Six: Smarter Lunchrooms

School Lunch 101
When Chocolate Milk Attacks
More Fruit by Design
The Salad Bar Solution
Lunch-Line Redesign, MTV-Style
What's Your Lunchroom Score?
The Lunchtime Report Card
Designing a Smarter Lunchroom Tray
Helping Your School Become Slim by Design

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Seven: Slim By Design for Life

From Can't to CAN
From Me to We
Getting Started
Design Trumps Discussion
Sample Scripts
Make It Happen

Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
* * * * *
Chapter Four
Supermarket Makeovers
You've Never Seen A Kleenex Cam. That's why it works so well--it
sees you, but you don't see it. It's helped us learn why the crazy
things grocery shoppers do aren't as crazy as they seem.

Back in 2001, I asked some clever engineering students at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to rig up a small, remotely
controlled movie camera into what looked like an ordinary box of
Kleenex.\1\ Using this invisible camera we could follow shoppers to
learn exactly how they shop. We took our Kleenex Cams and stacked them
on top of ``deserted'' shopping carts, hid them on shelves next to
Fruity Pebbles cereal, and positioned them in our carts so we could
follow shoppers as they moved through the aisles. The Kleenex Cams
showed us what catches a person's eye, what they pick up and put back,
why they buy things they'll never use,\2\ when shopping lists don't
matter, and how they shop differently in the ``smelly'' parts of a
grocery store. Again, these studies were all university approved.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The only remaining photo of the original Kleenex Cam is in this
newspaper article below. By today's tech standards, it's pretty boring,
but back then it was really souped up. Read about it at
SlimByDesign.org/GroceryStores/.
\2\ One interesting category of items that are most likely to
become cabinet castaways are unusual foods that people are buying for a
specific occasion. When that occasion never happens, the food just sits
and sits. This is a neat article on that: Brian Wansink, S. Adam
Brasel, and Stephen Amjad, ``The Mystery of the Cabinet Castaway: Why
We Buy Products We Never Use,'' Journal of Family and Consumer Science
92, no. 1 (2000): 104-8.
\3\ All of these studies are preapproved. Today--compared to twenty
or even 10 years ago--studies to be approved by a university's
Institutional Review Board to make sure that they are safe and to make
sure all of the data is collected anonymously and that no one will ever
know about that day you bought that EPT kit and the two pints of
Chocolate Fudge Swirl. Some studies--like many shopping studies--are
observational, but others might ask a person to complete a
questionnaire at the end of a trip in exchange for a small amount of
money, free food, movie tickets, and so on.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But let's back up and set the stage. Our best and worst eating
habits start in a grocery store. Food that's bought here gets moved
into our homes. Food in our homes gets eaten.\4\ If we bought more bags
of fruit and fewer boxes of Froot Loops, we would eventually eat more
of the first and less of the second. Although bad for the Froot Loops
Corporation, it's great for us--and great for grocery stores. The
typical grocery store makes more profit by selling you $10 more fruit
than $10 more Froot Loops. There's a higher markup on fruit, and--
unlike the everlasting box of Froot Loops--fruit spoils, and spoiled
fruit spoils profits. You have to sell it while you can.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ That is, about 88 percent of this food will be eaten. The 12
percent that's wasted, however, isn't the candy, chips, and ice cream;
it's typically the spoiled fruit and vegetables, leftovers, and cabinet
castaways. Brian Wansink, ``Abandoned Products and Consumer Waste: How
Did That Get into the Pantry?,'' Choices (October 2001): 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So if a grocery store makes more by selling healthy foods like
fruit, why don't they do a better job of it? They try--but what they
really need is a healthy dose of redesign.

Our best and worst eating habits start in a grocery store.

We've been following grocery shoppers since 1995, and some things
have changed since then. For one, we no longer have to wrestle with
Kleenex Cams. Our newer cameras are so small they're embedded into
Aquafina water bottles with false bottoms.\5\ The technology is sexier,
but the results are e-x-a-c-t-l-y the same.\6\ Wherever we've done
these studies--corner markets in Philadelphia or warehouse stores in
France, Brazilian superstores or Taiwanese night markets--people pretty
much shop in the same time-stressed, sensory-overwhelmed way. But
knowing what can be done to get them to buy a healthier cartful of food
is good for shoppers, for grocers, and even for governments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ A cool example of all of these hidden cameras in use can be
found at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2B0Ncy3Gz24. It's not at a
grocery store but in a lunchroom. Same approach.
\6\ Lots of people visit our Lab (even from way overseas) like it's
some weird trip to Consumer Mecca. Something I've heard a number of
times is ``Wow . . . this isn't really very high-tech!'' No, it isn't.
What we'd like to think, however, is that insights trump glitzy
technology every day of the week. We've got low-definition hidden
cameras, hidden scales, counters, and timers, because we don't need
holograms or brain-scan machines to nail down the reality--not the
theory--of why people do what they do. You don't need infrared sensors
to see someone eating twice as many Cheetos when you change what
they're watching on TV.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wait. Governments?
What jump-started a lot of our recent thinking was a request we
received from the Danish Government. In April 2011, they sent a six-
person delegation out to my Lab. Their mission: to help Danish grocery
stores make it easier for shoppers to shop healthier. Our mission, if
we chose to accept it: develop a healthy supermarket makeover plan that
would be cheap, easy, and profitable for Danish grocery stores to
implement. Our makeover plan had to be profitable for stores because
that's the only way it would work. But here's the cool clincher: They'd
give us an entire island on which to test our plan.
The Desserted Island of Denmark
Bornholm Is A Danish Island with forty-two thousand inhabitants
that sits in the Baltic Sea, one hundred miles east of Copenhagen.\7\
The Government of Denmark wanted us to help change the grocery stores
on the entire island so they could profitably help these islanders shop
healthier. They wanted to turn it from a Dessert Isle into a Salad
Aisle.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Denmark Islands. Denmark actually has a number of little
islands, but none like poor Bornholm. It never gets any peace.
Strategically located in the Baltic Sea, it was occupied by the Germans
during almost all of World War II and the Russians right after that.
And probably by the Vikings way before that.

Anyone who's read or seen H.G. Wells's The Island of Dr. Moreau
knows that islands are a researcher's dream. You can do all sorts of
crazy, mad scientist things on them and not worry about the rest of the
world bothering you. You can change the shopping carts or layout of all
the stores on the island, and if the sales of Crisco and Pixy Stix drop
by 20 percent, you know it's not because people are swimming over to
buy them in Lapland.
Until they came to talk with us, the Danish Government was
considering three types of changes: tax it, take it, or teach it.\8\
But taxing food or taking it away creates pushback. Shoppers don't like
it, grocers don't like it, and so it can often backfire. For instance,
when we did a 6 month study on taxing soft drinks in grocery stores in
Utica, New York, a medium-size city in the United States, we found that
the only people who bought fewer soft drinks were beer-buying
households--and they just bought a lot more beer.\9\ People had to
drink something with their pizza and burgers, and it wasn't going to be
tap water or soy milk. They changed from Coke to Coors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ People--whether public health professionals or politicians--can
often get very dramatic in what they tell grocery stores they should
do. Dramatic, but not always realistic or right.
\9\ This is an interesting paper of unintended consequences: Brian
Wansink et al., ``From Coke to Coors: A Field Study of a Sugar-
Sweetened Beverage Tax and Its Unintended Consequences,'' May 26, 2012,
available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2079840 or http://dx.doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.2079840.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And teaching doesn't work much better.\10\ As shoppers, we don't
behave the way we're supposed to because (1) we love tasty food, and
(2) we don't like to think very hard. Because of our love for both
tasty food and for mindless shopping, we don't approach grocery
shopping like a nutrition assignment. We just do it and move on to the
next fifty-seven items on our to-do list. With this mindless mindset,
when we're shopping at 5:45 on a Friday evening, we're not about to be
fazed by there being a few more calories in pizza crust than in pita
bread.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ This is controversial for me to admit since I'm the immediate
past president of the Society for Nutrition Education and Behavior and
because I was the White House-appointed person (2007-2009) in charge of
promoting the [D]ietary [G]uidelines for the USDA.

Maybe the best way we can change grocery shopping habits is to make
them more mindlessly healthy--make it more convenient, attractive, and
normal to pick up and buy a healthier food.\11\ So here's what we did
in Bornholm. Based on our ``Kleenex Cam'' recordings,\12\ notes,
stopwatch times, and data from thousands of similar shoppers, we
focused on design changes in five areas of the store: carts, layouts,
aisles, signs, and checkout lines. We had two criteria: (1) all the
changes had to make the store more money in a month than they cost to
implement, and (2) they all had to help make people slim by design.
Let's start with a shopping cart.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ This was one focus of my book Mindless Eating. The basic idea
is that making small changes around you that you don't even really
notice has a tremendous long-term impact on changing behavior and
weight.
\12\ We no longer use the Kleenex Cam but we still call it that. We
now use our bottles, hats, and iPhones.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Half-Cart Solutions
Here's a Ten-Word Description of how most people shop for
groceries: They throw things in their cart and they check out. What's
the right amount of fruits and vegetables to put in a cart? We don't
really know because we don't really care. Yet imagine what would happen
if every time we put something in our cart we had to ask ourselves
whether it was healthy or not. It would be irritating--for sure--but
after a while we'd think twice about what we casually threw in. Just
stopping and thinking for a split second would be enough to snap us out
of our mindlessly habitual zombie shopping trance.
13-14

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ A number of years ago we gave secretaries dishes of chocolate
Kisses that we either placed on their desk or 6 from their desk. We
found that those who had to walk only 6 ate \1/2\ as much candy (100
calories less; four each day instead of nine). Yet when we asked them
if it was because the 6 walk was too far or too much of a hassle,
their answer surprised us. They said instead that the 6 distance gave
them a chance to pause and ask themselves if they were really that
hungry. Half the time they'd answer ``no.'' The key was that
something--that distance--caused them to pause and interrupt their
mindlessness: Brian Wansink, James E. Painter, and Yeon-Kyung Lee,
``The Office Candy Dish: Proximity's Influence on Estimated and Actual
Candy Consumption,'' International Journal of Obesity 30, no. 5 (May
2006): 871-75.
\14\ Anything that stops and makes a person pause--even for a split
second--might be enough to knock them out of their mindless trance and
rethink.

Back to the cart. When most of us shop, fruits and vegetables take
up only 24 percent of our cart.\15\ But suppose your grocery store
sectioned a cart in \1/2\ by taping a piece of yellow duct tape across
the middle interior. And suppose they put a sign in the front of the
cart that recommended that you put all the fruits and vegetables in the
front and all the other foods in the back. This dividing line in the
cart doesn't moralize or lecture. It just encourages shoppers to ask
themselves whether the food in their hand goes in the front or back of
the cart. There's nothing to resist or rage against--they're simply
sorting their food . . . if they want to.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ The average grocery shopper buys only 24 percent of fruits and
vegetables. Simone French, Melanie Wall, Nathan R. Mitchell, Scott T.
Shimotsu, and Ericka Welsh, ``Annotated Receipts Capture Household Food
Purchases from a Broad Range of Sources,'' International Journal of
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 6, no. 37 (2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When you use duct tape at home, you become MacGyver. When it's used
to divide your grocery cart, you become healthier.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Brian Wansink, C.R. Payne, K.C. Herbst, and D. Soman, ``Part
Carts: Assortment Allocation Cues That Increase Fruit and Vegetable
Purchases,'' Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 45 (2013): 4S,
42.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We made a few dozen of these divided carts to test at supermarkets
in Williamsburg, Virginia, and Toronto, Canada.\17\ When people
finished shopping and returned their souped-up, tricked-out carts, we
gave them a gift card to a local coffee shop if they would answer some
questions and give us their shopping receipt.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Brian Wansink, Dilip Soman, Kenneth C. Herbst, and Collin R.
Payne, ``Partitioned Shopping Carts: Assortment Allocation Cues that
Increase Fruit and Vegetable Purchases,'' under review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shoppers with these divided carts spent twice as much on fruits and
vegetables. They also spent more at the store--about 25 percent more.
Not only did this fruit and vegetable divider make them think twice
about what they bought; it also made them believe that buying more
fruits and vegetables was normal. Who knows how much healthy stuff your
neighbor buys? It must be about \1/2\, people think as they throw in
some pears and three more red peppers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
How Your Grocer Can Help You . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Test the Half-Cart Waters
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Will a divided, half-cart approach be profitable? It can if it can
sell more perishable produce--like fruits and vegetables. All that's
needed is a visual divider in a few of your carts and a sign in the
front that says, ``Put your fruits and vegetables in the front of your
cart.''
If your grocery store doesn't want to bust out the duct tape, they
can use printable mats for the bottom of the cart that make the same
suggestion--fruits and vegetables in the front \1/2\ and everything
else in back (download at SlimByDesign.org).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Miracle of Duct Tape
A Half-Cart Solution

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Do it yourself. Divide your cart with your coat, your purse,
or your briefcase. Or bring your own duct tape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
What You Can Do . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hints for Half-Cart Shopping
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your local supermarket might not have divided carts yet, and you
probably don't travel with your own. Here's what you can do . . .

Decide what you want to buy more of. For instance, a shopper
with children might want to be nudged to buy more fruits and
vegetables, and a shopper with high blood pressure might want to buy
more low-sodium foods. A dieter might want to be nudged to buy more
low-carb foods, and a diabetic might want to buy more foods with a
low glycemic index.

Physically divide your cart by putting something across the
middle. This could be a purse, backpack, scarf, briefcase, coat, or a
sleeping child you want to keep an eye on. You can then claim the
front half of . . . our cart for whatever you want to purchase more
of. If that target space isn't full, you'll naturally tend to buy
more to balance things out.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

You're 11 percent more likely to take the first vegetable you
see than the third.
When opening your cupboard, you're three times as likely to
take the first cereal you see as you are the fifth.
Healthy First and Green Line Guides
When You Walk Up To A Buffet, you're 11 percent more likely to take
the first vegetable you see than the third.\18\ When opening your
cupboard, you're three times as likely to take the first cereal you see
as you are the fifth.\19\ The same is true in grocery stores. When you
start shopping, you can't wait to start piling things in your cart. But
after it starts filling up, you become more selective. If stores could
get you to walk by more of the healthy--and profitable--foods first,
they might be able to get you to fill up the cart on the good stuff,
and squeeze out any room for the Ben & Jerry's variety pack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ A really robust finding. A great reason why you should also
pass around the salad and green beans to your kids at dinnertime before
you bring out the lasagna. Brian Wansink and David Just, ``Healthy
Foods First: Students Take the First Lunchroom Food 11% More Often than
the Third,'' Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 43 (2011):
4S1, S9.
\19\ You can just believe me, or you can read ponderous evidence of
why this happens: Pierre Chandon and Brian Wansink, ``When Are
Stockpiled Products Consumed Faster? A Convenience-Salience Framework
of Postpurchase Consumption Incidence and Quantity,'' Journal of
Marketing Research 39, no. 3 (2002): 321-35.

We spend less than 6 minutes in the fruit and vegetable
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
section.

Most grocery stores in the United States place the fruit and
vegetable section on the far right of the store. It's the first thing
we see and wander over to. The bad news is that many of us spend less
than 6 minutes there.\20\ We pick up some apples and lettuce and then
wander over to the next aisle. But if stores could get us to linger
there a little longer, we'd buy a little bit more.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ This is a really neat finding, but it seems like it will take
a miracle to get it published. In the meantime, you can find it on
SSRN: Brian Wansink and Kate Stein, ``Eyes in the Aisle: Eye Scanning
and Choice in Grocery Stores,'' 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The secret might lie in the fact that we're wanderers--we're not
always very deliberate. What if they put a dashed green line that
zigzagged through the produce section, and what if they put floor
decals in front of food shelves that offer healthy meal ideas? Just
like that dashed yellow line on the highway that keeps you mindlessly
on the road and the billboards that keep you mindlessly amused, maybe
putting a dashed green line and floor decals would also have us
wandering the produce section a bit longer.
To test this, we proposed Operation: Green Highway on our mad
scientist island in Denmark. Supermarkets could put a 2" wide dashed
green line through the produce section--around the apples and oranges,
over to the lettuce, past the onions and herbs, and back around to the
berries and kumquats. They could even include some kid-friendly visuals
or floor graphics. If a shopper followed this green highway, he or she
might be tempted to buy more fruits and vegetables.
To test this, we had people initially trace their way through
grocery stores that either did or did not have Health Highway lines.
Did people stay on the line? Of course not, but they would have spent
an average equivalent of 3 more minutes in the produce section. At
about $1/minute, this would mean they could spend as much as $3 more on
fruits and vegetables than they otherwise would have.
21-22

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Would this dashed green line work through the rest of the
store? It could go down some of the healthier aisles--say canned fruits
and vegetables or foods with whole grains--and around much of the
perimeter of the store. Yet to use the quotation from Spinal Tap again,
``It's a fine line between clever and stupid.'' This line might work
well in the produce section, but don't take it overboard. It might be
irritating or too strange in the rest of the store--particularly
because these long aisles might make it look like a highway divider.
\22\ My good colleagues Collin Payne and David Just have early
evidence that this works well when it's first laid out. See Collin R.
Payne and David R. Just, ``Using Floor Decals and Way Finding to
Increase the Sales of Fruits and Vegetables,'' under review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But what about the other store aisles? Let's say that you have two
favorite grocery stores: Tops and Hannaford. At Tops, the aisle after
the produce section--let's call it Aisle 2--is the potato chips,
cookies, and soft drinks aisle. At Hannaford, the potato chips,
cookies, and soft drinks are in Aisle 15--the second-to-last aisle in
the store. If you're on a diet, which store should you choose?
We followed 259 shoppers in Washington, D.C., grocery stores to see
if a person shops differently depending on which aisle they're in.\23\
We discovered that most people with shopping carts behave the same way:
They walk through the produce section, then turn and go down Aisle 2
(which leads back toward the front of the store). It almost doesn't
matter what's in the aisle--health food, dog food, or mops. At this
point, shopping's still a fun adventure. But after Aisle 2, shoppers
get mission-oriented and start skipping aisles as they look for only
what they think they need. So, Aisle 2 gets the most love and attention
from the most shoppers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Wansink and Stein, ``Eyes in the Aisle.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, what's in Aisle 2 at your favorite grocery store? It's often
soft drinks, chips, or cookies as in the Tops store. To make a grocery
store more slim by design, managers could easily load up this aisle
with whatever healthier food is most profitable for them. This might be
store-brand canned vegetables, whole-grain foods, or high-margin lower-
calorie foods. First in sight is first in cart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
How Your Grocer Can Help You . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Guiding Angles, Aisles, and Lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
One way to help shoppers fill up their carts with healthy foods is
to make sure those are the aisles they visit first and stay in longest.
People cherry-pick their favorite fruits and vegetables and quickly
move to the center of the store, but you can keep them in the produce
area longer by angling displays so they guide shoppers through the
store--think of the 30 and 45 angles you used to see in those old-
school pinball games. Also, green lines--Green Highways--seem to nudge
most of us, at least occasionally, to turn in a direction we otherwise
wouldn't have turned in.
Since shoppers are more likely to buy healthy foods when their carts
are empty, stores should load up Aisles 1, 2, and 3 with whatever's
healthiest and most profitable.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
What You Can Do . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wander the Healthy Aisles First
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following the green line works well if there is a green line. But if
there isn't one, you can always make your own.

Make a point of wheeling through as many of the produce
aisles as possible. Even if it's fast and furious, simply seeing more
fruits and vegetables while your cart is empty makes them more
tempting.

Hit the other healthier aisles--like those with canned and
frozen fruits and vegetables--before you head for the Crunch & Munch
section.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wide Aisles and High Products \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ If you want a beleaguered researcher's view of how this works,
here's an op-ed: Kate Stein, ``Shop Faster,'' New York Times, April 15,
2009, p. A29.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The More Time You Spend in a store, the more you buy. Similarly,
the more time you spend in an aisle, the more you buy.
25
In
order for us to buy a healthy food, we need to (1) see it and (2) have
the time to pick it off the shelf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ One source for this is Brian Wansink and Aner Tal,
``Correlates of Purchase Quantities in Grocery Stores,'' under review.

But not all shelves are the same. Food placed at eye level is
easier to spot and buy. For instance, kids' foods are placed at their
eye level, so that they can irritate us into buying them (``I want it!
I want it! I want it!'').
This works for Count Chocula and our kids, but would it for kale
chips and us? We returned to our ``I-Spy'' habits and observed 422
people purchasing thousands of products in the Washington, D.C., area.
First we estimated the height of each shopper using a series of pre-
marked shelves they walked by (picture those height-marker decals on
the doors of convenience stores).\26\ We then measured the height of
each product they looked at. Based on where they looked, we could
figure out what percent of the foods they bought were at eye level.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Of course this is less accurate than measuring people barefoot
with a German-made stadeometer, but knowing someone's relative height
is probably sufficient. Being able to document that a 6 male is taller
than a 5 5" female is close enough for this calibration. This issue of
precision does raise to mind the comedian Ron White's quote ``I'm a
pretty big guy--between 6 and 6 6"--depending on what convenience
store I'm coming out of.''
\27\ In this study with Kate Stein, we tracked what people put in
their carts but we didn't track them to the cash register. Still,
unless someone changes their mind when in the National Enquirer
checkout line, we assume that what they took, they probably bought.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you're shopping in a narrow aisle, 61 percent of everything
you'll buy is within 1 of your eye level--either 1 above or 1
below.\28\ This is useful to know if you're a grocery-store owner who
wants to sell us healthier foods. Smart store managers can put these
profitable healthy foods at eyeball level. If the product is one that's
typically bought by males, it can be placed even 5" higher, since the
average male is that much taller than the average female.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ And 12" is even a stretch. Most purchased products were within
a 6 range--higher or lower--of eye level for a particular shopper.
This includes 37 percent of what women put in their cart and 44 percent
for men. To stretch the range of products purchased even further, widen
the shopping aisles. If an aisle is narrow--6 or less--61 percent of
the products you buy will be within 12" of eye level. But if you're in
a wider aisle, you look higher and lower. If it's only 2 wider, \1/2\
of what you buy will be outside this eye zone. But wide aisles also
have something else going for them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One well-known finding among people watchers is that nothing causes
a person to scoot out of an aisle faster than when someone accidentally
brushes against their behind. In his book Why We Buy, Paco Underhill
refers to this as the ``butt brush.'' \29\ Think of the last time this
happened to you--five seconds later you had pretty much teleported
yourself to another spot in the store. Since brushing against people
probably happens much more in narrow grocery store aisles than wide
ones, people might spend less time and buy fewer items there. Many
grocery store aisles range from 6 to 8 wide. In the Washington, D.C.,
grocery stores mentioned earlier, we measured the width of all the
aisles and timed how long the average shopper spent in them. Indeed,
the wider the aisle, the more they bought. It didn't matter what was
there--canned Brussels sprouts, twenty-pound bags of cat food,
dishwashing liquid--the more time they spent in the aisles, the more
items they bought.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Paco Underhill, Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping (New York:
Simon & Shuster, 2000).
\30\ There's also an irritation factor with narrow aisles. If a
person can't see a clear way through an aisle, they might be less
likely to go down it. And if you keep getting interrupted by people as
you're trying to shop because they're scooting by you, you're less
likely to linger.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your grocer could put more healthy, high-margin food in wider
aisles and less healthy food in narrower ones. Identifying or creating
healthy food aisles that are wider would be one solution. Another
solution--make sure the healthier foods are at eye level.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Kate Stein and Brian Wansink, ``Eye Height and Purchase
Probability,'' under review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eye-Level Shopping Bull's-Eye

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

* 60 percent of what shoppers buy is within 12" of their eye
height.
Slim-By-Design Grocery Shopping

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Groceries and Gum
Most of Us Know that it's a bad personal policy to go shopping on
an empty stomach. We think it's because we buy more food when we're
hungry--but we don't. In our studies of starving shoppers, they buy the
exact same amount of food as stuffed shoppers. They don't buy more, but
they buy worse.\32\ When we're hungry, we buy foods that are convenient
enough to eat right away and will stop our cravings.\33\ We don't go
for broccoli and tilapia; we go for carbs in a box or bag. We go for
one of the ``Four C's'': crackers, chips, cereal, or candy. We want
packages we can open and eat with our right hand while we drive home
with our left.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Here's the best proof of why you shouldn't shop when you're
hungry: Brian Wansink, Aner Tal, and Mitsuru Shimizu, ``First Foods
Most: After 18-Hour Fast, People Drawn to Starches First and Vegetables
Last,'' Archives of Internal Medicine 172, no. 12 (June 2012): 961-63.
\33\ This is a current working paper by Brian Wansink and Drew
Hanks, ``Timing, Hunger, and Increased Sales of Convenience Foods.''
Hopefully it will be published in time for our retirement.

When it comes to cravings, our imagination is the problem. The
cravings hit us super-hard when we're hungry because our hunger leads
us to imagine what a food would feel like in our mouth if we were
eating it. If your Girl Scout neighbor asked you to buy Girl Scout
cookies, you'd buy one or two boxes. But if she were to instead ask you
to describe what it's like to eat your favorite Girl Scout cookie, you
would start imagining the texture, taste, and chewing sensation, and
wind up ordering every life-giving box of Samoas she could carry. (Keep
this in mind the next time your daughter wants to win the gold medal in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cookie sales.)

Starving shoppers don't buy more, but they buy worse.

Most food cravings--including those that occur when we shop--are
largely mental. As with the Girl Scout cookies, they seem to be caused
when we imagine the sensory details of eating a food we love--we start
imagining the texture, taste, and chewing sensation. But if we could
interrupt our imagination, it might be easier to walk on by.
One way we can interrupt these cravings is by simply chewing gum.
Chewing gum short-circuits our cravings. It makes it too hard to
imagine the sensory details of crunchy chips or creamy ice cream. My
colleague Aner Tal and I discovered this when we gave gum to shoppers
at the start of their shopping trip. When we reconnected with them at
the end of their trip, they rated themselves as less hungry and less
tempted by food--and in another study we found they also bought seven
percent less junk food than those who weren't chewing gum.\34\ If you
shop for groceries just before dinner, make sure the first thing you
buy is gum--and our early findings show that sugarless bubble gum or
mint-flavor might work best.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ One of the ways we've tested this is by intercepting grocery
shoppers in the parking lot on their way into a store. We ask them to
answer a couple of questions about the store and if we can talk to them
after they shop. If they say yes, we tag their cart so we can catch
them as they check out. At that time, we ask them a few questions about
their experience and if we can have a copy of their shopping receipt. A
second group of people get the exact same treatment, except that
they're also given a piece of sugarless gum as a thank-you. We tag
their cart with a different color tag, and again catch them as they
check out.

Most food cravings--including those that occur when we shop--
are largely mental.
Chewing gum short-circuits our cravings. It makes it too hard
to imagine the sensory details of crunchy chips or creamy ice
cream.
Lights, Stars, Numerology!
Supermarkets Could Make Us slim by design if they only told us what
foods were the healthiest, right? Not really. Supermarkets and food
companies have endlessly experimented with little stickers and icons
that they hoped would help us to eat better. They'd say things like
``Good for You,'' ``Better for You,'' ``Don't Have a Stroke,'' and so
on. The United Kingdom even uses a traffic light--each food has a green
(go), yellow (slow), or red (no) icon on it.

Do you remember these icons? Of course you don't. Most of us
ignored them because they were too confusing, self-serving, or
unconvincing. Oh, and even when people did pay attention to them, they
often backfired. Some people believed the green and yellow foods were a
lot healthier than they actually were and gorged out on them. Then food
companies got tricky and took advantage of this by producing foods that
barely met the minimum requirements for a green or yellow icon. Getting
the healthy icon then became more important than actually coming up
with a healthier product.

Most labeling systems seem to backfire because we ignore them
or we game them.

One exception seems to be the Guiding Stars program. Back in 2005,
an innovative, brilliant, high-end grocery store in New England--
Hannaford Brothers--boldly stuck its neck out by putting bright yellow
stars next to the healthiest foods on their shelves--super-healthy
foods even got three stars. So, did people buy better food? Well,
according to one study, they didn't initially seem to buy any more of
the starred food. But they initially did buy less of the unstarred
foods. They didn't buy more tofu, though this led them to think twice
about the Doritos.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ This is a great study that shows surprisingly that either
taxing bad foods or subsidizing good foods seems to backfire. When you
subsidize healthy foods, people buy more of both healthy and unhealthy
foods. When you tax unhealthy foods, shoppers by less of both unhealthy
and healthy foods. John Cawley et al., ``How Nutrition Rating Systems
in Supermarkets Impact the Purchases of Healthy and Less Healthy
Foods,'' under review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But here's why most of these labeling systems seem to backfire: (1)
We don't believe them, or (2) we game them. We know an apple gets a
green light, an A+, or a 100 percent rating. And we know a Twinkie gets
a red light, a D^, and a two percent rating. It's the stuff in the
middle that turns us into nonbelievers. If a food gets a rating that
doesn't line up with our intuition, it totally loses credibility. When
the magic formula is too complicated or too secret, we dismiss these
ratings as ridiculous and ignore them.
But worse than our ignoring them is when we game the system. We're
experts at getting around something we don't want to do or believe. If
one type of cracker is rated five points higher than another type of
cracker, we choose it instead of an orange.\36\ Then we end up
rewarding ourselves by eating more of them.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ This is an award-winning article that opened a lot of eyes
with the health halo concept: Pierre Chandon and Brian Wansink, ``The
Biasing Health Halos of Fast Food Restaurant Health Claims: Lower
Calorie Estimates and Higher Side-Dish Consumption Intentions,''
Journal of Consumer Research 34, no. 3 (October 2007): 301-14.
\37\ There's a ton of evidence here that's compelling, but way too
detailed to talk about in the text. It happens with both low-fat foods
and with foods with healthy names. Knock yourself out reading these two
detailed (but award-winning papers): One's mentioned in the prior note
and the other one is Brian Wansink and Pierre Chandon, ``Can Low-Fat
Nutrition Labels Lead to Obesity?,'' Obesity 14 (September 2006): A49-
50.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
What You Can Do . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Use Your Intuition First and Their Labels Second
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Relying too much on ratings is confusing and can backfire. Even if
your grocery store is using them, rely first on your common sense and
only use the ratings to break ties between brands--Count Chocula beats
Cap'n Crunch.
But don't celebrate your slightly smarter choice with a double-wide
candy bar. That's the compensation danger in a health halo world.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Using the Half-Plate Rule
Each Spring, Wegmans, a popular grocery chain in the Northeast,
does a big health promotion push called ``Eat well. Live well.'' From
time to time, we've helped develop new ideas for their stores. In 2009,
they visited our Lab to see if we could help develop a program that
would encourage their own employees to eat more fruit and vegetables.
They were thinking of providing some sort of education or promotion
program. Instead, we were thinking of giving them a simple, visual rule
of thumb. What we told Wegmans worked great for them, and it can work
great for you in the store and even when you get home.

In the good old days when we were kids, eating was easy. Your
grandmother piled dishes of food on the table, you'd take a little of
each, and--ta-da--that was nutrition! Today, the 273-page United States
Dietary Guidelines tips the scale at almost 3 pounds. But there's an
easier way for most people. When I was the executive director in charge
of the Dietary Guidelines and people asked me how they should eat,
although not the official USDA-sanctioned answer, my shortcut answer
was to simply encourage them to use my Lab's Half-Plate Rule.\38\ Half
of their plate had to be filled with fruit, vegetables, or salad, and
the other \1/2\ could be anything they wanted. It could be lamb, a
blueberry muffin, a handful of cheese . . . anything. They could also
take as many plates of food as they wanted. It's just that every time
they went back for seconds or thirds, \1/2\ their plate still had to be
filled with fruit, vegetables, or salad.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Wansink, Mindless Eating, pp. 178-9+.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Half-Plate Healthy

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

* Follow the Half-Plate Rule.

Could a person load up \1/2\ of their plate with Slim Jims and pork
bellies? Sure, but they don't. Giving people freedom--a license to eat
with only one simple guideline--seems to keep them in check. There's
nothing to rebel against, resist, or work around. As a result, they
don't even try. They also don't seem to overeat.\39\ They may want more
pasta and meatballs or another piece of pizza, but if they also have to
balance this with a \1/2\ plate of fruit, vegetables, or salad, many
people decide they don't want it bad enough.\40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Check out the article Brian Wansink and Kathryn Hoy,``Half-
plate Versus MyPlate: The Simpler the System, the Better the
Nutrition,'' forthcoming, and Brian Wansink and Alyssa Niman, ``The
Half-Plate Rule vs. MyPlate vs. Their Plate: The Effect on the Caloric
Intake and Enjoyment of Dinner,'' Journal of Nutrition Education and
Behavior 44, no. 4 (July-August 2012): S33.
\40\ The more latitude we give, the more likely they'll follow our
advice. When rules become just a little too complicated or vague, we
find reasons to stop following them. This was an early problem with
MyPlate. When somebody starts questioning ``Where does my dessert go?''
or ``How am I supposed to eat fruit with dinner,'' the more likely they
are to simply say ``Whatever'' and ignore it.

Using our Half-Plate Rule works amazingly well at home, but
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
only if you also use it when you shop.

Using our Half-Plate Rule works amazingly well at home, but only if
you also use it when you shop.\41\ To use it, you need to have enough
fruits, vegetables, and salad around in the first place. If as you shop
you think about you and your family being half-plate healthy, you'll
buy healthier and you'll also spend more. The first is good for you;
the second is good for the store.\42\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ A recap of this done by Jane Andrews, Wegmans dietitian, can
be found at http://rochester.kidsoutandabout.com/node/1901.
\42\ See more at Wansink and Niman, ``The Half-Plate Rule vs.
MyPlate vs. Their Plate.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wegmans jumped on our idea. Within 2 years, it was rolled out to
all their stores, and you can now get Half-Plate place mats, magnets,
posters. (They renamed it the trademarkable Half-Plate Healthy.) You
can see it in action in any of their stores, and the only place it
works better than in a grocery store is in your home.
Supermarkets don't have to talk about servings of fruits and
vegetables to get the point across. All they need to do is to reinforce
the idea that \1/2\ a plate could hold whatever fruit, vegetables, or
salad a person wanted. They can do this on signs, specials, recipes, or
in-store promotions--and subtly encourage people to fill their cart
with slightly more fruits and vegetables than they typically do.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Learn more about how Wegmans implemented our idea at http://
www.wegmans.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/
ProductDisplay?storeId=10052&partNumber=UNIVERSAL_20235.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
What You Can Do . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Half-Plate Rule at Home
------------------------------------------------------------------------
``Fill \1/2\ your plate with fruit, vegetables, or salad, and fill
the other \1/2\ with whatever you want.'' We've given this simple rule
to tens of thousands of people because it works. People often report
back to us that they eat fewer calories and they eat a lot more
``balanced'' diet than they did before. They also say they eat until
they're full but not stuffed.\44\
\44\ Wansink and Hoy, ``Half-plate Versus MyPlate.''
Nobody likes to be told they can't do something. With the Half-Plate
Rule there's nothing you can't eat. You just have to eat an equal
amount of fruit, vegetables, or salad. At some point, getting that
fourth piece of pizza just isn't worth having to eat another \1/2\
plate of salad. But, most important, you're the one who made that
decision.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

After forty-five minutes of seeing food, guess what we want?
It's not a snack-size can of lima beans.
The Three Checkouts
Grocery Shopping Isn't Exactly a trip to Fantasy Island, but the
checkout line can be an exception. It's filled with guilty-pleasure
rewards at the end of the ho-hum errand of shopping. There are bizarre
new gum flavors like mango chutney mint, meal-size candy bars, and
irresistibly tacky tabloids with headlines like ``Cellulite of the
Stars.'' These aisles are entertaining, but if you're with kids, you're
doomed. Kids in grocery checkout lines are like kids in toy stores.
They grab, bug, beg, pout, and scream. And if we cave in to buying pink
marshmallow puff candy shaped like Hello Kitty, we also cave in to
buying something with lots of chocolate--for us. There's usually
nothing in the aisle that we actually need, but after forty-five
minutes of seeing food, guess what we want? It's not a snack-size can
of lima beans. So we buy the Heath bar we swore we'd never buy again,
finish it by the time we leave the parking lot, and shake our head on
the way home . . . just as we did last week.

Mothers shopping with children wanted more foodfree cashier
lines. Fathers shopping with children didn't exist.

One supermarket solution is to set up at least one checkout line so
it's totally candy-free.\45\ Just as large supermarkets have different
lines for ``10 items or less'' or ``cash only,'' some lines could have
candy, others could have healthy snacks, and some could totally be free
of food. The stores could still sell magazines and other crazy things--
like eyeglass repair kits and superglue--but one or two aisles wouldn't
have any food at all.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ See Ulla M. Toft, Lise L. Winkler, Charlotte Glumer, and Brian
Wansink (2014), ``Candy Free Checkout Aisles: Decreasing Candy Sales in
Bornholm Island Supermarkets,'' under review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To see what tired shoppers in grocery store parking lots thought of
this idea, we asked, ``If your favorite supermarket had ten checkout
lines, how many should be candy lines, healthy lines, or food-free
lines?'' Here's what we found:

Men shopping alone wanted all candy lines.

Women shopping alone wanted more of the healthy food lines.

Mothers shopping with children wanted more food-free lines.

Fathers shopping with children didn't exist.

An easier first step would be to help convince your local
supermarket manager to start by simply adding a healthy line--perhaps
selling fresh fruit, granola bars, and so on. It might be the one
longer line shoppers wouldn't mind waiting in. When the manager sees
those lines getting longer, he'll quickly make the bigger steps. If he
doesn't, there are other places you can shop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
How Your Grocer Can Help You . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
What If All the Aisles Were Candy Aisles?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you want that food-free checkout experience but all the aisles
are loaded up with Skittles and SweeTarts, here's what you do:

1.  Tell the manager that you want to avoid impulse-buying candy
while you're in the checkout line. Ask him or her which of the open
checkouts would be least tempting for a dieter or a shopper with
children.

2.  While the manager is thinking, ask if they would consider
putting in a candy-free aisle. You can mention that other stores
(such as Hy-Vee, Wegmans, and HEB) have at least one candy-free
checkout aisle, and you've heard they're popular with both dieters
and parents shopping with kids. If one of those stores you mention
happens to be a nearby competitor, it might not be too many more
trips before you have your candy-free aisle. That will be a good
time to say ``thank you.'' \46\
\46\ More at Ulla M. Toft, Charlotte Glumer, Lise L. Winkler, and Brian
Wansink (2015), ``Food Free Checkout Aisles: A Danish Field Study of
Becoming Slim by Design,'' under review.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Which of These Would You Like To See at Your Grocery Store?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Back to Bornholm
After Watching, Coding, and Analyzing Shoppers on the Danish island
of Bornholm, we generated a small list of changes--baby steps--these
grocers could make to profitably help shoppers become slim by design.
We were scheduled to present these ideas to all nine grocery store
managers at the Bornholm Island Hall after they got off work a couple
of days later at seven thirty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
How Your Grocer Can Help You . . .
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Original Slim-By-Design Supermarket Pledge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
When the Danish Government said they'd be willing to try almost
anything we recommended, here's what we first suggested, and here's
what paved the way for the full 100-point Supermarket Scorecard at the
end of this chapter. We asked them to try the three changes that would
be easiest and most profitable for them.

1.  Provide divided \1/2\ carts that encourage people to put their
fruits and vegetables in front. The dividers can be made from
paint, duct tape, mats, etc.

2.  Angle produce displays and use floor decals (such as green
lines) to guide and keep people shopping longer in the produce
section.

3.  Place the healthiest foods in Aisles 1 through 3.

4.  Make the healthiest aisles the widest and put healthy products
at eye level or on end-of-aisle displays (endcaps).

5.  Use the ``Half-Plate Rule'' promotion.

6.  On end-of-aisle displays, combine the regular promotion with a
healthy food complement.

7.  Have two or three types of checkout lines: standard, food-free,
and healthy foods only.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, 2 days later at seven thirty my five-person
delegation of researchers almost equaled the six grocery managers who
actually showed up. Strike one. After starting the presentation with
the only Danish word I knew--``Velkommen'' (welcome)--I told them the
night was all about ``new ways you can sell more of your healthier
foods and make more money.'' We then went on to give a punchy
presentation on seven easy changes that we knew would work well. We had
photos, video clips of shoppers, cool study results, numbers, and funny
stories. It was great . . . except that nobody laughed, asked a
question, moved, or even seemed to blink. It was like Q&A hour in a wax
museum. Strike two.

We generated a small list of changes these grocers could make
to profitably help shoppers become slim by design.

Because there were no signs of life, I idled down my enthusiasm and
wrapped up our presentation a half hour early so my Danish colleagues
could try to salvage the evening. Once they started talking in Danish,
some sort of switch flipped in the managers. They started talking
louder, started to un-Danishly interrupt each other, and then started
arguing. Thinking things were getting out of control, I suggested we
call it a night before they started to break furniture. My Danish
colleagues waved me off and the melee continued. An hour later, things
had slowed down, and the managers thanked us and cleared out. Before we
started cleaning up, I asked my Danish colleagues why they were so
irate. They said, ``Oh, no. They like the changes and they'll make most
of them. The rest of the time they were talking about the other changes
they wanted to make, like having more produce tastings, more pre-
prepared salads, and bundling meat and vegetable specials together.''
After all our supermarket makeovers, does every Bornholmian look
like a sleek, slim, Danish version of Mad Men? As I mentioned earlier,
it's still too soon to say (we're posting updates at
www.SlimByDesign.org/Bornholm), but with every trip I make, all signs
point in the right direction.
One way to tell how well a new idea is working is by how many
people want to jump in and be a part of it. The more changes we made to
the grocery stores in Bornholm, the more other groups got involved.
Before long, a public health advertising campaign was being rolled out,
petitions were launched, and local ordinances were proposed. After the
kitchen smoke clears, it will be difficult to see which of these moved
the dial the most--but the people on the island are buying in to
becoming slim by design.
There's a humbling expression: ``Success has a thousand fathers,
but failure has only one.'' If there are dramatic changes in the foods
these Danes buy, the public health people will say it was because of
their ads, the activists will say it was because of their tireless
petition drives, and charismatic politicians will say it was because of
their bold regulations. But if nothing happens and the whole plan ends
up being a failure, which father will take the blame? It won't be the
public health adviser or the politician. They'll abandon the program in
a heartbeat. Unsuccessful public health campaigns cost lots of money.
Unsuccessful ordinances can cost political careers.

We projected each change would turn a profit within a month
if not immediately.

Yet these supermarket makeovers were cheap and easy to make. Many
were done over a weekend, and we projected each of them would turn a
profit within a month if not immediately. Still, if even one works,
stores will be further ahead than before. On my most recent trip, they
asked me to help expand it to the mainland, so some hidden sales
numbers must be looking pretty good. It's the beauty of being slim by
design.
How Your Grocery Store Can Make You Slim
There Are Dozens of Ways your favorite grocery store could
profitably help you shop a little healthier. In April 2014, I shared
the Bornholm story with some of the innovative American grocery stores
that sponsored some of the studies you've read about throughout this
chapter. They all had clever ideas they were trying out in their stores
to help their customers shop a little healthier, but they were all
doing something different--and often repeating each other's mistakes.
If we could pool together all of my Lab's slim-by-design research
findings with some of the ideas they were successfully experimenting
with, we could make a supermarket scorecard that could help guide all
of them to make profitable healthy changes.

This supermarket scorecard tells shoppers what they should
look for or ask their local grocery manager to do.

Grocery chains are competitive--and not just for shoppers. Even
though a grocery chain in Texas doesn't compete for the same shoppers
as a grocery chain in Chicago, they all want to win awards for Most
Popular, Prettiest, Smartest, or Most Likely to Succeed at their annual
Grocery Store-a-Palooza Award Conference. Because having a scorecard
means there might be yet another new award they could compete on, most
were eager to help develop one. But more important than enabling
grocery chains to compete with each other, this supermarket scorecard
will transparently show them exactly how to compete. Also, it will tell
shoppers what they should look for or ask their local grocery store
manager to do. If all these changes help grocery stores make a little
more money, grocers will want to make the changes. If all these changes
help shoppers shop a little healthier, shoppers will want to hassle
their favorite grocer until he or she makes changes.

Slim-by-Design Grocery Store Self-Assessment Scorecard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Okay, so your favorite grocery store has great prices, selection,
and convenience, but it might still be making you fat and happy instead
of happy and slim. This scorecard tells you what your store is doing to
help you eat better. Our Lab has been working with top grocery chains
around the nation to help them make you slim by design. You can use a
scorecard like this to compare your favorite grocery stores, but it
will also tell you what you can ask them to do to make you and your
family more slim--and more loyal to their store. Some items on this
scorecard might initially seem to have nothing to do with food--like
having restrooms and a drinking fountain in the front of the store--but
together they will make you less anxious or more comfortable, and
others will slow you down and relax you. In the end, even some of these
nonfood changes can lead you away from impulsively buying Chunky Monkey
ice cream and more toward intelligently buying bananas. This is a
start--every year this scorecard is updated with the best practices and
the best research that helps us shop better (and helps stores make
money). The newest can be found at SlimByDesign.org.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Entrance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assign designated parking spots      The first area entered by most
(similar to handicapped spots) for   shoppers is the produce section.
pregnant women and mothers with      Free healthy samples are near the
infants.                             entrance.
Offer preprinted shopping lists of   There's a small ``grab and go''
basic staples near the entrance.     area in the front of the store
Provide information sheets near      with a small selection of milk and
the entrance on healthy ways to      bread for the in- and-out, or
shop.                                ``fill-in'' shopper.
Offer healthier foods near the       There's a small ``grab and go''
entrance to prime healthy            area in the front of the store
shopping.                            with a small selection of milk and
Two sizes of shopping carts are      bread for the in- and-out, or
available.                           ``fill-in'' shopper.
Handbaskets are available.
Divided shopping carts with a
``place fruits and vegetables
here'' section are provided.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Services and Signage
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Signs promote seasonal               Signs provide ``Did you know?''
combinations of fruits and           facts about the health benefits of
vegetables.                          specific foods.
Educational posters are located      There are specific perimeter
around the stores to educate         promotions for lean dairy.
people about healthy eating (for     There are specific promotions for
example, the Half-Plate Rule).       whole-grain products, such as
Local and seasonal foods are         bread and pasta.
clearly promoted.                    Calorie information is available
There is a special section for       in the meat section.
organic fruits and/or vegetables.    Healthy food apps such as
The organic section is boldly and    Fooducate and QR codes are
clearly labeled.                     promoted.
At least one produce-tasting         A kiosk with tear-off recipes is
station is near the entrance.        available in the produce section.
A wide range of precut fruits and    Combo packs are available that co-
vegetables are available.            promote healthy foods (such as
tomatoes and mozzarella).
There are separate in-aisle          A guidance system such as Guiding
promotions for canned fruits.        Stars or a stoplight approach is
used.
There are separate in-aisle          A dietitian is available and
promotions for canned vegetables.    visible in the store a couple of
days each week.
There are separate in-aisle          Unit pricing ($/oz) is available
promotions for frozen vegetables.    where relevant.
There are specific perimeter
promotions for lean meat.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Layout and Atmosphere
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Relaxing music is played in the      Lighting varies throughout the
produce section.                     store, but is always brightest on
Show price per unit along with       the healthier foods.
price per weight for healthy food,   Healthy tear-off recipe cards are
for ease of calculation.             provided near the fruits and
Floor decals are used for way-       vegetables.
finding to healthy sections.         Recipe ingredients for the recipe
cards are located next to the
cards.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aisles and Shelves
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some fruits are bundled into         Ingredients are organized by
family-size packs.                   preparation type (stir-fry versus
Some vegetables are bundled into     salad)--for example, put
family-size packs.                   mushrooms, eggplants, and peppers
in a ``stir-fry'' section.
A complementary fresh produce        Expiration dates are visible (at
display is available in the meat     front of package or on signs).
section (such as one containing      Aisles with healthy foods are the
broccoli, peas, cauliflower, and     widest.
peppers).                            Less healthy foods are
A complementary fresh produce        inconveniently placed very low or
display is available in the          very high on the shelves.
seafood section (such as lemons,     Healthier foods are conveniently
tomatoes, beans, and asparagus).     placed at eye level.
A complementary fresh produce        Aisles with healthy food are
display is available in the frozen   brighter than aisles with
food section.                        unhealthy food.
Displays of single fruits (such as   Hard-to-decide-upon foods (``long-
oranges, apples, pears,              buy'' items), such as soups,
nectarines, and apricots) are next   dressings, and baby foods are
to desserts.                         located in less busy aisles so
Ready-to-eat fruits and vegetables   people are relaxed enough to
are available in variety packs.      comparison shop.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prepared Food Area
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fruit is available in all            The healthy daily targeted entrees
foodservice areas.                   have creative or descriptive
Vegetables are available in all      names.
food-service areas.                  Posters displaying healthy foods
A mix of whole fruit options is      or a guidance system (such as the
displayed in an attractive bowl or   Half-Plate Rule) are visible in
basket.                              the dining area.
The ``pick me up'' or prepared       The cafeteria tracks the
food section has healthy default     popularity and frequency of
foods.                               healthy-option orders to see what
A daily fruit or vegetable option    promotions work most effectively.
is bundled into all grab-and-go      All promotional signs and posters
meals.                               are rotated, updated, or changed
A salad bar is available.            at least monthly.
All beverage coolers have both       Half portions are available for
water and white milk available.      all entrees.
Alternative healthy entree options   Half portions are available for
(salad bar, yogurt parfaits, and     all desserts.
the like) are highlighted on         Takeout boxes are available for
posters or signs within all dining   leftovers not eaten in the
areas.                               cafeteria.
The healthy daily targeted entree
is placed as the first one seen in
all dining areas.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shopper Comfort and Service
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Restrooms are easily accessible in   Health and nutrition games
the front of the store.              dominate the playroom.
A drinking fountain is located in    A local fitness club is co-
the front of the store.              promoted.
There is an area for shoppers to     A small discount to a local
sit and relax.                       fitness club is given to loyalty
There is an area for shoppers to     club shoppers.
eat.                                 There is a drive-through where you
can pick up your groceries, if you
call ahead.
There is a supervised playroom for   Home delivery is available (for an
children.                            extra charge).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Engagement: Employees and Social Media
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The produce-department manager and   All employees are trained to
staff are specifically trained to    suggest healthy complementary
suggest healthy answers to shopper   products when asked about a
questions.                           particular item.
The meat-department manager and      There are plentiful staff in the
staff are trained to suggest         meat and produce sections who are
healthy answers to shopper           trained to suggest healthy upsells
questions.                           or substitutes.
The dairy-department manager and     Store or chain has an eng aging
staff are trained to suggest         website that has a health-related
healthy answers to shopper           blog featuring local or seasonal
questions.                           products.
The bakery-department manager and    The website has shopper loyalty
staff are trained to suggest         specials.
healthy answers to shopper           Tips, features, or videos
questions.                           involving better shopping and
better living (such as ``Shopping
with Kids'') are available.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Checkout
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Loyalty programs specifically        Receipt provides an indication of
reward fruit and vegetable           what percentage of purchases were
consumption.                         fruits and vegetables, low-fat
Receipts are itemized in             meat, and low-fat dairy.
categories or otherwise coded to     A default shopping ``starter''
indicate how healthy you're          list is made available to each
shopping.                            shopper at the front of the store
The back of receipts feature         with a number of the major staples
coupons for healthy foods.           preprinted on it.
There is at least one food-free      The same healthy shopping-tips
checkout aisle.                      brochure available at the
A discount is offered if a certain   beginning of the shopping trip is
percentage of purchases are fruits   also available at the checkout
and vegetables.                      register.
Individual containers of precut      ``Don't Forget'' signs are placed
fresh fruit are available next to    at the register to remind
at least one cashier.                customers about certain healthy
Healthy snack options are offered    foods.
next to the cashiers.                A ``fruits and vegetables only''
Receipt uses loyalty card            self-checkout station is provided
information to show how much was     for quick purchases of produce.
spent on fruits and vegetables
compared to past trips.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scoring Brackets
------------------------------------------------------------------------
70-100--Slim-by-Design Grocery Store--Gold

50-69--Slim-by-Design Grocery Store--Silver

30-49--Slim-by-Design Grocery Store--Bronze
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Attachment 2
Healthy Profits: An Interdisciplinary Retail Framework that Increases
the Sales of Healthy Foods
Brian Wansink
a-b,
*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell
University, United States.
\b\ Cornell Food and Brand Lab, Cornell University, United States.
* Correspondence to: 475 H Warren Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY 14853, United States. Fax: +1 607 255 9984.
E-mail addresses:
[emailprotected]
,
[emailprotected]
.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2016.12.007**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
** Please cite this article in press as: Wansink, Brian, Healthy
Profits: An Interdisciplinary Retail Framework that Increases the Sales
of Healthy Foods, Journal of Retailing (xxx, 2017), http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jretai.2016.12.007.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
0022-4359/
'
2017 New York University. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Abstract
Disruptive layouts, smart carts, suggestive signage, GPS alerts,
and touch-screen preordering all foreshadow an evolution in how healthy
foods will be sold in grocery stores. Although seemingly unrelated,
they will all influence sales by altering either how convenient,
attractive, or normal (CAN) it is to purchase a healthy target food. A
Retail Intervention Matrix shows how a retailer's actions in these
three areas can be redirected to target shoppers based on whether the
shoppers are Health Vigilant, Health Predisposed, or Health
Disinterested. For researchers, this review offers an organizing
framework that integrates marketing, nutrition, psychology, public
health, and behavioral economics to identify next generation research.
For managers, this framework underscores how dozens of small, low cost,
in-store changes are available to each that can surprisingly increase
sales of entire categories of healthy food.

2017 New York University. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.
Introduction
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Editor's note: The article is in press, consequently, the
endnotes are unnumbered. In the submitted article pdf the referenced
works have the author'(s) name(s) highlighted for hyperlinking, but
they are not linked; therefore, the endnotes are in order as printed
and not in order as referenced.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our best and worst eating habits start in the grocery store.
Although critics claim that retailers are primarily motivated to sell
unhealthy processed food--Froot Loops instead of fruit or fish sticks
instead of fish--the opposite is true for the savvy ones. If the fruit
turns mushy and the fish begins to smell, retailers may lose more money
in sunk inventory costs then they would otherwise gain by selling the
processed versions. Grocers are motivated to sell healthy, profitable
foods. Unfortunately, they do not know how to effectively do so
(Chandon and Wansink 2012; Guthrie 2017; Inman and Nikolova 2016), so
retail fruit and vegetable sales continue to drop (Haywood 2016;
Produce for Better Health 2015).
Each issue of Supermarket News and Progressive Grocer highlights
clever twists on how retailers can increase sales: novel POP displays,
creative cross-promotions, compelling incentive programs, colorful
floor decals, and trendy planogram arrangements. Most of these tactics
are driven by manufacturers of branded, less-than-healthy packaged
goods. In contrast, most of the newest and most creative solutions for
selling unbranded healthy products--such as fish, poultry, fruits, and
vegetables--have been discovered in academia (Johnson, et al., 2012).
Regretfully, however, many of these discoveries are not widely
adopted or used beyond one or two field test stores (Inman 2012).
First, these discoveries appear disorganized or disjoint because
together they use a wide range of interventions to investigate a wide
range of outcomes (such as sales, satisfaction, loyalty, repatronage,
eye-tracking, and so on). This combination is overwhelming to a manager
who is looking for a single solution, such as how to simply sell more
fish. Instead of giving managers a useful toolbox of organized
solutions, what we give them is more like a shoebox full of tax-time
receipts.
The second reason our work is infrequently translated into practice
is because its conclusions are either uncompelling or inconsistent
(Vermeir and Van Kenhove 2005).We tend to focus on interactions or
boundary conditions where an intervention might work with some
customers and with some food categories, but not with others (List,
Samek, and Zhu 2015). For instance, a Traffic Light rating system may
be useful to some shoppers (Dzhogleva, Inman, and Maurer 2013; Grunert,
Bolton, and Raats 2011; Trudel, et al., 2015), but to others it might
be a glaring warning sign that the food will taste bad (Werle, et al.,
2011). Academia thrives on interactions and exceptions, but the rest of
the world runs on main effects.
The future of healthy retailing will be guided by the future of new
research. All of the research in this review has been published or
conducted after 2011 and \1/2\ are still working papers.
They comprise a framework that integrates the newest discoveries in
marketing, health psychology, public health, consumer research,
nutrition, and behavioral economics to identify what might be the most
actionable and compelling new research to influence practice and
theory. First, the framework collapses the myriad of individual
differences among shoppers into a three-segment hierarchy which
summarizes their healthy shopping disposition. Second, it offers a
useful way to organize the receipt box full of findings in a way that
shows how various interventions work (improving convenience,
attractiveness, and norms) and where they can work within grocery
stores (by altering the signage, structure, service mix). Fig. 1
foreshadows how these pieces will combine to eventually create a Retail
Intervention Matrix framework that can organize existing findings and
stimulate useful new insights.
Fig. 1. How and Where Retail Interventions Can Influence Shoppers

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Hierarchy of Health Predispostion
Not all shoppers shop alike. Health food enthusiasts shop
differently than mothers shopping with kids; a ``hot'' fast-thinker
shops differently than a ``cold'' slow-thinker; and variety-seekers
shop differently than budget-constrained shoppers (Hui, Huang, et al.,
2013; Verhoef and van Doorn 2016). There will always be an exception or
an untested segment. This sometimes leads our results to appear
frustratingly inconclusive when we have to admit that we do not know
whether our new intervention works the same way with elderly shoppers
as it does with shoppers using SNAP benefits (Guthrie 2017).
One solution is to only view shoppers based on how predisposed they
are to making a healthier shopping decision. We can view them as
belonging to one of three fluid groups that belong to a Hierarchy of
Health Predisposition. The top segment of this hierarchy are Health
Vigilant shoppers (Fig. 2). They are highly informed, conscious of
calories, and are influenced by nutrition information. At the bottom
extreme, Health Disinterested shoppers have little interest in changing
their eating choices because of either the effort, sacrifice, or
perceived futility. The segment in the middle are the Health
Predisposed shoppers. They would prefer to make healthier food choices,
but they have difficulty consistently doing so unless it involves very
little sacrifice. This Predisposed segment is the one that buys the
100-calorie packages of snacks and the sugar-free yogurt. This segment
is larger on New Year's Day than it was in December; it was larger this
past Monday morning than it was during the prior Friday night's
shopping trip.
One reason nutrition guidance systems (such traffic lights or
Guiding Stars) have had only modest influences on the sales of healthy
food (Cawley, et al., 2015; Nikolova and Inman 2015) may be because
they mainly resonate with only the top of the Hierarchy. Health
Disinterested shoppers ignore these programs, and heath predisposed
shoppers inconsistently follow them. If the only segment they reach are
the vigilant shoppers, interventions like this will have hardly any
sizable impact on health since this segment is already shopping in a
healthy way. Even if the same intervention is perfectly targeted at the
bottom portion of the Hierarchy, it would have hardly any impact
because the bottom segment does not care.
Fig. 2. The Hierarchy of Health Predisposition

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The CAN Approach to Improving Healthy Shopping
Changing widespread eating behavior does not happen by convincing
shoppers that an apple is healthier than a Snickers nor does it happen
by coaching them to improve their imperfect willpower. While these may
be reminders to Health Vigilant shoppers, they will not reliably work
with Health Predisposed shoppers, and almost certainly will not work
with Health Disinterested shoppers. Instead, a more sensible and cost-
effective solution would be to simply make sure that the apple is much
more convenient, attractive, and normal to choose than the Snickers.
Offering an apple sample at the front of the store primes more fruit
sales (Tal and Wansink 2015) and offering an apple display at the
checkout helps pre-empt Snickers sales (Winkler, et al., 2017). Such
changes are effective because they influence passive shoppers and not
just the vigilant ones.
In 2011, Denmark started a public health initiative to reduce
obesity--partly by trying to increase the sales of fish, fruits, and
vegetables (fresh, frozen, and canned) in grocery stores (thereby
hopefully decreasing the sales of less healthy foods). Starting with a
list of dozens of retail changes that were believed to be revenue
positive (see Appendix A), six were selected to be implemented over a 2
year period on the isolated Danish island of Bornholm (population
42,000). The six interventions selected were ones that retailers
believed would both be profitable and easy to implement and maintain:

1.  Fruit displays within 10 of the entrance

2.  At least one candy-free check-out line

3.  Traffic interrupters (displays of healthy foods in the
wideraisles)

4.  End-aisle displays of fish

5.  Traffic Light (``Green Key'') labeling

6.  In-Store Promotions = \1/2\ Plate Rule Guidance System

In combination, these retail interventions were successful because
they made it more convenient, attractive, and normal to purchase fish,
fruits, and vegetables. For instance, putting fruit in an attractive
display made it appear more normal (typical, or reasonable) to take
fruit--partly because it was now also more convenient and looked more
attractive. It was the CAN approach to changing behavior (Wansink
2015). Looking toward the future of retailing, the key to doing this
successfully is to not handicap our imagination by too narrowly
defining what is meant by convenient, attractive, and normal (Bommelaer
and Wansink, 2017).
More Convenient to Select
As Fig. 3 illustrates, a manager can help make healthy foods more
convenient to see, to consider, and to purchase (Desai and Trivedi
2014; Gilbride, Inman, and Stilley 2015). For instance, one of the
biggest barriers to purchasing fish is that many shoppers are not
confident about how to prepare and serve it. With these shoppers, no
nutrition scale or promotion would lead a person to buy more fish until
they understood that it could be integrated into cooking routines that
were familiar and convenient for them. This was similar with tofu and
to counter this, the largest tofu manufacturer in the U.S. launched an
in-store campaign that clearly illustrated that tofu is convenient to
buy and to cook (``Fridge to pan in 10 minutes'' and ``Cooks like
chicken'') which helped increase both shopper confidence and retail
sales (Hsu 2014).
Even when shopping for familiar foods in familiar aisles, small
changes can conveniently guide shoppers to make healthier choices.
Vegetables placed near the front entrances are selected eight percent
more than those that are not (Wilson, et al., 2016), floor decals that
guide people to other vegetable displays increased sales by nine
percent (Payne and Niculeseu 2012), and center-of-aisle ``traffic
interrupter'' displays repeatedly increased 1 day sales of overlooked
vegetables by 400% in Denmark. Convenience also helps explain why about
43% of interior aisle grocery sales are within 12" of eye level (Stein
2018). This ``you buy what you see'' continues all the way to the
checkout where fruit displays can increase short-term sales by 35% (van
Kleef, Often, and van Tripj 2012).
Fig. 3. The CAN Approach To Influencing Shopping Decisions

Along with saving physical effort, convenience can also refer to
saving cognitive effort. This ranges from using easier-to-understand
product category layouts (de Wijk, et al., 2016; van Herpen 2016) to
leveraging technology in the form of GPS alerts or personal shopping
profiles (Sciandra and Inman 2014). Such reminders can guide shoppers
to healthier choices by making it both more cognitively convenient to
select and more convenient to visualize this food being prepared and
eaten at a home meal (Hui, Inman, et al., 2013; Lowe, Souza-Monteiro,
and Fraser 2013).
More Attractive to Select
The second principle of the CAN approach is that the healthy choice
needs to be made more attractive relative to less healthy (but usually
more tastier) options. It could be more attractively named, more
attractive in appearance, more attractively priced (Hampson and
McGoldrick 2013), or it could evoke more attractive taste expectations
than it usually does (Trivedi, Sridhar, and Kumar 2016; Vega Zamora, et
al., 2014). Fruit that is haphazardly piled onto a flat table is less
attractive than fruit that is angled on a display with a colored frame
around it (Stein 2018). Even simply giving a fruit or vegetable a
descriptive name--crisp carrots or Michigan cherries--makes them more
attractive and increases a person's taste expectations (Spence and
Piqueras-Fiszman, 2014) and selection by sixteen percent or more
(Wansink, et al., 2012).
Attractive packaging, descriptive names, color, labels, and
appearance have all been shown to bias evaluations of taste. Food can
also be more attractive simply by being novel (curried pumpkin),
attention-getting (heirloom Indian corn), or even more ethically
attractive (meat-free turkey). Both the sustainability movement and the
``ugly vegetable'' movement have capitalized on ethically-motivated
shoppers who find sustainable products to be more attractive.
Making a food more attractive by altering its price is a popular
tool of behavioral economists, and it takes the standard form of taxes,
subsidies, rebates, coupons, and bundling (Carroll, Samek, and Zepeda
2016). Unfortunately, when price rebates have been offered on fruits
and vegetables, they can sometimes backfire by increasing both the
sales of healthy produce in addition to the sales of unhealthy foods--
especially in low-income households (Cawley, et al., 2016). That is,
the money saved on fruit is then spent on Froot Loops (Cawley, et al.,
2016).
More Normal to Select
Last, many shoppers often prefer to buy the foods they believe are
normal or popular to purchase, serve, and eat. For instance, signs that
told people that chick peas were the favorite bean in that area
(Harlem) shifted 21% of all bean selections over to chick peas (Bhana
2017). This also works with quantities. Shopping cart signs that stated
that the average shopper purchased at least five fruits and vegetables
increased produce sales by ten percent (Payne, et al., 2014). Moreover,
even the size of the store might subtly suggest to a customer how much
is normal to purchase during a shopping trip (Ailawadi, Ma, and Grewal
2016).
Benchmarks provide visual purchase norms. Consider two benchmarks
that increase fruit and vegetable sales. One is the Half-Plate rule
which was originally designed to help consumers operationalize the
spirit of USDA's MyPlate guidance system (Wansink and Tran 2017). The
Half-Plate rule simply states that in order to eat more balanced meals,
\1/2\ of your plate needs to be fruits, vegetables, or salad and the
other \1/2\ can be whatever you wanted. You can have a second or third
helping if you want, but \1/2\ of your plate always has to be fruits,
vegetables, or salad. This was successfully implemented in the leading
grocery chain in the United States (Kell 2016) as ``Half-Plate
Healthy'' because it had been shown to encourage shoppers to buy
``considerably more'' produce (Wansink 2014). After all, if consumers
were going to eat half-plate healthy, they needed to shop half-plate
healthy (see Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. The Half-Plate Rule and the Half-Cart Both Suggest Larger
Portion Size Norms for Fruits and Vegetables

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

One of the reasons the half-plate healthy approach was effective
for this leading retailer was because it offered a simple visual
benchmark about how much fruit and vegetables are the right amount to
eat--half the plate. Similarly, when consumers shop, little thought may
be given as to whether a food is healthy or not. Yet if asked to
categorize and separate each food they buy according to whether it is
either a fruit or a vegetable (versus neither), it forces more mindful
shopping. One set of studies involved shopping carts that had been
physically divided across the middle and were accompanied with a sign
in the front that instructed people to place their fruits and
vegetables (fresh, frozen, or canned) in the front \1/2\ of the cart
and everything else in the back \1/2\. Using this Half-Cart approach
increased the sales of fruits and vegetables by eighteen percent
(Wansink, Payne, and Herbst 2017). In a second set of studies, when the
proportion of the cart allocated to fruits and vegetables was either at
the 35% level or the 65% level, the amount that shoppers spent
increased from $14.97 to $17.54 (Wansink, Soman, and Herbst 2017). When
the same type of dividing lines were added to online shopper order
forms for grocery delivery, the same results were found. The size of
partitions indeed matters to shoppers.
Nearly all healthy interventions in retailing influence shoppers by
increasing how convenient, attractive, or normal it is to purchase one
food instead of another--an apple or a fish instead of crackers and
beef (Bommelaer and Wansink, 2017). By organizing how our discoveries
work, we open up new possibilities of influence. The CAN approach
enables us to organize how our interventions influence shoppers. As
Table 1 foreshadows, the next section shows where they will work best
in a store.
The Signage, Structure, Service Mix: Where Retailers Can Best Change
Behavior
Although nearly all shopping interventions influence shoppers by
altering how convenient, attractive, or normal it is to buy a product,
there are endless ways they can do so. There are also three different
areas where retailers can influence shoppers by using these tools.
Shoppers can be influenced through signage (inside and outside the
store), by the structure of the store (layout and product positioning),
and by the service the store provides (on-line, in-person, or on-site).
This signage, structure, service mix influences different shoppers in
different ways. Improving service might work best for Health Vigilant
shoppers (because they are most likely to seek out the extra
information or assistance). Improving signage might work best for
Health Predisposed shoppers (as well as those who are and Vigilant).
Changing the store's structure might work well for all three segments.
Signage
Signage overlaps with the traditional ``Promotion P'' of the 4-P's
framework. It involves all out-of-store, in-store, and online efforts
that are directed toward influencing what a shopper buys (Kovacheva and
Inman 2014). Outside the store it includes fliers, circulars,
commercials, outdoor advertising, and coupons. Inside the store it
includes posters, signs, shelf-hangers, floor decals, and kiosks as
well as take-home media such as recipes, brochures, and magazines, and
more stylized or person-based media, such as tailored ads, feedback or
messages on shopping receipts (Otterbring, et al., 2014), and GPS
alerts for promotions. On-line it includes the website, on-line tools,
social media, e-mail alerts, sponsored apps, and GPS alerts for
promotions that can be triggered both in and out of the store.

Table 1. How Sample Findings Fit Into the Retail Intervention Matrix
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More convenient    More attractive   More normal to
to  purchase       to  purchase       purchase
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Signage
Floor
New
Signa
decal arrow        recipe ideas, co-  ge stating
stickers asking    promotions, and    that garbonzo
people to follow   end-of-aisle       beans were
the arrows to      displays           the most
eat more           increased canned   popular
nutritiously       fish sales by      beans,
lead to a nine     eighteen percent   increased
percent increase   (Toft, et al.,     selection by
in produce sales   in preparation)    fourteen
(Payne, et al.,
Starring   percent
2014)              items as more      (Bhana 2017)

Joint      healthy
Shopp
efforts to         decreased the      ing cart
provide fish       purchase of        signs stating
dinner recipe      unstarred (less    that the
cards and          healthy foods)     average
grilling           by two percent     shopper
instruction        (Cawley, et al.,   purchased at
brochures were     2015)              least five
part of a larger                      fruits and
campaign that                         vegetables
increased fish                        increased
sales by 28%                          produce sales
(Karevold, Tran,                      by ten
and Wansink                           percent
2017)                                 (Payne, et
al., 2014)
Structure
A fruit
Fruit
Visua
display near       samples provided   lly diving a
cash register      to consumers       shopping cart
increased sales    upon entering      in \1/2\ and
35%, even when     the store          suggesting
product was not    increased sales    that \1/2\
discounted (van    fruit sales by     should be
Kleef, Often,      seven percent      used for
and van Tripj      (Tal and Wansink   fruits and
2012)              2015)              vegetables,

Items
People     increased
(including         were sixteen       their sales
produce) that      percent more       by fourteen
was within 12"     likely to          percent
of a shopper's     purchase a         (Wansink,
eye-level          product from the   Payne, and
comprised over     first full aisle   Herbst 2017;
43% of all sales   they entered       Wansink,
(Stein 2018)       than any           Soman, and
subsequent aisle   Herbst 2017;
(Stein 2017)       Wansink,
Tran, and
Karevold
2017)

Using
more islands
than aisles
in produce
aisles
increased
shopping time
and items
purchased
(Mukund,
Atakan, and
Wansink 2018)
Service
Healthy
In-store
``Hal
``Grab and Go''    suggestions by     f-Plate
lines in store     staff              Healthy'' on-
cafeterias led     contributed to     line planner,
to a 82%           increased fish     led to higher
increase in        sales (Karevold,   produce sales
healthy food       Tran, and          and more
sales (Hanks, et   Wansink 2017)      balanced
al., 2012)
One        meals a

Mobil      loyalty program
Shopp
apps that          rewarded fruit     ing receipt
indicated what     and vegetable      ``scorecards'
percent of your    purchases by       ' showed
food is healthy    providing a        consumers how
and which were     scaled discount    the
missing, was       based on how       percentage of
rating as being    much was           fruits and
most attractive    purchased a        vegetables
to in-store                           purchased in
consumers (Mao                        this trip
and Atakan 2017)                      compared with
past trips
(based on
loyalty card
data) a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a Unpublished findings based on proprietary studies.

Signage builds awareness, offers reminders, changes attitudes,
encourages comparisons, and so on. It can change the perceived
convenience of purchasing healthy foods by making it more convenient or
easy to consider (``Having turkey for dinner sounds good''), by
changing perceptions of how attractive it would be to add organic
parsnips into a routine meal, or changing how normal it would be to
have a full fruit bowl sitting out when the kids return home from
school (see Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. The Signage-Structure-Service Mix

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Structure
The structure of a store includes its layout and where and how
foods are positioned, such as whether the healthier foods are nearest
the door, at eye level, co-promoted with other displayed products, and
whether they are located in the first two aisles where a consumer
shops. But structure also influences people before they even enter the
store. Starting in the entryway, the size and shape of the shopping
carts structurally influences how much is purchased (bigger carts lead
to bigger shopping trips) and what is purchased (divided carts lead to
more fruit and vegetable sales). Any changes related to shopping carts
and hand baskets continue to influence shoppers throughout their entire
shopping trip, but shopping carts have their biggest impact before it
fills up because this makes a shopper's budget constraints more salient
(van Ittersum, et al., 2013).
A store's structure can be changed by using traffic interrupters
and islands (instead of aisles) in the produce section. A recent
analysis of 1,242 shoppers in four different sections of various
grocery stores shows that while purchases in many sections of a grocery
store (such as meat and cereal) begin to level off after 2 minutes of
shopping, the total number of dollars spent in the produce section
continues rising for about 12 min. at a rate of $1.84/min. One
objective for a store, therefore, is to determine how to keep people
shopping in the produce section for up to 12 min. Islands (instead of
aisles) may help. They appear to slow shoppers down which relates to
them spending more money on produce (Mukund, Atakan, and Wansink 2018).
Service
Most obviously, service includes the sunny appearance, helpfulness,
and friendliness of greeters, butchers, and cashiers (Huneke, et al.,
2015; Keeling, McGoldrick, and Sadhu 2013), the cleanliness of the
store, and the restocking and upkeep of shelves (Robinson, et al.,
2016). Yet much of the service that really guides shoppers to healthier
choices is surprisingly less face-to-face. It starts with how
technology can influence the goals and expectations customers have
before they enter the store (Gustafsson, et al., 2016; Hunneman,
Verhoef, and Sloot 2015; Lee 2015), such as when a Health Vigilant
shopper reads a store blog on healthy food substitutes and prints off
the related coupons. Once in the store, service can be efficiently
boosted by new technologies, such as kiosks that give tailored recipes
or a GPS cart-mounted tablet that gives real-time shopping advice
(Block and Platt 2014). Last, service can influence a shopper's comfort
and mood (Atalay and Meloy 2011; Chen, Lee, and Yap 2011). While the
location of the restrooms and drinking fountains or the availability of
near-the-entrance parking for new mothers appears to have little to do
with sales, it increases a person's shopping time and store
satisfaction, and it may indirectly trigger healthier sales (Atakan and
Finch 2018).
Signage, structure, and service are the areas of the store where
the CAN approach can be much more creatively leveraged to sell
healthier foods. Still, aggressively pressuring shoppers to fill their
shopping carts with healthy foods has diminishing returns, especially
as their shopping trip progresses (Biswas, Szocs, and Inman 2016;
Sheehan and van Ittersum 2016; Van der Heide, van Ittersum, and van
Doorn 2016). There is a limit to how much more produce shoppers can be
nudged to take (Toft, et al., in preparation; Trivedi, Gauri, and Ma
2016). Unless total shopping volume rises, a short intervention study
might heroically claim 30% increases in fruit and vegetable purchases,
but a sustained long-term sales increase of three percent would be more
realistic.
Although a long-term increase in sales of three percent for one
intervention is much less exciting than 30%, there is an entire
shopping experience or journey that needs to be taken into account
(Beatty, et al., 2015; Lemon and Verhoef 2016). This gradual healthy
shift in the entire shopping experience could form the habits (Cleeran,
et al., 2016) that can nurture healthier store loyalty and healthier
bodies.
Shaping Future Healthy Shopping
Organizing our findings into a Retail Intervention Matrix helps us
make them more useful to retailers. If we can better see how one of our
new discoveries influences choice (through the CAN Approach), and then
better imagine where it will work best (the signage, structure, service
mix of a store), we can help retailers far more than if we give them a
nuanced, isolated finding. Moreover, knowing that there are three
segments of shoppers with different degrees of health disposition
(Vigilant, Predisposed, and Disinterested), helps us more realistically
point to who we will have an impact on and who we will not.
Thinking Deeper
Within the signage, structure, service mix, much of the
interdisciplinary retailing research focuses on using signage to make a
healthy food more attractive through the way it is positioned or priced
(Shah, et al., 2013). As the upper right corner of Fig. 6 indicates,
what is less known is how signage can be used to establish new purchase
norms or consumption norms (Van Doorn and Verhoef 2015). For instance,
over the past 40 years, foods like yogurt and granola have gone from
being foreign oddities to favorite staples. Knowing what created these
new norms could help engineer sustainable healthy food trends of the
future--regardless of whether they involve tofu or lab-grown meat
(Purdy 2016).
Fig. 6. Where Research Is Most Needed

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In contrast to signage, changes in ``structure'' have generally
focused only on making a healthy food more convenient: Move the fruit
to front of the store, over to the cash register, to eye level, to an
end-aisle display, and so on. Now it is time for bigger questions such
as how structure can make a healthy food more attractive or more normal
or popular to buy. Again, consider healthy, high-margin,
environmentally sustainable tofu (Groening, Inman, and Ross 2014).
Using a store's structure to make tofu become more popular and trendy
could be surprisingly transforming for retailers, manufacturers, and
consumers.
Service is sometimes too narrowly defined as face-to-face or voice-
to-voice encounters. New technologies both inside and outside the store
give service the most unrealized potential by leveraging eye-tracking,
smart shopping carts, video-tracking, and GPS technology (Hue, et al.,
2013; Nikolova, et al., 2014). Whereas most interventions cannot easily
show which of the three Hierarchy of Health predisposition segments
they impact most, new technologies could show the results of these
interventions by either directly linking them to sales or indirectly
doing so through shopper loyalty cards.
Applying Wider
Some of what we know about improving healthy shopping in grocery
stores has already been systematically adopted into the growing 24-h
lifestyle of convenience stores, corner stores, and mini-stores (Lenard
and Schnare 2016). In 2016, the National Association of Convenience
Stores launched a new toolkit titled, ``Ideas That Work to Grow Better-
for-You Sales,'' and they include evidence-based tactics including (1)
grab them immediately, (2) variety sells produce, (3) use creative
adjectives, (4) remember the convenience factor, (5) have multiple
displays, (6) let your store ``talk,'' (7) direct their feet, and (8)
remind them (Lenard and Schnare 2016). Given this success in C-Stores
(note the fruit baskets that are now near most cash registers), there
are three other retailing frontiers that are deserving of our
attention.
Concessions and Kiosks
Entrenched managers in food concessions and kiosks have long
justified their unhealthy food portfolio mix my reactively claiming
they simply ``sell what people buy.'' Yet they say this without really
having given healthier food much of a chance. Indeed, when a healthier
range of snacks (fruit, chicken sandwiches, granola bars, low-fat
string cheese, trail mix, and so on) were offered alongside existing
concession foods during one Iowa football season, sales of healthy
snacks rose with each high school game until they comprised nine
percent of sales in less than 2 months because of both switching and
new sales (Laroche, et al., 2015). When Disney World followed by
changing the defaults on kids' meals at their kiosks and offering fruit
instead of french fries, it too generated more praise than pushback
(Peters, et al., 2016). Discovering simple, evidence-based steps that
help retail concessions profitably move from selling snack foods to
selling meal substitutes could be game changing (Laroche, et al.,
2017).
On-line Shopping and Delivery
After its initial growing pains, on-line shopping and delivery has
been consistently growing across both North America and Europe. Yet the
new adopters of this service are often families with children who
steadily use the service once a week for a month; use it less
consistently for the next 2 months; and often become inactive after
that. Other than focusing on price promotions or loyalty programs
(Bodur, Klein, and Arora 2015), a better solution would be to determine
how to increase retention in a way that transforms how they eat in the
same way it transformed how they order (Marinova, et al., 2016). The
opportunity to help people transform the way they view themselves (and
their health) because of how they order food could sustain both this
industry and their families (Lund and Marinova 2014).
Food Pantries
Helping food pantry shoppers make healthier decisions has typically
involved research replicated from other contexts (Bhana and Contento
2017; Wilson 2016). There are limited numbers of products in food
pantries and there are binding constraints (such as how much one can
carry, or how much a person is allowed to take from a category such as
pastries). Yet these limitations are precisely why a food pantry is a
rich context for discovery. Without economic considerations, how do
food shoppers behave? If they still take no fruits and vegetables, this
might suggest that subsidizing cucumbers and taxing cupcakes may not
have the intended policy impact that public health policy makers
believe it would have (Bhana 2017; Cawley, et al., 2015). Aside from
being a rich context for research, applying useful insights to food
pantries provides a world of value far from the office.
Why Healthy Field Study Interventions Appear to Fail
Applying this Retail Intervention Matrix framework is enticing. Yet
one frustration when applying our theories deeper and wider is that
health-focused interventions often fail when we move from the lab to
the field (e.g., van Herpen, et al., 2016). We usually believe it was
because of poor implementation by our retail partner, or it was because
of a noisy measurement problem. Instead, there are two reanalyses we
could make ex post to more precisely determine if an intervention was
more effective than it initially appears. We need to analyze the right
people, and we need to analyze the right days of the week.
We Do Not Analyze the Right Consumer Segment
Not all interventions work with all people (recall Fig. 2). An
expensive, digital, in-store calorie education program with a hip
spokesperson and viral social media support will still have no impact
on the top or bottom segments of this hierarchy. This is because the
Health Vigilant Shoppers already know it, and the Health Disinterested
Shoppers do not care. Yet most retail field studies show
disappointingly modest results because they do not try to disaggregate
the data and focus their analysis on the segment it was most intended
to influence. A more targeted analysis could be done by segmenting
shoppers into the Vigilant, Predisposed, or Disinterested segments
based on their purchase history (which is linked to their loyalty
cards) and then reanalyzing each segment.
Different interventions influence different segments (Table 2).
Setting up a study when and where it is most likely to influence a
targeted segment will better help sift out which interventions are
actually working in the way they intended. Aside from segmenting
shoppers based on their loyalty card purchase records, shoppers could
also be segmented or targeted by where they shop (e.g., Whole Foods,
Target, Wal-Mart, the Co-op, and so on). If neither is possible,
shoppers could be targeted by the time of the day or the day of the
week when they shop.

Table 2. A Retail Intervention Matrix of How Scandinavian Retailers
Doubled the Sales of Frozen Fish
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More convenient to  More attractive to   More normal to
Mix element         purchase            purchase           purchase
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Signage
Created
Co-
Create
recipe cards        promoted the fish   d ``Native
titled ``Fish in    with vegetables     Norway'' logos
15'' (min)          (suck as leeks      to promote

Offered a   and broccoli)       fish as local
``Grill Tips''
Named
Used
flier for the       select fish and     ``Local
grilling salmon     included a map      Favorite'' and
showing the part    ``Managers
of the world        Special''
where it was        stickers
caught
Structure
Utilized
Moved
Placed
vertical display    fish displays       the single
cases; moved fish   immediately after   servings of
to eye level and    vegetables          fish and some
processed foods
Included    of the lower
to the bottom       a buffer of         priced ``sales
frozen vegetables   specials''
between the fish    near the
and the beef so     highest
people would not    traffic edges
make an unfair      of the
sensory             displays
comparison with
beef
Service
Offered
Offered
Employ
frozen freezer      smaller, one-       ees were
packages to keep    portion servings    instructed to
fish frozen until
Put         suggest the
home                markings on the     two best

Offered     wrapper to show     selling types
plastic bags to     how much to         of fish and
put shrink-         prepare for one,    the two most
wrapped fish in     two, three, or      common items
for extra           four persons        with which
separation
E-mail      they were
protection from     promotions were     prepared
other foods in      send to loyalty     (e.g., rice
the basket          card holders,       pilaf and
with recipe ideas   broccoli)
and web-links to
Employ
downloadable        ees were
coupons             trained to
suggest
additional
items commonly
bought along
with specific
types of fish
------------------------------------------------------------------------

We Do Not Analyze the Right Days of the Week
It is not surprising that people shop much less healthy at the end
of the year--October through December--than they do after January 1st.
The dollar amount of the healthy food we purchase increases 29.4% right
after the first of the year (Pope, et al., 2014). This is not
surprising but it would suggest that if an intervention has any chance
of working, it would be better to test it in mid-January than in mid-
December or even mid-June. In general, a healthy intervention's
effectiveness might continually decline throughout the year. That is,
healthy shopping-focused interventions may be most effective in the
first quarter, moderately effective in the second quarter and third
quarter, and least effective in the fourth quarter.
Yet if shoppers are on their best healthy shopping behavior during
January, something similar may happen the beginning of each week in a
smaller way. After a weekend of indulging, some people might have an
unstated resolution to try and shop better, which makes them more
susceptible to in-store nudges on a Monday than they would have been
the prior Friday night. This Monday Morning Effect has been recently
shown in both in cafeterias and grocery stores (Wansink, Tran, and
Karevold 2017). In a 3 month study of over 15,000 diners, putting fish
first (and beef last) on a buffet line increased fish selections on
Mondays to Wednesdays but had no influence after Wednesday. Analogous
results were found in grocery stores. Among people who made larger
purchases (over $50 USD), interventions were most effective early in
the week (Monday-Wednesday) than on Thursday-Sunday. If a field study
intervention does not seem to have worked, reanalyze the sales results
for only Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays. It may give a more accurate
assessment of whether the intervention is worth dropping, reporting, or
improving.
Using the Retail Intervention Matrix to Sell More Fish
Until now, the Retail Intervention Matrix has been presented as a
way to organize research findings based on how they work (making
healthier foods more convenient, attractive, or normal) and where they
are implemented in the store (within the signage, structure, service
mix). This framework can be used to organize key findings into a
sensible pattern that is also useful in practice.
For example, a large Scandinavian grocer had the marketing
objective of growing their market share by repositioning itself as the
most environmentally sustainable retailer in Norway. One way they
planned to accomplish this was by increasing their sales of fresh and
frozen fish, which are much more environmentally sustainable than beef,
pork, and lamb. They planned to first increase the variety of fish they
offered (types, sizes, packaging, and so on) and to more actively
promote this fish though advertising campaigns and price promotions. In
addition to these traditional 4-P marketing mix methods of growing this
category, the Retail Intervention Matrix was then used to create a
broader set of interventions that could be used to further push the
sales of fish by focusing on changes in the signage, structure, and
service mix.
All 457 stores in the chain used the traditional marketing mix
approach of altering the variety, packaging, advertising, and price
promotions of fish. Over a 2 year period, these marketing efforts
consistently increased sales by nine percent. Following this, 239
stores selected various additional changes to make (see the Retail
Intervention Matrix for increasing fish sales in Table 2). Because of
these changes, the average store generated 28% more fresh fish sales
per transaction than those stores that had initially changed only the
marketing mix (Karevold, Tran, and Wansink 2017).
This brief example involving Norwegian fish shows one way research
findings can be extrapolated, organized, and presented in a way that is
compelling for mangers who have little time or tolerance for ambiguity
and nuance. Showing how an intervention might work (the CAN approach)
and where it can be implemented (through the signage, structure,
service mix) enabled this retailer to provide a menu of actions or
changes that each of its stores could pick and choose from. Similar
adoptions of retail-based findings are also being explored by an
American consortium of grocers (Borstein 2015) who are assembling an
industry-wide Grocery Retail Scorecard that will show retailers how
they can profitably help their customers shop healthier
(Convergencepolicy.org/scorecard/).
Conclusion
Retailing research in the future will be different than that of the
past. It will be partly judged on whether it delivers fresh, useful
solutions. A common view in the past was that an academic's role was to
generate insights, and the role of managers was to determine how to use
them. In the future, determining and discovering which insights have
the biggest impact will be broadly rewarded. Using the Retail
Intervention Matrix--including the CAN approach and the signage,
structure, service mix--can help determine what is known and what needs
to be discovered. Last, the Hierarchy of Health Predisposition can show
where an intervention can be most effective, most immediately.

Appendix A. An Abbreviated Scorecard To Help Retailers By Organizing
Sample Findings Into the Retail Intervention Matrix a c
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More convenient    More attractive   More normal to
to purchase        to purchase        purchase
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Signage
Use
Use a
Displ
display signs to   guidance system,   ay
draw attention     such as Guiding    educational
to and promote     Stars or a         posters
the store's        stoplight          around the
selection          approach, at the   store that
seasonal fruits    shelf edge         encourage
and vegetables
Use        healthy
with display       display signs to   eating, such
signs              draw attention     as the Half-

Provide    to and promote     Plate Rule
information        seasonal fruits
Co-
sheets on          and vegetables     promote
healthier ways     with display       healthier
to shop near all   signs              options
entrances
Use        together in

Directs    signs which        snack aisles
traffic entering   provide ``Did
Highl
the store such     You Know?''        ight healthy
that most          health benefit     alternative
shoppers begin     facts, positive    entree
in the produce     messages about     options such
section            specific           as the salad

Provide    healthful foods    bar on
a circular/ad      throughout the     posters or
publication        store, or both     signs within
featuring and
Bundle     all dining
promoting          recipe             areas
healthier value    ingredients for
Place
options at least   family meals       posters
once per week      next to recipe     displaying
cards for a        healthier
healthy meal       foods or a

Make       guidance
sure that soda     system such
and low-nutrient   as the Half-
snacks (i.e.,      Plate Rule in
chips) are not     visible areas
displayed or       in the dining
merchandised in    area
the produce
section
Structure
Offer a
Assign
Offer
``grab and go''    designated         at least
area in the        parking spots      three
front of the       near at least      healthier
store with a       one entrance for   foods for
small selection    pregnant women     sale at all
of low fat milk,   and mothers with   entrances to
eggs, 100%         infants (similar   prime
juice, low-fat     to handicapped     healthier
yogurt, and        spots) d           shopping
whole grain
Create a
Offer
bread for the in-  fresh produce      pre-printed
and-out shopper    display in the     shopping

Organize   seafood section    lists of
ingredients for    including items    basic staples
a healthy meal     such as lemons,    near all
by preparation     tomatoes, beans,   entrances
method, such as    and asparagus
Offer
a stir-fry
Display    healthier
section that       whole fruits       food samples
includes           such as oranges,   or
mushrooms,         apples, pears,     demonstration
eggplants,         nectarines, and    s near at
peppers, and so    apricots next to   least one
forth              prepared           entrance and

Place      desserts           at least once
healthier foods
Make       per week
conveniently at    sure that there
Offer
eye level          is at least one    \1/2\

Make       checkout aisle     portions for
available one      in which the       all entrees
percent or fat     only food for      and desserts
free milk, 100%    sale qualifies     that are
juice, and water   as healthier (no   served or pre-
in all mini        candy aisle)       packaged,
fridges in                            smaller
checkout aisles                       containers

Make                          for self-
sure there is at                      service
lest one                              entrees and
checkout aisle                        desserts, or
[i]n which the                        both
only food for
Make
sale qualifies                        sure that
as healthier (no                      takeout boxes
candy aisle)                          are available

Make                          for leftovers
sure that all                         not eaten in
beverage coolers                      the dining
have both water                       area
and low-fat non-
Offer
flavored milk                         divided
stocked and                           shopping
available                             carts with a
``place
fruits and
vegetables
here''
section
Service
Supply
Provide
Suppl
simple five-       calorie            y useful tips
ingredient         information on     related to
recipes as tear-   different types    preparation,
off cards next     and cuts of meat   storage, and
to specific        in the form of     food safety
produce in-        posters,           in produce
store, on the      brochures, or      section, via
store's website,   labels             mobile phone
mobile phone
Make       app, or both
app, or both       sure that the
Use a

Make pre-  store's website,   receipt
cut vegetables     mobile app, or     program which
available in the   both (if they      can create an
meat section       have one) has      itemized list

Provide    Shopper Loyalty    indicating
an area in the     specials that      what
store for          include deals on   percentage of
shoppers to sit    healthier items    purchases
and relax d
Provide    were fruits

Provide    a loyalty card     and
an area in the     program which      vegetables,
store for          rewards            low-fat meat,
shoppers to eat    customers with     and low-fat
d                  incentives such    dairy

Offer a    as bonus points
Use a
salad bar that     or coupons for     receipt
includes lower     purchasing         program that
calorie            fruits and         uses loyalty
dressings          vegetables,        card
options such as    making healthier   information
oil and vinegar    choices, or both   to show how

Promote
Offer a    much was
mobile phone       discount for       spent on
apps that          customers if a     fruits and
encourage          certain            vegetables,
healthful eating   percentage of      and compares
such as            purchases are      this amount
Fooducate,         fruits and         to past trips
MyFitnessPal or    vegetables
other Barcode/QR
Offer at
code scanners      least two daily

Offer      healthier grab &
tips, features,    go breakfast,
or videos          lunch, and
involving better   dinner options
shopping and
better living on
the store's
website or
social media
outlets
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a  Reprinted, with permission, Slim by Design, Wansink (2014).
b Findings are from published papers, working papers, and unpublished
pilot studies (Wansink 2014).
c Comfort measures reduce stress. People make better food decisions when
they are under lower stress conditions.
d Editor's note: No footnote in submitted article.

References

Ailawadi, Kusum L., Yu Ma and Dhruv Grewal (2016), ``The Impact of
Warehouse Club Stores on Our Packaged Food Consumption,'' working
paper.
Atalay, Selin and Margaret G. Meloy (2011), ``Retail Therapy: A
Strategic Effort to Improve Mood,'' Psychology & Marketing, 28 (6), 638-
59.
Atakan, Sinem Stet and Laura Finch (2018), `` `Do You Have a
Restroom?' How Environmental Comfort in Retail Stores Influences
Sales,'' working paper, Cornell Food and Brand Lab.
Beatty, Sharon E., Alexa M. Givan, George R. Franke and Kristy E.
Reynolds (2015), ``Social Store Identification and Adolescent Females'
Store Attitudes and Behaviors,'' Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, 23 (1), 39-56.
Bhana, Hiershenee (2017), ``Conducting Behavioral Field Research in
Food Pantries: Lessons and Tactics for Testing Nutrition
Interventions,'' working paper, Columbia University.
Bhana, Hiershenee and Issabella Contento (2017), ``Social Norm
Signage Shifts Pantry Patrons to Healthier Food,'' working paper,
Columbia University.
Biswas, Dipayan, Courtney Szocs and Jeffrey Inman (2016), ``Making
Choices for a Sequence of Healthy and Unhealthy Options,'' in Let's Get
Engaged! Crossing the Threshold of Marketing's Engagement Era Springer
International Publishing 167-72.
Block, Martin P. and Steven Keith Platt (2014), Consumer Location-
Based Analytics Deliver Actionable Insights, Platt Retail Institute.
Bodur, Onur, Noreen M. Klein and Neeraj Arora (2015), ``Online Price
Search: Impact of Price Comparison Sites on Offline Price
Evaluations,'' Journal of Retailing, 91 (1), 125-39.
Bommelaer, Columbe and Brian Wansink (2017), ``Healthy Shopping By
Design: Redesigning Grocery Stores to Sell More Fruits and
Vegetables,'' working paper, Cornell Food and Brand Lab.
Borstein, David (2015), ``The Art of Getting Opponents to `We' ''
New York Times, (November) (accessed July 12, 2016), [available at
http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/11/03/the-art-of-getting-
opponents-to-we/].
Carroll, Kathryn A., Anya Savikhin Samek and Lydia Zepeda (2016),
``Product Bundling as a Behavioral Nudge: Investigating Consumer Fruit
and Vegetable Selection using Dual-Self Theory,'' working paper,
Agricultural and Applied Economics Association (2016 Annual Meeting,
July 31-August 2, 2016, Boston, Massachusetts, No. 236130).
Cawley, John, Matthew J. Sweeney, Jeffrey Sobal, David R. Just,
Harry M. Kaiser, William D. Schulze, Elaine Wethington and Brian
Wansink (2015), ``The Impact of a Supermarket Nutrition Rating System
on Purchases of Nutritious and Less Nutritious Foods,'' Public Health
Nutrition, 18, 8-14.
Cawley, John, Andrew S. Hanks, David R. Just and Brian Wansink
(2016), ``Incentivizing Nutritious Diets: A Field Experiment of
Relative Price Changes and How They are Framed,'' NBER working paper
no. w-21929.
Chandon, Pierre and Brian Wansink (2012), ``Does Food Marketing Need
to Make Us Fat? A Review and Solutions,'' Nutrition Reviews, 70
(October (10)), 571-93.
Chen, Charlene Y., Leonard Lee and Andy J. Yap (2011), ``Do People
Spend More in a Crowded Store? A Field Experiment on Control
Deprivation and Compensatory Spending,'' NA--Advances in Consumer
Research, 39 (1), 729-30.
Cleeran, Kathleen, Kelly Geyskens, Peter C. Verhoef and Joost M.E.
Pennings (2016), ``Regular or Low-fat? An Investigation of the Long-run
Impact of the First Low-fat Purchase on Subsequent Purchase Volumes and
Calories,'' International Journal of Research in Marketing, (in press).
Desai, Kalpesh and Minakshi Trivedi (2014), ``Do Consumer
Perceptions Matter in Measuring Choice Variety and Variety Seeking?,''
Journal of Business Research, 67 (1), 2786-92.
de Wijk, Rene A., Anna J. Maaskant, Ilse A. Polet, Nancy T.E.
Holthuysen, Ellen van Kleef and Monique H. Vingerhoeds (2016), ``An In-
Store Experiment on the Effect of Accessibility on Sales of Wholegrain
and White Bread in Supermarkets,'' PLoS One, 11 (3), e0151915.
Dzhogleva, Hristina, Jeff Inman and Jim Maurer (2013), ``Does
Reducing Nutritional Information Complexity Promote Healthier Food
Choices?,'' NA--Advances in Consumer Research, 41.
Gilbride, Timothy J., Jeffrey Inman and Karen Melville Stilley
(2015), ``The Role of Within-trip Dynamics in Unplanned Versus Planned
Purchase Behavior,'' Journal of Marketing, 79 (3), 57-73.
Groening, Christopher, Jeffrey Inman and William T. Ross, Jr.
(2014), ``Carbon Footprints in the Sand: Marketing in the Age of
Sustainability,'' Customer Needs and Solutions, 1 (1), 40-51.
Grunert, Klaus G., Lisa E. Bolton and Monique M. Raats (2011),
``Processing and Acting upon Nutrition Labeling on Food: The State of
Knowledge and New Directions for Transformative Consumer Research,'' in
Transformative Consumer Research for Personal and Collective Well-
Being, Mick D.G., Pettigrew S., Ozanne J.L. and Pechmann C., eds. New
York: Routledge, 333-51.
Guthrie, Joanne F. (2017), ``Integrating Behavioral Economics into
Nutrition Education Research and Practice,'' Journal of Nutrition
Education and Behavior, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.Jneb.2016.09.006
(forthcoming)
Gustafsson, Anders, Crina Tarasi, Lars Witell and Ruth Bolton
(2016), ``How Goals, Emotions and Experiential Attributes Influence
Shoppers' Satisfaction with their Retail Service Experience,'' working
paper.
Hampson, Daniel P. and Peter J. McGoldrick (2013), ``A Typology of
Adaptive Shopping Patterns in Recession,'' Journal of Business
Research, 66 (7), 831-8.
Haywood, Stephen (2016), ``Farmers Blast Supermarkets over Falling
Fruit and Veg Sales--Despite Plunging Prices,'' Mirror (Mirror.co.uk),
(May).
Hsu, Christine (2014), ``Weight Primary Reason for Increased in Tofu
Consumption,'' Counsel & Heal, CounselHeal.com, (July) (accessed April
12, 2016), [available at http://www.counselheal.com/articles/10425/
20140710/weight-primary-reason-increase-tofu-consumption.htm].
Hui, Sam K., Yanliu Huang, Jacob Suher and Jeffrey Inman (2013),
``Deconstructing the First Moment of Truth: Understanding Unplanned
Consideration and Purchase Conversion Using In-store Video Tracking,''
Journal of Marketing Research, 50 (4), 445-62.
Hui, Sam K., Jeffrey Inman, Yanliu Huang and Jacob Suher (2013),
``The Effect of In-store Travel Distance on Unplanned Spending:
Applications to Mobile Promotion Strategies,'' Journal of Marketing, 77
(2), 1-16.
Huneke, Tabea, Sabine Benoit, Poja Shams and Anders Gustafsson
(2015), ``Does Service Employees' Appearance Affect the Healthiness of
Food Choice?,'' Psychology and Marketing, 32 (1), 94-106.
Hunneman, Auke, Peter C. Verhoef and Laurens M. Sloot (2015), ``The
Moderating Role of Shopping Trip Type in Store Satisfaction
Formation,'' working paper, Oslo: BI Norweigan School of Management.
Inman, Jeffrey (2012), ``The Elephant Not in the Room: The Need for
Useful, Actionable Insights in Behavioral Research,'' NA--Advances in
Consumer Research, 40.
Inman, Jeffrey and Hristina Nikolova (2016), ``Shopper-Facing Retail
Technology: An Adoption Decision Calculus,'' (2016).
Johnson, Eric J., Suzanne B. Shu, Benedict G.C. Dellaert, Craig Fox,
Daniel G. Goldstein, Gerald Haeubl, Richard P. Larrick, John W. Payne,
Ellen Peters, David Schkade, Brian Wansink and Elke U. Weber (2012),
``Beyond Nudges: Tools of a Choice Architecture,'' Marketing Letters,
23 (June (2)), 487-504.
Karevold, Knut, Huy Quoc Tran and Brian Wansink (2017),
``Supermarket Interventions to Sell Sustainable Foods: Better to Change
the Selection or to Change the Store?,'' Food and Brand Lab working
paper, Cornell University.
Kell, John (2016), ``Wegmans Was Just Named the Best Grocery Chain
in America,'' Fortune, (April) (accessed April 12, 2016) [available at
http://fortune.com/2016/04/14/best-grocery-store/].
Keeling, Kathleen A., Peter J. McGoldrick and Henna Sadhu (2013),
``Staff Word-of-Mouth (SWOM) and Retail Employee Recruitment,'' Journal
of Retailing, 89 (1), 88-104.
Kovacheva, Aleksandra and Jeffrey Inman (2014), ``Shopper Eye-Cue:
Understating the In-Store Decision Process With Field Eye-Tracking
Data,'' NA--Advances in Consumer Research, 42.
Laroche, Helena H., Christopher Ford, Kate Anderson, Xueya Cai,
David R. Just, Andrew S. Hanks and Brian Wansink (2015), ``Concession
Stand Makeovers: A Pilot Study of Offering Healthy Foods at High School
Concession Stands,'' Journal of Public Health, 37 (1), 116-24.
Laroche, Helena, Chrisne Hradek, Kate Hanson, Andrew S. Hanks, David
R. Just and Brian Wansink (2017), ``Healthy Concessions: High School
Students' Responses to Healthy Concession Stand Changes,'' Journal of
School Health, 87 (2), 98-105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/josh.12472.
Lee, Leonard (2015), ``The Emotional Shopper: Assessing the
Effectiveness of Retail Therapy,'' Foundations and Trends in Marketing,
8 (2), 69-145.
Lemon, Katherine N. and Peter C. Verhoef (2016), ``Understanding
Customer Experience throughout the Customer,'' Journey Journal of
Marketing, (in press).
Lenard, Jeff and Carolyn Schnare (2016), ``Eight Low-Cost--and
Proven--Tactics for How C-Store Operators and Grow Their Healthy
Offer,'' NACS, Magazine, (August), 30-6.
List, John A., Anya Savikhin Samek and Terri Zhu (2015),
``Incentives to Eat Healthy: Evidence from a Grocery StoreField
Experiment,'' CESR--Schaeffer working paper 2015-025.
Lowe, Ben, Diogo Souza-Monteiro and Iain Fraser (2013), ``Exploring
the Role of Technology in Consumer Processing of Nutritional
Information,'' Journal of Marketing Management, 29 (11-12), 1337-66.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2013.798673.
Lund, Donald J. and Detelina Marinova (2014), ``Managing Revenue
Across Retail Channels: The Interplay of Service Performance and Direct
Marketing,'' Journal of Marketing, 78 (5), 99-118.
Mao, Ran and Sinem Atakan (2017), ``What Future Technologies Will
Help Grocery Shoppers to Shop Healthier?,'' working paper, Cornell
University.
Marinova, Detelina, Irina V. Kozlenkova, Leona Cuttler and J.B.
Silvers (2016), ``To Prescribe or Not to Prescribe? Consumer Access to
Life-Enhancing Products,'' Journal of Consumer Research, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucw057.
Mukund, Anupama, Sinem Atakan and Brian Wansink (2018), ``When Does
More Time in the Aisle Mean More Food in the Cart?,'' working paper,
Cornell Food and Brand Lab.
Nikolova, Hristina Dzhogleva, Jeffrey Inman, Jim Maurer, Andrew
Greiner and Gala Amoroso (2014), The Shopper-Centric Retailer: Three
Case Studies on Deriving Shopper Insights from Frequent Shopper Data,
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.75-102.
Nikolova, Hristina Dzhogleva and J. Jeffrey Inman (2015), ``Healthy
Choice: The Effect of Simplified Point-of-Sale Nutritional Information
on Consumer Food Choice Behavior,'' Journal of Marketing Research, 52
(6), 817-35.
Otterbring, Tobias, Erik Wastlund, Anders Gustafsson and Poja Shams
(2014), ``Vision (im)possible? The Effects of In-store Signage on
Customers' Visual Attention,'' Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Sciences, 21 (5), 676-84.
Payne, C.R., Mihai Niculescu, David R. Just and Michael P. Kelly
(2014), ``Shopper Marketing Nutrition Interventions,'' Physiology &
Behavior, 136, 111-20.
Peters, John C., Jimikaye Beck, Jan Lande, Zhaoxing Pan, Michelle
Cardel, Keith Ayoob and James Hill (2016), ``Using Healthy Defaults in
Walt Disney World Restaurants to Improve Nutritional Choices,'' Journal
of the Association for Consumer Research, 1 (1) (forthcoming).
Pope, Lizzy, Andrew S. Hanks, David R. Just and Brian Wansink
(2014), ``New Year's Res-Illusions: Food Shopping in the New Year
Competes with Healthy Intentions,'' PLoS One, 9 (12), e110561.
Produce for Better Health (2015), State of the Plate: 2015 Study on
America's Consumption of Fruit and Vegetables, Washington, D.C.:
Produce for Better Healthy Foundation.
Purdy, Chase (2016), ``To Lure People Put Off by the Freakiness of
Lab-Made Meat, This is What the Industry Wants to Call It,'' Quartz,
(May) (accessed August 12, 2016) [available at http://qz.com/772987/to-
lure-people-put-off-by-the-freakiness-of-lab-made-meat-this-is-what-the-
industry-wants-to-call-it/].
Robinson, Stacey G., Michael K. Brady, Katherine N. Lemon and
Michael Giebelhausen (2016), ``Less of this One? I'll Take It: New
Insights on the Influence of Shelf-based Scarcity,'' International
Journal of Research in Marketing, (in press).
Sciandra, Michael and Jeffrey Inman (2014), ``Smart Phones, Bad
Calls? The Impact of In-Store Mobile Technology Use on Purchase
Behavior,'' working paper.
Shah, Avni, Jim Bettman, Punam Anand Keller and Peter Ubel (2013),
`` `Does This Tax Make Me Look Fat?' Using Stigma-Inducing Labels to
Decrease Unhealthy Food Consumption,'' NA--Advances in Consumer
Research, 41.
Sheehan, D. and Koert van Ittersum (2016), ``In-Store Spending
Dynamics,'' working paper.
Spence, Charles and Betina Piqueras-Fiszman (2014), The Perfect
Meal: The Multisensory Science of Food and Dining, John Wiley & Sons.
Stein, Kate (2017), ``Do Supermarket Aisles Bias Spending?,''
working paper, Cornell Food and Brand Lab.
____ (2018), ``Eyes in an Aisle: How Eye Gaze Level Relates to
Healthy Grocery Store Purchases,'' working paper, Cornell University
Food and Brand Lab.
Trivedi, Minakshi, Dinesh K. Gauri and Yu Ma (2016), ``An Empirical
Investigation of Inefficiencies for Sales Promotions in Stimulating
Category Sales,'' Management Science, (forthcoming).
Trivedi, Minakshi, Karthik Sridhar and Ashish Kumar (2016), ``Impact
of Healthy Alternatives on Consumer Choice: A Balancing Act,'' Journal
of Retailing, 92 (1), 65-82.
Trudel, Remi, Kyle B. Murray, Soyoung Kim and Shuo Chen (2015),
``The Impact of Traffic Light Color-coding on Food Health Perceptions
and Choice,'' Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 21 (3), 255-
75.
Tal, Aner and Brian Wansink (2015), ``An Apple a Day Brings More
Apples Your Way: Healthy Samples Prime Healthier Choices,'' Psychology
& Marketing, 32 (5), 575-84.
Toft, Ulla, Lise Lawaetz Winkler, Frank Eriksson, Bent Egberg
Mikkelsen and Charlotte Glumer, ``The Effect of 20% Price Discount on
Fruit and Vegetables Combined with a Space Management Intervention on
Supermarket Purchases During the Three Month SoL Project,'' working
paper, University of Copenhagen (in preparation).
van Herpen, Erica (2016), ``Product Category Layout and
Organization: Retail Placement of Food Products,'' in Reference Module
in Food Science Elsevier.
van Herpen, Erica, Evan van den Broek, Hans C.M. van Trijp and Tian
Yu (2016), ``Can a Virtual Supermarket Bring Realism into the Lab?
Comparing Shopping Behavior Using Virtual and Pictorial Store
Representations to Behavior in a Physical Store,'' Appetite, 107, 196-
207.
Van der Heide, Martine, Koert van Ittersum and Jenny van Doorn
(2016), ``Healthy Shopping Dynamics: The Relative healthiness of Food
Purchases Throughout Shopping Trips,'' In Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 44, Moreau Page and Puntoni S. eds. Duluth, MN:
Association for Consumer Research.
Van Doorn, Jenny and Peter C. Verhoef (2015), ``Drivers of and
Barriers to Organic Purchase Behavior,'' Journal of Retailing, 91 (3),
436-50.
van Ittersum, Koert, Brian Wansink, Joost M.E. Pennings and Daniel
Sheehan (2013), ``Smart Shopping Carts: How Real-Time Feedback
Influences Spending,'' Journal of Marketing, 77 (6), 21-36.
van Kleef, Ellen, Kai Otten and Hans C.M. van Trijp (2012),
``Healthy Snacks at the Checkout Counter: A Lab and Field Study on the
Impact of Shelf Arrangement and Assortment Structure on Consumer
Choices,'' BMC Public Health, 12 (1), 1072.
Vega Zamora, Manuela, Francisco Jose Torres Ruiz, Eva M. Murgado
Armenteros and Manuel Parras Rosa (2014), ``Organic as a Heuristic Cue:
What Spanish Consumers Mean by Organic Foods,'' Psychology & Marketing,
31 (5), 349-59.
Verhoef, Peter C. and Jenny van Doorn (2016), ``Segmenting Consumers
According to Their Purchase of Products with Organic, Fair-Trade, and
Health Labels,'' Journal of Marketing Behavior, 2 (1), 19-37.
Vermeir, Iris and Patrick Van Kenhove (2005), ``The Influence of
Need for Closure and Perceived Time Pressure on Search Effort for Price
and Promotional Information in a Grocery Shopping Context,'' Psychology
& Marketing, 22 (1), 71-95.
Wansink, Brian (2014), Slim by Design--Mindless Eating Solutions for
Everyday Life, New York, NY: William Morrow.
_____ (2015), ``Change their Choice! Changing Behavior Using the CAN
Approach and Activism Research,'' Psychology & Marketing, 32 (5), 486-
500.
Wansink, Brian, David R. Just, Collin R. Payne and Matthew Z.
Klinger (2012), ``Attractive Names Sustain Increased Vegetable Intake
in Schools,'' Preventive Medicine, 55 (4), 330-2.
Wansink, Brian and Huy Quoc Tran (2017), MyPlate, Half-Plate, or the
Whole Plate: How Dietary Guidance Systems Influence Eating Behavior,
Cornell Food and Brand Lab working paper.
Wansink, Brian, Collin R. Payne and Kenneth C. Herbst (2017), ``Half-
Cart Approach to Increasing Fruit and Vegetable Purchases in Grocery
Stores,'' working paper, Cornell Food and Brand Lab.
Wansink, Brian, Dilip Soman and Kenneth C. Herbst (2017), ``Larger
Partitions Lead to Larger Sales: Divided Grocery Carts Alter Purchase
Norms and Increase Sales,'' Journal of Business Research,
(forthcoming).
Wansink, Brian, Huy Quoc Tran and Knut Ivar Karevold (2017),
``Healthy Eating Interventions Work Best on Mondays and Tuesdays, Food
and Brand Lab,'' working paper, Cornell University.
Werle, C.O.C., G. Ardito, O. Trendal, A. Mallard and P. Nat (2011),
``Unhealthy Food is Not Tastier for Everybody: The Healthy = Tasty
French Intuition,'' Actes du Congres de l'AFM.
Wilson, Norbert Lance Weston (2016), ``When the Cupboards are Bare:
Nudging Food Pantry Clients to Healthier Foods,'' Journal of the
Association for Consumer Research, 1 (1) (forthcoming).
Wilson, Norbert L.W., David R. Just, Jeffery Swiger and Brian
Wansink (2016), ``Food Pantry Selection Solutions. A Randomized
Controlled Trial in Client-Choice Food Pantries to Nudge Clients to
Targeted Foods,'' Journal of Public Health.
Winkler, Lise L., Ulla Christensen, Charlotte Glumer, Paul Bloch,
Bent E. Mikkelsen, Brian Wansink and Ulla Toft (2017), ``Substituting
Candy for Fruit and Healthy Snacks at the Checkout: A Win-Win Solution
for Consumers and Food Stores,'' BMC Public Health, (forthcoming).

The Chairman. I thank our panel, terrific. I want to remind
our Members that I am going to be relatively strict with the 5
minute clock in order to try to get everybody through the
system. So if you want to use most of your 5 minutes to make
editorial comments and ask a question with a second left on the
clock, I will ask our witnesses to submit the answers for the
record. I am just trying to be fair to everybody.
So with that, I will recognize the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Nutrition for his 5 minutes. G.T.?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, members
of the panel, for everything that you do, supporting the
nutritional needs of American families. It is greatly
appreciated.
This is such a great topic, obviously one that I am
passionate about. We are looking at how Americans find
themselves, and American families, individuals, a lot of
children find themselves in some pretty challenging financial
circumstances, get access to nutrition. Certainly in addition
to personal resources and family support, community programs,
and obviously our TEFAP program and other ways that this
Committee supports those community programs, and then we have
SNAP, the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program.
And this is an appropriate place to have this discussion.
Quite frankly, this is the appropriate jurisdiction when you
look, because there are two basic principles. First, nutrition
matters in so many different ways; and second, it is farmers'
feed.
And so my first question is to the gentleman from the
Keystone State, Mr. Weidman. It is good to see you. Thank you
for being here today, and congratulations on The Food Trust's
25th anniversary. We appreciate all that, sir, your
organization does to improve access for those in need to
affordable and nutritious food.
Your testimony mentions that in Pennsylvania, nutrition
education programming is in both urban and rural environments.
I represent the Pennsylvania 5th district. Obviously, on this
topic I am concerned with all Americans, but in the 5th
district, which is very rural by definition, 24 percent of the
land mass of Pennsylvania, how does SNAP-Education reach into
those rural areas?
Mr. Weidman. Thank you, Congressman Thompson.
In Pennsylvania, we have a great SNAP-Ed program. There is
a little variability from state to state in how the program is
operated. In Pennsylvania, it is led by Penn State, and they do
a great job. Because of the extension program, they have a lot
of breadth to cover rural areas. We have stuff happening in
almost every county in Pennsylvania. And it is similar to the
work that we are doing in Pennsylvania, working with children,
working with adults to get them to learn more about where food
comes from, sometimes nutrition science can be confusing to all
of us, so helping them, kind of guide them to make good choices
of the food around them.
One of the programs we work with is the Share Our Strength
Program called Cooking Matters in the supermarkets. It is
really taking seniors and other adults on tours of a grocery
store literally and teaching them about how to shop healthy,
how to shop on a budget. And this kind of work is happening all
around the country. There is a great rural example of SNAP-Ed
happening in New Mexico, the CHILE (Child Health Initiative for
Lifelong Eating and Exercise) Plus Program, and that is doing
work in Head Start centers as well as pre-K, working with kids
and their families, basically, to help them, again, guide them
on making healthier choices, teaching them how to cook healthy
recipes, taste tests, and that is happening on Tribal lands as
well in New Mexico, in addition to other sites. It is at about
80 sites in all in rural areas of New Mexico. And I am sure
there are plenty of other examples.
SNAP-Ed is a great way to get at both this problem of
improving health in urban and rural communities.
Mr. Thompson. It seems like from the testimony and past
discussions I have had with key stakeholders and folks making
sure that nutritional needs are met is really strengthened by a
collaborative process, and obviously with programs like SNAP-
Ed, food insecurity, nutrition incentives, Healthy Food
Financing Initiative, all those, can you expand just in the
short time we have on other types of collaboratives, other
folks who have sat at the table. You mentioned my alma mater,
the great land-grant university of Penn State. Are there other
examples of collaboratives?
Mr. Weidman. Sure.
Mr. Thompson. It seems like a model we should continue to
strengthen.
Mr. Weidman. Yes, There are great examples of
collaboratives, a lot with the grocers. We work with a great
local grocery chain in Pennsylvania called The Fresh Grocer,
and The Fresh Grocer is partnering with us to provide us space
for doing nutrition education, SNAP-Ed programming in their
stores. As Brian said, these stores are a great place to meet
customers where they shop and help guide them to make healthier
choices. That same grocer is also helping us with SNAP
incentives, doing our Philly Food Bucks inside The Fresh
Grocer. Every time a customer spends $5, the grocer is the one
that created the whole technology to put out a coupon, an
electronic coupon for $2 in free fruits and vegetables at that
store. And, again, this is something that we are seeing
nationally, great partners with grocers, with farmers certainly
at all of our farmers' markets in Pennsylvania and around the
country have been great partners.
I also just quickly would mention that the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce today in D.C. is having a conference called the Health
Means Business conference, and they are recognizing
partnerships between nonprofits and the corporate sector aimed
at improving health. GSK has funded a citywide initiative
called Get Hype Philly, working to get youth to be leaders in
making healthy changes in their community. So we are working
with nine other nonprofits and 50,000 kids in Philadelphia with
GSK, and then Campbell Soup Foundation in Camden, New Jersey is
midway through a 10 year initiative working with a number of
groups to improve health and childhood obesity.
Mr. Thompson. That is great, Mr. Weidman. Thank you.
I see my time has expired.
Mr. Weidman. Okay, thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Scott, 5 minutes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This whole issue, to me, strikes right at the nerve of the
foundation of our great country, which is founded on the
principles of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. And
there is no other area of human endeavor that best manifests
our foundation of life, of liberty, and happiness than our
choice of food.
Think of what makes you happy. I know there are many things
out there individually that make us happy, but none greater
than food. And what bothers me with this is that we want to
make subjections here that are just absolutely not true. Sodas,
candy, sweet things, that is not what makes us obese. It is the
lack of our children exercising. Look at the history of this
country. Look at us 30 years ago, 20 years ago. What has
happened? Our children and us, we don't go and exercise. We
don't have physical education in the schools anymore. But what
we have is this Blackberry, this Facebook, this going on the
Internet. And instead of children going and saying let's go
play basketball or let's hook up a game here, they go in the
basement or they go in their room and they stay hour after hour
on that.
My whole point is this. Food surveillance violates the
basic principles of this great country, and first of all, you
are going to discriminate between a low-income person simply
because for 6 months on average that is all they stay on food
stamps. They are gone. Look at the complexity you are going to
put into the grocery store. Who is going to pick up that extra
cost to have the food police there monitoring, and why?
Now I think that a better way of going about solving many
of these things is to look at how we educate people. You can't
force them. You can't deny them their freedoms to be able to
make choices without violating their pursuit of happiness.
Think about it. When Thomas Jefferson wrote those words, he
said to himself, and he wrote in one particular pamphlet, and
he wrote this to his arch competitor, Alexander Hamilton. And
what he said was, in this way, he said, ``What I have declared
here, my dear Mr. Hamilton, is has come to me these words,
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.'' He said by some
divine providence intervention. In other words, what he was
saying was those words, life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, he came and he wrote that Declaration of
Independence under the inspiration of God Almighty. Let us not
go against that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Crawford, 5 minutes.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is a tough act
to follow, Mr. Scott. I appreciate that.
I represent a part of the country, the Delta region,
probably better than \1/2\ of my district is, and as you can
imagine, working with a high degree of poverty. So many of my
constituents are heavily dependent on SNAP benefits, and the
problem they confront is that over the years, we have seen a
decline in the number of supermarkets. So what we are dealing
with ultimately here, ironically, is one of the most productive
agricultural regions in the country is effectively a food
desert. We have limited access to the healthy foods, so they
rely on convenience stores and things like that. To restrict
SNAP purchases to healthier food products, my question is would
the compliance costs outweigh the benefits of accepting SNAP
benefits at retail locations, or would it encourage SNAP
retailers to offer a wider variety of healthy food products?
And I will just leave that to any or all that want to make a
comment on that.
Ms. Sarasin. It depends, frankly, on how any changes to the
program were structured. Obviously, retailers want very much to
be in areas where they can meet customer needs, and if the
customer base is there and they can be profitable and
successfully meet the needs locally, they will, and they want
to.
The kinds of proposals that we are talking about here will
definitely have an impact on how these companies can function.
The potential increase in the administrative costs for a
program that limits certain products, whatever they are,
whatever kind of products we are talking about, is going to be
oppressive, as I indicated in my testimony, given the sheer
volume of products that are available in supermarkets today,
and the number of new products that are introduced every year.
The creation of a structure to monitor that and determine which
products are in and which ones are out, is going to necessarily
create pressure on the system, and also create pressure at the
retail level for stores that are in existence, for stores that
are being contemplated to be created, and the result could be
that stores can't function profitably any longer in some areas.
It could also be that some stores will have to determine that
the administrative costs are so great that they would have to
leave the SNAP program entirely.
Dr. Schanzenbach. Thank you.
I would echo that. I would be particularly concerned that
these increased regulatory burdens would drive out some of the
smaller retailers, especially in rural areas.
The other thing that I would like to add is that, as an
economist, all of this comes down to supply and demand, and I
have heard a lot of conversation about how do we increase the
demand for healthy foods, whether that is through education,
whether that is through pricing incentives. If people demand
more healthy foods in those areas, those grocery stores are
going to respond by supplying more of them. So that is why I
would like to see the market work in this, and not restrict.
Mr. Weidman. And I would just agree with you of the need
for more grocery stores in the Delta. We are working with the
Michael and Susan Dell Foundation and Hope Enterprises located
in Jackson, Mississippi, to incentivize more grocery stores to
come to the Delta region. I also think the USDA through the
farm bill, the Healthy Food Financing Initiative offers real
opportunities to bring more grocery stores to the region.
Mr. Crawford. Dr. Rachidi, do you want to weigh in on that?
Dr. Rachidi. Sure, just real quickly. If you placed
restrictions on a very narrowly defined product such as
sweetened beverages, it would not be overly burdensome for
retailers, and I agree that it is really a supply and demand
issue. So if you did a restriction on sweetened beverages, for
example, which drove up demand for healthier products because
that is all people could use their SNAP benefits for, you would
hope that the retailers would then respond by providing more
healthy options.
Dr. Schanzenbach. And just respectfully, we think based on
economic theory that that is not what will happen. So many
people are using both SNAP benefits and their own cash, it
won't actually change behavior.
Ms. Sarasin. And if I could also respond to that.
I think we end up on a slippery slope when we start talking
about sweet beverages, because I don't know what that means,
and like most things, the devil is in the details. Because when
we start talking about sweetened beverages, are we talking, I
don't know exactly we are talking about. I mean, there are
juices that bring lots of nutrition that are sweetened
beverages. There are yogurt drinks that bring all kinds of
nutrients to the consumers of them that also have sugar in
them. We need to be careful about how we are discussing these,
because we are talking about a category of products as if we
all understand what that means.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McGovern, 5 minutes.
Mr. McGovern. Well thank you.
It is safe to say that we all can make better choices and
healthier choices, SNAP recipients and non-SNAP recipients. The
avoidable health care costs that taxpayers pay for non-SNAP
recipients, they get diabetes, heart disease. We all need to do
better. But I don't think by limiting the choices of SNAP
recipients you get there.
In fact, Ms. Rachidi said that we have a new President.
Maybe this is a time to try a pilot project. So when you say
that, I Googled Donald Trump's eating habits, and it is not a
pretty picture. Domino's Pizza, Kentucky Fried Chicken,
McDonald's, Diet Cokes. I mean, maybe we ought to begin with a
pilot project that limits access to unhealthy foods at the
White House, because we all pay for that. The taxpayers pay for
that.
If we are serious about it, this ought to be a bigger
discussion. And one of the things we ought not to do, and this
is out of this Committee's purview, is cut back on the
nutritional standards of the school feeding programs, which
some have suggested. We ought to figure out the things that
have worked. I visited a place in Dorchester, Massachusetts,
called Daily Table. They provide access to nutritional foods at
a lower cost. A lot of these vegetables and foods would
otherwise be discarded by other grocery stores, but people go
there and they can afford to be able to make healthier choices.
I personally think that one of the things that we could do
is increase the SNAP benefit. It is about $1.40 per person per
meal. You can't make a lot of choices in general with that kind
of benefit. Research from the Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities found that increasing SNAP benefits by a mere $30
per month would lower food insecurity, decrease fast food
consumption, and increase vegetable consumption. We have seen
the Healthy Incentives Pilot which found that an ongoing
investment of less than 15  per person per day may result in 25
percent increase in fresh fruit and vegetable consumption. And
out of this pilot came the FINI grants, which are working
across the country to incentivize healthy eating. All very
positive stuff.
I have been to SNAP-Education programs, and I will be
honest with you, the critique I get from some who attend these
programs is that the ability to buy the stuff to have a
healthier diet is difficult, because in their neighborhoods;
they don't have supermarkets. They have to rely on convenience
stores, and there are a lot of issues here that we need to talk
about.
In our school programs, we ought to stress nutrition
education at an earlier age. It is a lot easier to get people
on a healthy pathway when they are younger.
But let me ask, Dr. Schanzenbach, do you support increasing
SNAP benefits? Do you think that would promote healthy eating?
Dr. Schanzenbach. There is good evidence that an increase
in SNAP benefits would increase consumption of healthy foods.
Just like was testified earlier, when people have really tight
budgets, they concentrate on getting the lowest cost calories;
and then, if we expand purchasing power over time, then people
will increase both the quantity and the quality of foods that
they are eating.
We have really good evidence from the Summer Feeding
Program, the Summer EBT Program that says, additional resources
improve nutrition outcomes, and similar, this work that you
cited from the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities suggests
that additional $30 per month would change how people eat and
make them consume more healthy foods.
Mr. McGovern. And I agree with what Ms. Sarasin said about
how do you define a sweetened beverage. Does cranberry juice
fall into that category? There are lots of nutritional benefits
to cranberry juice, but it is a sweetened beverage. And would
you take that off the list?
And again, from my experience talking to people on SNAP, a
lot of times it comes down to the affordability as well as the
access. We have lots of pilot programs going on all across the
country. You mentioned one going on in Pennsylvania, all very,
very positive stuff. We ought to understand that is how you do
it, not by going and telling somebody that we are going to
restrict your choices. I think that is something that we ought
not to be doing here in Washington. But if you want to do a
pilot program, I am happy to cosponsor one at the White House,
because I am worried about our President's eating habits right
now.
So thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. LaMalfa, for 5 minutes. Mr. LaMalfa, for 5 minutes? You
pass? Mr. Davis, 5 minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. You are very welcome.
Mr. Davis. I appreciate that. It is always actually great
to follow my colleague, Mr. McGovern, and outside of the
comments about the President's eating habits, I actually agree
with him on some of these issues that maybe we ought to look at
incentives. Having this debate is great for all of us, because
this is isn't a partisan issue. I would challenge my colleague,
Mr. McGovern, to go to some of those restaurants that he named
and I believe he is going to be able to find that he can make
healthy choices at every single one of those restaurants, and
that is what is great about what we have seen in our country,
in our access to healthy foods. The marketplace is demanding
healthier choices, and all of those restaurants that he
mentioned have so many more today at a very much more
affordable cost than what they had even 5, 10 years ago.
So the marketplace is actually helping to supply that
demand for healthier choices, and I agree with Mr. McGovern. I
don't think that we have a role here in being the food police.
And he mentioned some critics of the School Nutrition Program.
Yes, I am one of those, and it is because the lunch ladies tell
me stories about how kids are throwing food away that they are
not eating. We don't have an adequate supply of healthy food to
serve in our school lunches that tastes good. Kids are throwing
it away, so how do we fix that? We do it by actually offering
more healthier choice, but in a way that is less of a top down
approach. Maybe incentivize it.
It is great to see so much testimony about expanding
purchasing options. I was a big supporter of the Double Bucks
Program in the last farm bill, and Dr. Wansink, I was actually
leaving to go to another hearing, but listening to your
testimony, and you talked about how do we have more incentives?
What can we do to incentivize rather than punish? Because I
don't drink cranberry juice. Sorry. It is probably good for me,
Jim.
Mr. McGovern. It is.
Mr. Davis. I don't drink it. It tastes like syrup to me. I
can't handle the sugar content in it. But if I was a SNAP
beneficiary, would I be able to buy cranberry juice and not
what I live off of, Diet Coke or Diet Pepsi? Who is going to
make that choice? It has zero calories. Actually, cranberry
juice has a lot more sugar and a lot more calories. So I don't
know who is going to make those choices, and frankly, I haven't
seen the Federal Government be a good barometer of making
choices like that for the constituents that I serve.
But Dr. Wansink, can you tell us what type of incentive
program would you recommend?
Dr. Wansink. Thank you very much.
Well if we can use schools as a parallel, as was brought
up. One of the ways that we found that it is best to guide kids
to eat healthier in schools is not necessarily nutrition
education programs, because they are costly and they are tough
to get into schools, but instead simply making the healthier
products more convenient, more attractive, more normal. Having
a basket of apples next to the checkout line, making foods
taste better, reducing waste and it also increases how much
people eat. And there are 29,000 schools who are now on that
program.
Now a similar thing can be done in the stores, and you are
right spot on when you say anybody goes in these restaurants
can eat healthy, because there are the options that are now
cheaper than they used to be. Making simple changes in grocery
stores that are incentive compatible with the grocery stores
that are either profit neutral or profitable for them.
Mr. Davis. Haven't they already been doing that?
Dr. Wansink. Not as widespread. I took last year off and
went on sabbatical to implement this in Norway to show that it
could be done as a tested concept, and even making small
changes in these grocery stores, simply having things such as
having fruits and vegetables within 10 of the doorway
increases how much people take by three percent. Making these
changes are things that grocery stores find profitable, but
then it also benefits all of us, not just SNAP beneficiaries.
Mr. Davis. But you wouldn't make the government force the
stores to change?
Dr. Wansink. Absolutely not.
Mr. Davis. Okay.
Dr. Wansink. No, we would make the profit argument to them
that they can make more money making people healthier.
Mr. Davis. Okay, because I know some stores would have to
actually move their Starbucks out of the way to be within that
10 of the door.
Does anybody else on the panel want to address the
incentivization?
Ms. Sarasin. If I could just say that, apart from the
incentive part of it, the thing that retailers are doing is a
lot of the stuff is happening on their own without incentives.
Our most recent data shows that something in the neighborhood
of 95 percent of our member companies have nutritionists and
dieticians onsite in their stores or at corporate headquarters
helping direct what is going on with their customers and
education. So there is a lot of this stuff that is happening
even without the incentives.
Mr. Davis. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Lujan Grisham, 5 minutes.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank my colleagues, Mr. McGovern and Mr. Davis. The focus of
all of our conversations ought to be on the incentives, and I
don't want to lose momentum. And we do really want very
specific ideas. In my state, we have incentives and initiatives
that are both authorized and supported by the farm bill, and
many of those that are solely state or corporate private-public
partnership initiatives. We have programs at WIC, we have
programs at Head Start that are uniquely focused on SNAP-
Education. We have a program called CHILE Plus. For those of
you not from New Mexico, we are the leaders and have the best-
tasting New Mexico chile anywhere. In fact, our state question
is whether it is red or green? But it is the Child Health
Initiative for Lifelong Eating and Exercise, and it really is
focused to integrate both purchasing and education and cooking
and eating healthy that we pushed out into the rural areas.
The core issue is that we want the flexibility for states
and rural communities and communities to really figure out how
to do it, but we need the farm bill to be really clear that
there is not only those incentives in terms of authorizations,
but there is funding and incentives for those funding vehicles.
I did the SNAP challenge, for $30, so I just had a protein
shake. I really think, as nearly a 60 year old woman with a
fairly sedentary public policy lifestyle I am really proud of,
I try to be cognizant of my calorie intakes. I work very hard
at it. Well during my SNAP challenge, I wasn't so good at it,
all right? I ate ramen noodles. I am trying to think of the
other high carbohydrate kinds of foods. I tried to get peanut
butter, high fat, and I couldn't get any organics. I bought one
banana and one apple for my weekly benefit if I was going to
have enough food and $1.50 left over.
Now if I am dealing with average benefits for my whole
family, and God forbid somebody in your family is sick and they
say we want high iron, high protein, you have a teenager who is
playing football. With that SNAP benefit, you can try all you
want to do healthy foods. It is impossible, because unhealthy,
cheaper foods are all you can buy. And I ate it. I stayed true
to doing what I was supposed to do, but it wasn't good.
So if we don't deal with that, in my state, seniors are
about to get their SNAP benefits cut: $33 a month with the
state portion that they are going to cut. I don't know about
you. I am a caregiver for my mom. If I go to the grocery store
for $33, I can't get anything that she ought to be eating.
Anything. So if we don't increase SNAP-Education funding and we
don't really put resources to allow folks to do these
incentives, we can talk about how great they are all the time,
and they are. I agree with that, my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle, we really shouldn't be the food police. We
ought to do incentives. We ought to do something about obesity.
You do something about obesity, you have hundreds of millions
of dollars to put back into economic incentives and farm bill
incentives to grow better food and to do more in the areas that
we all care about on this Committee. How can you get us, one of
the most bipartisan committees, to really think long and hard
about putting the resources where they need to be and seeing
the evidence-based outcomes that we have the research, the
Chairman teases me about research all the time. We have the
research that shows us that you have to educate people.
Do you have ideas to help us get to that agreement about
making sure that there are the resources that allow us to do
the things that you know would make a difference?
Dr. Wansink. I believe if we want to change things really
quick, it is probably not going to be education. It is a nice
long-term solution that is going to take a long time, and it is
not going to be the payoff. Initially educating, in this case,
retailers as to what they could do to guide people to these
healthier options, which are also high margin foods, because
they have to throw them away. If a banana goes bad, a retailer
loses money on it. What they can do to guide people to these
and get people to buy more of them. It is not just going to
benefit SNAP recipients, but it is going to benefit all of us.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Anybody else? I have 10 seconds. Let's
go.
Dr. Rachidi. Just real quickly, there is really little
evidence that, and I am in favor of incentive programs, but
there is little evidence that incentive programs reduce
consumption of unhealthy foods. And so I advocate for both, and
so if you look at the integrity of the program, you could gain
support for increasing incentive programs and education if you
eliminate some of these other issues like allowing unhealthy
foods to be purchased from the program.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. My time is definitely up, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Comer, 5 minutes. Mr. Comer, 5 minutes.
Mr. Comer. I was Commissioner of Agriculture in Kentucky
for 4 years, and one of the things that worked really well for
us with being able to provide healthy options to people with
EBT cards was when I first got elected, we only had 21 farmers'
markets that took EBT cards. When I went out of office, all 225
farmers' markets took EBT cards, and a lot of people said well,
that will never be a factor in sales. In a lot of those
farmers' markets, it was over 25 percent of the sales were from
EBT cards because of food deserts, and access to healthy food.
The farmers' markets are a great way, a great option for
people on SNAP because there are no bad foods at a farmers'
market, or I have never seen candy or soft drinks sold at any
Kentucky farmers' market, so I just wanted to share that story.
That was a pretty successful way to get healthy food options to
people that need it because of the obesity problem that we
clearly have.
Shifting gears here, what percentage of people use their
entire monthly SNAP benefits during the first week of the
month? Does anybody know the answer to that?
Ms. Sarasin. I don't know the percentage, but I can tell
you that the data that we have seen shows that a tremendous
amount of it is spent in the first week, and that those
purchases tend to be the largest of the month.
Mr. Comer. Right.
Ms. Sarasin. And the ones that have the most protein and
the things that we would tend to expect that they would buy
first.
Mr. Comer. In talking with retailers across the state about
this issue, several have come up with this suggestion, and they
use this example. The majority of the people that they deal
with use their entire benefit, monthly benefit, the first week
of the month. So if you want to provide milk and things like
that, meat for low-income people to eat healthy, if this is
their only source of revenue for their food, the milk expires
or it is gone. They don't have access to milk or a lot of
proteins that expire. I wonder how feasible it would be to have
a bi-monthly benefit to encourage more people to try to manage
their budgets to where they can have milk for the first half of
the month and the second half of the month, because it is a big
problem. I represent a very poor district and that is something
that just about every retailer that I have talked to has
mentioned that as a suggestion to be more efficient and to help
the people. Because a lot of the people unfortunately don't
have a high level of financial literacy, and that is an issue.
So I just wanted to get your thoughts on that, Ms. Sarasin.
Ms. Sarasin. As a Kentuckian myself, and from the next
county over from you, I can totally understand the discussions
that you have had. And what we find in many states is that they
have gone to not having single dates of the month when the
benefits are available. There are multiple points in the month
when recipients have access to their benefits. And so in the
states where that has happened, it has been very beneficial,
certainly from the retail perspective because it allows us,
instead of having to have such pressure on both our labor pool
on a certain day or in a certain week of the month, but also on
the supply chain issues so that we have enough milk in
different quantities and different styles and different sizes,
for example. Being able to move these things out over the
course of a month would certainly, from a retail perspective,
be a better situation for us.
Mr. Comer. Yes, I am for less government, and I don't like
the nanny state and all that, but is it clearly a problem, and
the obesity issue, it is almost at epidemic levels. The poorer
the county, the higher the obesity rate. And you can see that
when you go into public schools and, unfortunately for the
students in the poorer schools. You can just tell there is a
higher obesity rate in those schools.
Ms. Sarasin. A couple of things. One is the data seems to
indicate that everybody is getting fat, rich kids, poor kids
alike. But to give my perspective on your question about the
twice a month. Something that people raise as a concern there,
especially for people with limited access to places to shop,
breaking this benefit up into twice a month might make it
harder for them to get to the store, because now instead of one
big shopping trip, they have to do multiple. So it is just
something to consider.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Adams, 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Peterson, for hosting the hearing, and thank you
to the witnesses for being here today.
The SNAP program is very important to those in the 12th
District of North Carolina. I represent that district, and the
folks struggle with food insecurity a lot. We have a lot of
food deserts. But as someone who lives with diabetes, I know
that there will be times when someone that participates in the
SNAP program and has diabetes will need to buy a candy bar to
quickly raise their blood sugar, and they should be able to buy
that candy bar with their SNAP benefits.
Dr. Schanzenbach, could you provide a brief summary of the
findings of your research on the long-term health impacts on
individuals who participated in SNAP as infants and toddlers?
Dr. Schanzenbach. Thank you. So my recent research study
looked at the introduction of the Food Stamp Program, which was
done over the 1960s and 1970s. Congress in its great wisdom
decided to roll it out slowly, and so that gives us an
opportunity to study, if you lived in this county when you were
5 years old versus that county, you had different access to the
Food Stamp Program, as it was then called. And so then we can
tease out well, what happens if people are given access to the
Food Stamp Program.
What we found was a couple of things. First is children are
born healthier if their moms have access to food stamps while
she is pregnant. But then because this happened so long ago, we
were able to follow the children who grew up in these areas
over time. So now they are 40 and 50 years old. What we found
was that we should really be thinking about food stamps as an
investment in children. So we found that access to food stamps
during childhood increased the likelihood that they graduated
from high school by 18 percentage points. Furthermore, we were
able to look at their adult outcomes. We found that they are
healthier in adulthood. We looked at this thing called
metabolic syndrome, which is a clustered association between
obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, et cetera. What we
found there was more access to food in early life sets up
systems in your body to actually make you less obese in later
life.
Then finally we found that, and this was particularly the
case for women, that people who had access to food stamps in
childhood grew up to be more economically self sufficient. They
are more likely to be employed. They had higher earnings, and
they themselves as adults were less likely to be reliant on
food stamps or welfare programs.
And of course, as an economist, what I think is going on
here is that the children were better able to make investments,
right? They weren't going to school hungry so they could pay
attention in school better and learn more. And so this is very
important evidence, evidence I certainly want the Committee to
know about, to think about this program as an investment.
Ms. Adams. Okay. So would you support a higher SNAP
benefit?
Dr. Schanzenbach. Certainly, it is very important to
preserve the program as it is, so that is sort of always my
first worry. But then I do think with separate evidence that
there is good evidence that increasing the benefit levels will
increase the amount of healthy foods purchased, will reduce
food insecurity, and of course, one out of every five children
in this nation lives in a food-insecure household right now,
and in nine states, it is one out of four children live in a
food-insecure household. I think that is too high for this
great nation of ours.
Ms. Adams. Okay. So why would SNAP restrictions on soft
drinks, for example, be unlikely to change consumption patterns
shared by all Americans?
Dr. Schanzenbach. Sure. So of course, remember that food
stamps benefits are relatively modest, $4.50 per person per
day, and if we think about an average household, which gets
about $250 in food stamp benefits, and then they have to
supplement their food purchases by additional cash resources.
So it is $100, $150 additional. Then on average, households
spend about $12 to $14 a month on soda, right? So $250 SNAP,
$100 in cash, $12 on soda. Be very straightforward that even if
we go through all this red tape and debate what is in a soda
and what is out of a soda and is this sugar sweetened or not,
if we did that, when they get to the checkout line, they would
be able to say, ``Okay, I still want to purchase my soda, my
sugar sweetened beverage. I just need to do it out of this pot
of money instead of that pot of money.'' That is a lot of red
tape to go through to not change behavior.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Yoho, 5 minutes.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it, and I
appreciate you all being here. This is such an important topic
that we look to reform and make it right, both for the
recipient and for the taxpayers.
Ms. Sarasin, one of the common arguments against
restricting SNAP purchases has been the operational challenges
of implementing restrictions, and if you have gone over that, I
apologize, and if you haven't, with regard to the tech needed
to track the restricted items, what do you see as a hold up on
that, or is there anything that we can do better legislatively,
or leave you guys alone?
Ms. Sarasin. Well as I mentioned in testimony, one of the
things that is challenging is that our cashiers end up being,
to some degree, the food police at checkout time. And as you
are probably aware, that holds up a line.
Mr. Yoho. Yes.
Ms. Sarasin. And if you have ever been in line behind
somebody who is having a challenge like that, it is difficult.
And sometimes, it ends up being a difficulty with some of our
most vulnerable populations, and so it becomes also a stigma
and a problem in that regard.
But when you are operating a business that in general is on
a one to two percent profit margin a year, every second that is
delayed at the checkout line is a problem. Our companies
measure it because they want to keep things moving.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Ms. Sarasin. It creates a lot of issues for us at checkout,
and just the administrative function of trying to figure out
what is in, what is out, as if we went into the role of trying
to determine that certain things shouldn't be allowed and
certain things should be allowed, it would create real havoc in
our stores.
Mr. Yoho. Let me ask you this, because this has been
brought up to me multiple times, in the big retailers' aisles
that were restricted just to those things so people could go
right there. It would expedite them going in there, buying
those products, bringing them up and checking out with no
confusion. Your thoughts on that, and then the other one is the
financial impact. We hear people saying that on the retail side
that this brings in `X' amount of dollars for us, and we can't
change it because we are dependent upon that. What is the
pushback that you have experienced in your industry?
Ms. Sarasin. Well the real pushback is the administrative
costs of trying to actually facilitate the program. One of the
things that I hear regularly from our companies is that these
programs are some of the most difficult regulatory programs for
them to implement in their stores. And when you are talking
about companies that have to deal with things like the Food
Safety Modernization Act and all of the regulations that go
along with that, if this is a more difficult challenge for
them, that says a lot for what they are dealing with.
The costs associated in the store with doing this on such a
low margin business is significant, and not that there
shouldn't be changes to the program if they are desirable and
if they achieve a policy goal, but just to unilaterally
identify that certain types of products should or should not be
in without a real basis for making the decision is problematic
for us.
Mr. Yoho. Well, you can see how important it is, as many
meetings as we have had on it, and I commend Chairman Conaway
and the Chairwoman of the Nutrition Subcommittee last year,
Jackie Walorski.
Let me ask one other question, and this goes to Mr.
Weidman. How is SNAP-Ed reached in the rural area? And I know
in the State of Florida with the University of Florida, which
is a land-grant, they have an extension office in every county,
67 counties in Florida. And they seem to do a good job of doing
it. The nutritional educational programs, are they different
based on regions? Like we are in Florida. We have a hot, humid
climate. How is it in your area, and then can you do a one size
fits all for nutritional program for the whole nation, or
should it be more regionalized?
Mr. Weidman. Yes, that is a great question, and SNAP-Ed
does great work in rural and urban areas all around the
country. I mentioned earlier a rural program in New Mexico,
CHILE Plus, which is doing great work in pre-K and Head Start
programs. But yet, to your point, the great thing about the
SNAP-Ed program is it does have kind of oversight and guidance
to all of the programs that the different states are doing, but
it allows for local on the ground sort of innovation so that
the right type of nutrition education is happening, based on
region and based on the population that you are serving.
Mr. Yoho. Okay, I appreciate your time. I am out of time,
and thank you. Mr. Chairman, I thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lawson, from Florida, 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
all of you all who are here. I was just thinking, I am a
country boy and so I couldn't think of anything more important
on a Friday than RC Cola and a moon pie. And the other day, I
was in the airport in Atlanta and I wanted to have a healthy
choice, and I saw a long line at Subway, but there wasn't a
line at Bojangles', so I tried to make the right decision, but
Bojangles' won out. So I understand.
What I really want to say is that it appears that when they
did this survey, and anyone can answer, the FNS did a survey,
and they said that in order to change the program, put
restriction on the program, that it could cost as much as $400
million or $600 million to administer the program. And I know
that would be dollars well spent if you put that into the
program, and people are going to do different things. And I
have seen people go into these convenience stores, and even
standing in line when they were making purchases, and saw that
it was very difficult and they didn't really want to be there.
But what I would say to you, and this question will go to
anyone, is that in my state, we have an organization like Farm
Share and Frenchtown Farmers Market that carry a similar
initiative to alleviate hunger. From your success with Food
Bucks programs and with nonprofit, how can I as a Congressman
assist other food banks and various organizations to help be
successful in this way and get this message out? Because you
talk about the educational aspects of it, rural and urban. What
can we do, because, you want to see this program continue, and
I don't know whether the young people know about RC and a moon
pie, but I want to make sure that it happens to all of us. But
what can we do as legislators to help in those areas? Anyone
can answer that.
Mr. Weidman. I will. As I said in my testimony, I really
think what is working is this comprehensive approach that
includes nutrition education, and the SNAP-Ed program is doing
a great job at that. Through incentives like the new FINI
Program, and I really appreciate Congress for launching the
FINI Program. We, for years, have been hearing that you get the
farmers' market in the neighborhood or if you get a grocery
store in the neighborhood, what about price, and that can be an
issue. And we have heard that today. The FINI Program does a
great job of both, making healthy foods more affordable, and
also allowing for innovation, again, at the local level in
places all around the country. And then last, actually getting
the stores located in areas so that people don't have to take
three buses to get to the grocery store. And I really
appreciate, again, the leadership of Congresswoman Fudge and
many others on this Committee for their support of the Healthy
Food Financing Initiative, which is a proven model that was
launched in Pennsylvania, working in partnership with the
grocers and other food retailers, to locate in under-served
urban and rural areas, create jobs, and provide access to
healthy food.
Mr. Lawson. Okay, and I have one more question for, is it
Raskins?
Ms. Sarasin. Sarasin.
Mr. Lawson. Ms. Sarasin, okay. I'm seeing things--dyslexic.
But why in the grocery stores are all the candies and stuff
right up by the cash registers? It feels good to look at all of
it, but I just ask that question, you know what I mean? Once
you missed it you got it again. Once you miss it down in the
candy aisle, it is back up there at the cash register.
Ms. Sarasin. What you will find is that increasingly in our
stores, while there are still aisles with candy right up front,
increasingly there are stores that have lots of other things
right up front as well. Mr. Wansink referred earlier to the
increasing incidents of bowls of fruit and other healthy
products that are available at checkout for consumers who are
interested in having them.
So from a retail perspective, our role is to provide the
best service and create the best experience with the product
lines that our customers seek, and at a price that they can
afford, and hopefully as conveniently as possible. So that is
what we strive to do for all of our customers, whether they be
SNAP beneficiaries or others. And so we have this constant
balance going on of trying to make sure that we are meeting all
of these needs, and for some people, having a sweet treat as
they walk out of the store is important. For others, it is
other kinds of products. They would rather have a piece of
fruit or they would rather have a yogurt as they walk out the
door.
So our goal is to try to provide a balance of products for
all of our customers, depending on what they are looking for.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. LaMalfa, 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So today we are talking about the SNAP program,
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. Supplemental meaning
in addition to what might be someone's personal income, or
other forms of aid a family might be receiving. Nutrition,
generally thought of as something good for the body, making you
healthier, stronger. Assistance, the idea that someone else is
probably paying for this to help people.
Ms. Sarasin, you talked repeatedly about how what basically
a hassle this will be for stores to have the system in place to
differentiate between more of these food products, so do people
that come through the checkout line that are SNAP users not
have other products that are ineligible for SNAP very
frequently, such as house cleaning items, toiletries, other
things that they are paying for that are not eligible? Is there
anything that is not eligible for SNAP, I guess, that would
have to cause a second transaction at the checkout counter?
Ms. Sarasin. Yes. Yes, there are many types of products
that are not----
Mr. LaMalfa. Tobacco, alcohol, like that?
Ms. Sarasin. Alcohol and tobacco are not SNAP eligible.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay.
Ms. Sarasin. SNAP is applicable to food products.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. So if you have someone in line that is
making one trip to the store, they are buying all the needs for
their household for the next week or 2. They are buying
multiple items. Some are eligible, some are not.
Ms. Sarasin. Correct.
Mr. LaMalfa. So if we were to have this discussion about
things that are nutritional and we have items on the list that
maybe are now eligible for SNAP but determined somehow to not
be nutritional, is it really that much tougher to differentiate
between soda pop and tobacco?
Ms. Sarasin. The challenge is in how you are defining soda
pop or how you are defining nutrition or how you are defining a
healthy product. We have had a lot----
Mr. LaMalfa. Well shouldn't we try, because we are having
all this effort made in recent years over fighting obesity and
kind of differentiating between what things are contributing to
obesity and what are not?
Ms. Sarasin. We have had testimony this morning that has
provided the evidence that doing so is going to be at great
cost, and that the ultimate benefit----
Mr. LaMalfa. It is great cost to the people that are the
assistance part of this program, and it is also of great cost
to the people, for lack of maybe knowledge or the idea that the
government is incentivizing it, sending them home with candy
bars and soda pop. So maybe it is worth the trouble.
Let me shift to Dr. Rachidi here. I thank you for appearing
as well. When we talk about the SNAP program's intention to
alleviate hunger and malnutrition, and permit low-income
households to obtain a more nutritious diet through normal
sources, that is in statute, so with these aims and the idea
that we are approaching nearly ten percent of beverages are
accounting for expenditure, as was mentioned, we don't have
data to determine how the restriction should impact the
program, but we should at least try.
The recent USDA study was troubling, and I think kind of a
red flag for a lot of folks. A couple thoughts for you on that
is you discussed a study also that evaluated the impact of a
hybrid pilot of incentives and restrictions. So do you think
this could be a feasible demonstration we could take more
widely for entire states, and with some more cooperation from
USDA, which seems to want to shut down states from making their
own determination? Please expound upon that.
Dr. Rachidi. Yes, I definitely think it is something that
should be tested, and at the state level or the local level.
Like I mentioned, we tried to do it in 2011 in New York City.
The USDA at the time denied it, as they denied a few other
states that had----
Mr. LaMalfa. What do you think the USDA's incentive is to
deny these possible studies and the learning we can get from
that at state level or New York City level?
Dr. Rachidi. I think there is a general aversion to
restrictions, as we have heard today, and that is part of it.
An additional reason that was given to us was also that it is,
they felt that our evaluation was not going to be rigorous
enough, which we did not----
Mr. LaMalfa. Do you think we have rigor now in separating
these----
Dr. Rachidi. Meaning that the evaluation design was not
rigorous enough that in the end, even with an evaluation, we
still wouldn't have been able to tell if it was effective or
not. Which we didn't necessarily agree with, but that was one
of the reasons. And the other reason was what we have also
heard today about the difficulties in defining what is a
sweetened beverage or not. We actually came up with what we
thought was a pretty clear definition, which is it excludes
juice, 100 percent juice, and any other beverage that has 10
calories per 8 ounces is a sweetened beverage, with a few
exclusions like Pedialyte, for example. But it was a pretty
straightforward definition.
Mr. LaMalfa. So we have super computers that could probably
program this in at the register and not make it that tough,
right?
Dr. Rachidi. Exactly, and we talked to retailers in New
York City, and there have been other retailers that we have
talked to through other efforts that have said exactly what you
said. They already restrict alcoholic beverages, for example,
non-food products, and this would just be one more thing to add
to the list.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. O'Halleran?
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a
couple of brief statements. I will have plenty of questions for
the record.
But one of the statements I heard today was this pot
instead of that pot, and another one was three buses. And my
district is kind of a little bit different. It is a district
the size of Pennsylvania. It has 12 Native American
reservations on it, and some of the kids go to school on a bus
2 hours one way. Some of them have anywhere from a 50 percent
to an 80 percent unemployment rate. And sometimes, people can't
get out of their homes after a big storm because of the
condition of the roads to get to the store. So we have the
urban setting, the rural setting, and then we have these very
rural settings. And I am just trying caution us that as we look
at this whole problem, the cost of stores is an important
aspect to me, because in my area, stores are very far apart,
obviously, and the food that is in those stores is much more
limited in scope than other stores in urban areas. We also have
the concern that the education level on nutrition is very low,
and I appreciate the cooking classes and everything else, but
it is kind of hard to get to a cooking class if you are 2 hours
away from the nearest class.
And so between the quality of the merchandise, the concern
I have for the distances traveled, the unacceptable
unemployment rates, I just want to just caution everybody when
we start to think about this a little more that the entire
process, and I don't think there is anybody here that doesn't
care about nutrition for our families and our children, but we
also have to understand the realities of life in some areas of
America.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Marshall, 5 minutes.
Mr. Marshall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My first question is
for Dr. Rachidi.
As you may know, I am an obstetrician and very familiar
with WIC programs. Of all the things that my patients and
nurses seem to think is a good thing, is WIC. What can we learn
from WIC that we could apply to SNAP? What makes it successful?
Tell me what we are doing differently between the two programs
briefly, if you could?
Dr. Rachidi. Well sure. Real briefly, I mean, WIC has a set
of products that are eligible products to be purchased, and so
there is a list that is put together and it is intended to be
healthy products, and also they cater towards infants and new
mothers and pregnant women. SNAP, on the other hand, does not
have that. There are a few restrictions as we have heard today,
alcoholic beverages, non-food items, hot prepared foods, but in
general, there are no restrictions on what can be purchased
with SNAP benefits.
Mr. Marshall. Tell us a little bit about that education,
what is going on with those pregnant women and breastfeeding
moms that WIC is doing that seems to me to be so beneficial?
Dr. Rachidi. Yes, so WIC also has a large education
component, and again, it is a little bit of a different program
because it is focused on new mothers and infants primarily, and
young children. The education efforts are very much geared
towards that, but also very much geared towards nutrition.
On the SNAP side, as we have also heard today, there is a
nutrition and education program, and it is very different
across the states. States can choose how to implement it. Some
choose to have very robust programs. Some choose to have maybe
not so robust, but reach a lot of people, and so it is just a
little bit different program than WIC.
Mr. Marshall. Okay. Dr. Wansink, I guess my next question
is for you.
Certainly, I am concerned about health and diabetes and
obesity and these things, but my question for you is: have any
of the current educational or in city-based efforts resulted in
large scale changes, in your opinion, large scale changes in
dietary habits? Is it working?
Dr. Wansink. There is some of this going on that is very
good that has been effective, and back when I was Executive
Director for the Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, I
kind of said, this is too big of a thing for the government to
figure out, because government can't be where everybody
purchases and prepares food everywhere they work and they play,
but all of the things around us can, the companies and things
like this. So we started a program called Partnering with
MyPyramid. It's now called Partnering with MyPlate. And the
idea was to give credit and incentives to any company or any
nonprofit that would help make it easier for people to move
toward eating following the Dietary Guidelines. It was
tremendously successful under the last year of President Bush's
term, and it still is in place but it is not being encouraged
as much as it could be. And that would be great, because it
would enlist everybody to help more people eating toward the
Dietary Guidelines.
Mr. Marshall. Okay. I am going to stick with this theme of
lifestyle changes a little bit, and this is probably your
questioning, Dr. Wansink.
In my lifetime experiences, as a physician, trying to
change people's lifestyles, when they are pregnant seems to be
their most willing to do it. I have given up trying to convince
people to stop smoking unless they are pregnant or they ask me
about it. Trying to help a newly developed diabetic pregnant
woman to talk to them about diet modifications, they are very
motivated. They start wearing seatbelts. There are reasons that
this woman is motivated for lifestyle changes.
Why are they so motivated, and how can we apply that to
SNAP as well? I just think that pregnant women, by the time
they are 45, it is too late, but when they are 21, there are
opportunities here. So help me with what the next step is for
SNAP to take?
Dr. Wansink. I think that is an outstanding question,
because you are looking at, there is somebody who is doing
something for a bigger cause than themselves, and we see this
with people making changes in their diet, too. They will do it
for a bigger cause and become a vegetarian for a bigger cause,
but not for their health. And in trying to apply some of these
things to SNAP benefits, maybe what we need to do is we need to
start focusing on the impact this has on a person's family or
on their children, and start talking about SNAP benefits not in
terms of, oh, he was going to buy some groceries, but on the
implication this has on their family. And I love the stats that
you had about what happens that graduation rates go up by 18
percent for kids on SNAP benefits----
Mr. Marshall. I am sorry to cut you off, but I appreciate
the answer. My biggest concern is lack of activity as opposed
to calories in. I think that is the biggest problem with
obesity. Do any of you--can you--are we doing anything with
SNAP related to encouraging activity as opposed to playing
video games all day? My time is out. Sorry. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Panetta, 5 minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it, and
thanks to all of the witnesses who are here. I appreciate your
testimony, your preparation. I know it took quite a bit of
time, I am sure, to put together your statements today, so
thank you very much. I appreciate that.
My question kind of stems around education. As many Members
are starting to know, and as many people do know, I come from
the salad bowl of the world there on the central coast of
California. But we are looking to change that name actually. We
are going to call it the salad bar of the world. No, I am
serious. The reason they are doing that is because a lot of the
growers and the shippers, what they realized is the people who
work for them weren't eating the same foods that they are
picking. And they realized how to get to them is by getting to
their kids. And so what a lot of our ag companies have done is
donated salad bars, over 100, to the local schools to start
getting our children, including my two daughters, to start
eating more healthy foods, having that salad bar option. And
they are doing that. And what they are seeing is that when
their children start to eat more at schools, those trends go
home and their parents start to develop those same trends, and
that is actually working to a certain extent.
And so my question is how do we continue, besides ag
companies donating salad bars to our schools, how do we
continue to educate our children when it comes to getting them
to eat healthier in our schools? How do we do that?
Ms. Sarasin. A couple of things that the food retailers are
working on, one is a very high percentage of our companies do
in-store tours. I mentioned earlier that about 95 percent of
them have on staff nutritionists and dieticians, and what they
are doing is actually bringing school groups into the stores,
and the nutritionists and the dieticians take the children
through the store, and help them understand about nutrition,
help them understand the kinds of nutrients and vitamins they
get from various products, and the balance that they need to be
trying to achieve in their lives. So that is one thing that has
worked well and will continue to work well.
Another thing that we have done at FMI through our FMI
Foundation is we just had our second annual National Family
Meals Month in September. And the notion of National Family
Meals Month is sort of multi-fold. One is that some of the
societal challenges that we have are improved by having more
frequent family meals, and I am talking now about school
truancy, underage drinking, drug abuse, et cetera. The research
shows that more family meals tends to bring down the incidences
with young children and teenagers. But in addition to that,
what we find is that children who engage with their families at
mealtime, both by cooking, by purchasing the food, by being
involved in preparation and serving, they tend to have a better
understanding of nutrition and diet and health than those that
don't. So we are promoting national family meals within our
organization, but also at store level. And we have had, as I
mentioned, our second annual in September of 2016, so this is
something that we are doing on an annual basis so that our
retailers can actually be engaged with their customers in
helping children engage more with the preparation of food in
their homes.
Mr. Panetta. I appreciate that.
With the FINI Program and the SNAP-Ed program, what do
those entail?
Mr. Weidman. Yes, I was just going to say we work in 100
schools in Pennsylvania, doing SNAP-Ed, nutrition education
work. So teaching kids to try new foods, a lot of it is also
peer-to-peer marketing, so getting kids to be leaders in
changing their school environment, youth-led wellness councils,
and you really find that when the students are kind of
marketing to their peers around healthier eating, that has a
big impact. We also do, to the Congressman's point, our Get
Hype Philly program is about healthy eating and exercise, so
the combination of both of those is really important.
Mr. Panetta. Great. In regards to you, Dr. Wansink, you
talked about middle of the road consumers. You mentioned
signage, service, and structure, is there anything else we can
do to target them? What else can we do?
Dr. Wansink. Well what can be done at a retail level is to
make sure that the foods we want to guide them to are the
healthier foods, and they are being the ones that are most
convenient to purchase, they are most attractive to purchase,
not just by price, but attractively looking, attractively
named, attractively positioned, and then also that are more
normal, because right now it is just not normal to buy a lot of
healthy things at the grocery store, because you feel like you
are kind of a strange person. Simply a lot of placement changes
can make a big difference. Thank you very much for your
questions.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Faso, 5 minutes.
Mr. Faso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am intrigued, we had a
table here that came from USDA that suggests in 2011 that there
were approximately six billion purchases of sweetened beverages
in 2011. I don't know, do any of the witnesses have an idea of
how much of that six billion would be what we call soda in the
East and my colleagues like Mrs. Hartzler call pop in the West.
Although in western New York, they do call soda pop.
Dr. Rachidi. I believe it is a little more than \1/2\.
Mr. Faso. A little more than \1/2\. And would any of the
witnesses contend to me that soda, sweetened soda has
nutritional value?
This would be for Dr. Schanzenbach, and maybe Dr. Rachidi
as well. I take it by no answer from any of the witnesses that
no one believes soda has nutritional value. What would be the
problem with our, especially if we are looking at more than $3
billion of taxpayer money going to buy something that no one,
as far as I can tell, believes has nutritional value? What
would be the issue in your mind of a carefully designed study
by the USDA to actually analyze this question as to whether if
we had a restriction on certain sugared beverages that it could
result in altered buying habits and dietary consequences and
nutritional consequences for the families, particularly the
children who live in those households where that $3 billion of
taxpayer money is spent to buy soda?
Dr. Schanzenbach. You are asking a researcher if we should
have more research and that is the first thing they teach you
in grad school is yes, I would welcome any sort of a
demonstration program, but I would be quick to add that it
needs to be high quality, and so in particular that includes it
needs to be real randomized controlled trial, and that it also
needs to do a couple of other things. One, it needs to measure
consumption, not just compliance, but how does this change what
people consume, because some of the research out there that
maybe looks at the impact of soda taxes and other things like
that show that yes, people substitute away from soda sometimes,
but what they replace it with isn't necessarily much better.
Mr. Faso. Right, and so how many people do you think would
be appropriate in such a study?
Dr. Schanzenbach. Oh boy. I can't do power calculations on
the fly. I would be happy to submit something.
Mr. Faso. Perhaps you could submit that for the record.
Dr. Schanzenbach. I would be happy to.
Mr. Faso. Ms. Sarasin, at the risk of getting my friends in
the food merchants, and my friend, Mike Rosen, in Albany upset,
the fact is that now that SNAP benefits are in EBT form by and
large for the vast majority of those purchases, the merchants
are able to differentiate among taxable items and non-taxable
items. We had an issue in New York State for years where
certain marshmallows that were used if you put them on a stick
and you roasted them over the fire, those were tax exempt, but
if you bought the small marshmallows, those were taxable. I
realize the administrative complexity argument, but it does
seem to me that we are now at a point where we could be able to
more readily differentiate, just as we do with tobacco and
beer. You can't buy that with food stamps.
Ms. Sarasin. Well as I said in my testimony, could it be
done, yes, probably so. The question is at what cost, and is
the cost of trying to put together a means through which to
define the products that are in clearly, define the products
that are out clearly, such that electronically they could be
contained in a system and therefore would be able
electronically to be able to segregate? Absolutely, that would
certainly help, but again, we are talking about many tens of
thousands of products that would have to be done every year,
and the infrastructure to be able to make those determinations.
Mr. Faso. My point would be that we have these wonderful
academic researchers and experts. Perhaps we could design a
study that was statistically valid and which would consider the
difficulty that the food merchants have, but also get to the
core of the fact that when we were kids, the only time we ever
had soda or pop was when it was someone's birthday. And when I
see $6 billion, perhaps $3 billion of taxpayer dollars being
spent on soda, which has no nutritional value, in a program
that is called Supplemental Nutrition Assistance, something is
wrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Soto, 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In Florida, we have our Fresh From Florida Program, which
has tried to cue in local farmers with our schools, which has
had some pretty good success. In listening to your testimony,
it appears that most of you are encouraging us to have
incentives, to have a carrot rather than a stick, pun intended
on that--and to have greater access to folks in food deserts
rather than desserts. And I agree with both those things.
I did, however, read a Washington Post article this morning
that went right into this issue, and they had a conclusion that
a SNAP purged of sodas or candy or both could be less
vulnerable to cuts, and supporters can seek full funding. That
every dollar for SNAP would help nurse the poor, just as
Congress intended. And it got me thinking, first, how many of
you by a show of hands would support a ban on soda and candy?
Go ahead, how many? Okay, we have one. How many of you believe
that it would save money if we banned these two products? Raise
your hand. Okay.
And so I think that is what my main quandary is now is
whether or not the real goal is to have these sorts of bans to
get people to eat healthier, whether the real goal would be to
try to save money to expand a lot of the pilot programs that
you all have discussed. And I am one who doesn't want food
police or a big brother society or any of these other things
that we are all so worried about. And so it would be great in
the time I have remaining for you all to either support or not
the concept of whether this would save money, and why? And I
would like to hear from all of you on it.
Dr. Rachidi. Well I guess I will start.
In terms of saving money, just the opportunity or the
potential to save medical-related expenses, especially on the
public health side, Medicaid/Medicare, I think that there is
potential there. And then----
Mr. Soto. Excuse me, I didn't mean to interrupt. Just with
regard to the SNAP program, whether we would save money in SNAP
funds.
Dr. Rachidi. Right. Well, I don't know if this is exactly
what you are getting at, but in terms of the article this
morning, again, I look at it as a program integrity issue. It
is difficult to talk about expanding SNAP benefits, for
example, when that ten percent of SNAP benefits are spent on
sweetened beverages which have no nutritional value and do
nothing to further the goals of the program.
Dr. Schanzenbach. I think that this won't save SNAP
dollars. In fact, as I testified earlier, it will increase the
administrative cost of the program to no benefit. My
professional opinion as an economist, I don't think it is going
to change behavior.
Ms. Sarasin. And as I have said before, I don't think it is
going to save money either. The administrative costs associated
with making these determinations in the context of USDA would
be astronomical.
Mr. Weidman. We recommend an access to healthy food
incentives and nutrition education, and we think that approach
is the best way to create jobs, lift people out of poverty so
they don't need SNAP, and reduce healthcare costs.
Dr. Wansink. There are easier ways to get at that
objective, and I don't think just cutting that is going to have
the benefits we want.
Mr. Soto. Now my next question is what would be the
administrative costs, knowing that we already ban alcohol, and
that seems to be something that hasn't mushroomed costs.
Dr. Rachidi. When I hear the discussion about how the cost
would be astronomical, I don't quite understand how that could
be with items, for example, like sweetened beverages that are
very straightforward. I understand moving more towards a WIC
model, how that could potentially increase administrative
costs, but the things that I am talking about I don't see how
that would increase administrative costs.
Mr. Soto. And this is a reference just to a ban on candy
and soda, no other items.
Dr. Schanzenbach. So I guess I would add to that that
restricting alcoholic beverages, that is sort of a different
product category and it is real easy for the person who is
checking you out to know oh, this is a bottle of wine and not
something else. But when it comes to something like sugar
sweetened beverages, what we saw in the New York pilot proposal
was it is really hard to decide how to define this. For
example, two what I would call similar beverages, V8 you could
still purchase, but V8 Splash, which is the same sort of thing
but it has a little kiwi fruit in it, was not eligible. I think
that it gets to something that is very complicated at the
store, and it is going to cause confusion. Do we have great
estimates of how much it will cost? We have some evidence from
the Healthy Incentives Pilot that maybe $5 billion a year,
something like that.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Arrington, 5 minutes.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I admittedly come
to the table to discuss as with tension between the consumers'
freedom to choose what they purchase to eat, and our
responsibility as stewards of taxpayer money to guide in the
most responsible way. And I must say, I am undecided, quite
frankly, and I am sorry I couldn't get all your testimonies and
be a part of the discussion. I had another hearing.
Dr. Rachidi, I understand that you ran the SNAP program for
New York City and that you requested a waiver so that you could
apply restrictions to people on SNAP and their purchases. Why
were you denied that flexibility?
Dr. Rachidi. And just to be clear, I didn't run the
program, but I was the director for policy, and so we proposed
the restriction.
But ultimately, what we were told in terms of being denied
was related to the evaluation design and that it wasn't
rigorous enough to be able to conclude whether a restriction
would be effective or not. And that was the main reason that
was given, and then given that other states in the past had
also proposed similar things, we suspected it was just a
general aversion to wanting to do any type of restrictions.
Mr. Arrington. Have they granted--go ahead.
Ms. Sarasin. If I could, just one comment that I don't
think has been mentioned today and it is worth mentioning in
the context of waivers for various reasons. This Committee
several years ago under the leadership of Mr. Goodlatte spent
an awful lot of time and energy working toward a state by state
interoperability type of process with SNAP. In this mobile
society that we are in right now, there has been the need for
SNAP recipients to be able to use their benefits where they
find themselves, and so with EBT cards, et cetera, that has
been facilitated, so these waivers have created a tension
within USDA as well, because once you start doing waivers
piecemeal around the country, the interoperability that this
Committee spent so much time trying to achieve is compromised.
Mr. Arrington. When is the last time the USDA has granted a
waiver for such restrictions?
Dr. Rachidi. They have not.
Mr. Arrington. Ever, okay. Yes?
Dr. Schanzenbach. But, if you wanted to do a real
demonstration project, we would just really need to make sure
that it is set up so that we can learn something from it. Not
only studying the impact on consumption, which I will let you
know I have a prediction what that will be, but also the impact
on retailers and others. It is going to cost you if you elect
to do it.
Mr. Arrington. Yes, that is a good idea and it is fair to
include all stakeholders, with states bearing much of the cost
in healthcare, or let's just say significant costs for
healthcare of their citizens, why not enter another freedom to
choose? Why not block grant SNAP, let states choose if they
want to go higher with support and supplemental support and
work any reforms they want in on work requirements and other
requirements and other reforms that have been discussed, not
for this hearing? And then let them decide if they find it
useful and meaningful to restrict purchases based on the
nutritional value? Let states do that. Has that been discussed,
and what are your thoughts about that?
Dr. Schanzenbach. So my grave concern around a potential
block grant is that one of the things that makes SNAP most
successful, especially to the broader economy, is that it is
designed to respond quickly to changing economic conditions and
to times of need. So the program, as you saw during the great
recession, expanded in response to the greater need that we
saw. It is starting to come back down as the economy is
starting to get a foothold.
You may be aware that the dollars that we spend in SNAP
also they are very promptly spent and they are spent in the
local communities, and so they provide an economic stimulus to
the whole area. For every dollar that we spend, at the height
of the great recession we got $1.74 in local economic activity
because of this. A block grant takes that important aspect of
this program off the table. I think it would be a mistake.
Mr. Arrington. So it seems to me that in terms of who is
more nimble, the Federal Government, Federal program or a state
and local government and program, I am going to put my money on
the state and local program in terms of nimbleness. I don't
think we have anything to compare it to with respect to this
specific program, but I bet there are other ways to compare it.
I am running out of time.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Evans. Mr. Evans, 5 minutes.
Mr. Evans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One question that I have, and maybe all of you can deal
with this, my inquiry is what is the impact a reduction in SNAP
would mean for retailers from a job perspective? Can someone
shed light on the impact of jobs and a reduction of SNAP would
create?
Mr. Weidman. One of the things that we have been doing
around the country since we started in Pennsylvania with the
Fresh Food Financing Initiative is convening groups that
include grocers, but other stakeholders around the issue of
access to healthy food and grocery store access. That is one
thing that we heard loud and clear is that in order to have a
successful enterprise in low-income communities, SNAP has
become a very critical component there. So in our view,
reductions to SNAP is not only going to result in more hunger
and less food on the table for American families who are
struggling with hard times, but it is going to have an economic
effect. Oftentimes grocery stores are the anchor in a
community, so if the grocery store closes down, that can have a
domino effect, affecting other retail in the community. This
happens in rural small towns and urban neighborhoods.
Mr. Evans. Is anybody as, with the national retailer, able
to quantify it in some way what you think it means in terms of
numbers?
Dr. Schanzenbach. Sure. During normal economic times, every
dollar that we spend on SNAP returns about $1.25 to the local
area, so I would think the way to think about it during normal
economic times, although this would be worse during downturns,
but during normal economic times if we took $1 away from SNAP,
we would expect to see a reduction of $1.25 in local economic
activity.
Mr. Evans. Can each of you shed light from your perspective
on what a SNAP benefit impact would be on recipients?
Dr. Schanzenbach. Sure. We have strong predictions that if
benefits were reduced, I would predict that we would see an
increase in food insecurity. Currently one out of every five
children in this great nation lives in a food-insecure
household. I also think that, just the opposite of what I
talked about before, having fewer dollars to spend at the
grocery store means that people are going to substitute towards
cheaper forms of calories, and that is exactly the opposite of
the direction that we like to see people go. We like to see
people eat healthier foods, which tend to be more expensive per
calorie.
Mr. Evans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Allen, 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the reason I an the
last one to ask questions is because I was in a conference
meeting this morning talking about spiraling cost of healthcare
in this country. And as I look at, statistically, at the growth
of this program from 17 million people in 2000 to over 40
million people today, and the fact that this program was
initially started during World War II, because I am military,
our generals felt like they didn't have the nourishment that
they needed to battle the enemy. So we have seen tremendous
growth in this program, and then we see tremendous growth in
the cost of healthcare.
We are talking about nutrition, and then what is that doing
to healthcare? Do we have any studies that tell us, okay, are
they related, and if they are related, how do we fix this?
Dr. Schanzenbach. To be sure, obesity rates have
skyrocketed, not just among the poor, but all across the
distribution. And there are studies, we could nitpick them, but
common sense dictates that this increase in obesity that we
have seen across the income distribution has real ramifications
for the cost of healthcare.
Mr. Allen. Obviously, the retailers have a stake in this,
the producers, our farmers obviously have a stake in this. We
have talked about some options here available to us, but it
sounds like to me we better fix this problem because when you
look, for example, at Medicaid costs, I mean, it is
skyrocketing and the number of people on Medicaid is
skyrocketing. And it is because folks are having health
problems because of, it may be other factors, but a large part
of it is nutrition.
Doctor, would you like to comment on what your thoughts
are? I mean, how do we fix this?
Dr. Wansink. Yes, absolutely. We have all the health
concerns that we face, diet-related disease and obesity are the
only ones that we can deal with and change immediately. Now you
bring up a great point that most grocery stores, maybe they
don't really care that much about the shoppers who are there,
and to use a health motivation to try to encourage them to get
people to buy more fruits and vegetables wouldn't be the right
way to do it. But instead, it is aligned in their interest to
get more people to buy fresh fruits and vegetables, lean meat
and dairy, things like this because when that stuff goes bad,
they actually lose money. The margin on it might be thin at the
register, but the loss is huge compared to Fruity Pebbles if
they don't sell it. Being able to show them that these are easy
ways that we can help you get that stuff moving through your
store is going to be a win/win situation, just like it was with
convenience stores when the Association of Convenience Stores
started giving their members ways that they could accelerate
sales of healthy foods.
Mr. Allen. I am sure you would like to respond to that.
Ms. Sarasin. Yes, I would like to respond to that. Thank
you.
I think the notion that food retailers don't care about the
health of their customers is just incorrect.
Dr. Wansink. We will----
Ms. Sarasin. It is incorrect. Just not factually correct.
Of course we care about the health of our customers, and of
course we are doing things to try to enhance the health of our
customers. And we do that every single day, and in my longer
testimony, there are multiple examples of the things that we do
in store, in our communities, and across the board to try to
make sure that we are doing everything we can to meet the needs
of our customers.
So while the convenience stores are relatively new to this
process and apparently are doing some good things, that is
wonderful, but your broad line grocers have been engaged in
this process for decades in trying to assist their customers in
meeting their dietary needs, and they do it by bringing in
nutritionists and dieticians and other professionals in the
store to work with their customers on a daily basis to meet
those needs, and will continue to do so.
Mr. Allen. And of course, we have the food deserts that we
have to deal with now. We had testimony here with Amazon, which
is becoming a big player in the grocery market. Obviously, we
have to come up with a solution to this issue, and so thank you
for your help here today, and hopefully we can get our arms
around this and solve this problem.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I want to thank our witnesses. The great news about this
Committee, and today's hearing is a terrific example of it, is
that if you took the names off the questions and the comments
made, you would be hard pressed to determine which were
Republicans and which were Democrats. You all have given us
great information. The panel has given us terrific information
to chew on. This is not the last conversation we will have on
SNAP restrictions. I have some folks who feel really strongly
about both sides, and the Committee will work its will when we
get to this point and place, but this is an important
conversation to have had today. You have been incredibly
respectful and I appreciate everyone's participation, and I
wish more of our work here in the House was as nonpartisan as
this is. Not a person here doesn't care about nutrition. Not a
person here doesn't care that people eat healthy and that they
exercise, and that they make good decisions.
I was particularly informed by the triangle from Dr.
Wansink. I wish it was reversed. I wish the health vigilant was
the big piece and that the health-disinterested, or the ones
who don't care, was the smaller piece of that triangle, but
that is correct. There are far more people in America who
really don't care. And then there is that group that we can
hit, that can change their habits. It is a convenience issue.
It is an opportunity to have their kids tell them to do it.
So this program is important, and what they spend their
benefit on is important. I am not convinced that the more
decisions we make on people's behalf doesn't make them less
capable of making good decisions on their own, so it takes
education. Somebody said in their testimony there is no silver
bullet to fixing this issue. Sugar drinks have a clear impact
on people's health, but if we eliminated them off the face of
the Earth, I don't know that obesity rates would be any
different than they are right now. There are some other
systemic changes that have to go on in people's choices and the
way they conduct their lives to make this happen.
Under the Rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to receive
additional material and supplementary written responses from
the witnesses to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Report by Hon. K. Michael Conaway, a Representative in
Congress from Texas
Foods Typically Purchased by Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) Households
November 2016
Nutrition Assistance Program Report
Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Policy Support

Authors:                             Submitted to:
Steven Garasky                       Office of Policy Support,
Kassim Mbwana                        Food and Nutrition Service,
Andres Romualdo                      3101 Park Center Drive,
Alex Tenaglio                        Alexandria, VA 22302-1500
Manan Roy                          Project Officer:
Submitted by:                          Sarah Zapolsky
IMPAQ International, LLC,
10420 Little Patuxent Parkway,
Suite 300,
Columbia, MD 21044
Project Director:
Steven Garasky

This study was conducted under Contract number GS-10-F-0240U with
the Food and Nutrition Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
This report is available on the Food and Nutrition website: http://
www.fns.usda.gov/research-and-analysis.

Suggested Citation:

Garasky, Steven, Kassim Mbwana, Andres Romualdo, Alex Tenaglio and
Manan Roy. Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households. Prepared by
IMPAQ International, LLC for USDA, Food and Nutrition Service, November
2016.
Table of Contents
Executive Summary

Purpose and Overview
Methodology

Data Overview
Identifying SNAP Households and Creating Analysis
Categories
Data Caveats and Limitations

Key Findings

Food Items Purchased by SNAP Households

Chapter 1. Introduction and Background

1.1  Introduction

1.2  Background
1.3  Research Questions
1.4  Challenges of Collecting Point-of-Sale Data

Chapter 2. Methodology

2.1  Data Overview
2.2  Identification of SNAP Households and Creation of
Analysis Categories
2.3  Data Caveats and Limitations

Chapter 3. Findings: Top Expenditures by SNAP and Non-SNAP
Households

3.1  Distribution of Expenditures by Summary Categories
3.2  Distribution of Expenditures by Commodities
3.3  Distribution of Expenditures by Subcommodities
3.4  Distribution of Expenditures by Household Demographics,
Store Characteristics, Type of Resource Used, and Month of
Purchase

Chapter 4. Findings: Top Expenditures by USDA Food Pattern
Categories

4.1  Top Expenditures for Dairy
4.2  Top Expenditures for Fruits
4.3  Top Expenditures for Grains
4.4  Top Expenditures for Oils
4.5  Top Expenditures for Protein Foods
4.6  Top Expenditures for Solid Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS)
4.7  Top Expenditures for Vegetables
4.8  Top Expenditures for Composite Foods
4.9  Top Expenditures for Other Subcommodities

Chapter 5. Conclusion
Appendix A. Top Purchases by Expenditure for SNAP and Non-SNAP
Households *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: the report entitled, Foods Typically Purchased By
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Households and Foods
Typically Purchased By Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
Households--Appendices are two different documents. For purposes of
publication in this hearing they are treated as one document.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Appendix B. Crosswalk of Top 1000 Subcommodities to Summary
Categories
Appendix C. Crosswalk of Subcommodities to USDA Food Pattern
Categories
Appendix D. Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by
Expenditure for Each USDA Food Pattern Category
Appendix E. Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by
Expenditure by Demographic and Store Characteristics
Table of Exhibits
Exhibit 1: SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Food Expenditure Patterns
Exhibit 2: Conceptual Map for Identification of SNAP Households in
the POS Data
Exhibit 3: Summary of SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Food Expenditures
in the Dataset by Subcommodity
Exhibit 4: Aggregating Food Items
Exhibit 5: Summary Categories by Expenditure
Exhibit 6: Top 100 Commodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure
Exhibit 7: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by
Expenditure
Exhibit 8: Top 25 SNAP Household Dairy Subcommodity Expenditures
Exhibit 9: Top 25 SNAP Household Fruit Subcommodity Expenditures
Exhibit 10: Top 25 SNAP Household Grains Subcommodity Expenditures
Exhibit 11: Oils Subcommodity Expenditures
Exhibit 12: Top 25 SNAP Household Protein Foods Subcommodity
Expenditures
Exhibit 13: Top 25 SNAP Household Solid Fats and Added Sugars
(SoFAS) Subcommodity Expenditures
Exhibit 14: Solid Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS) Expenditures by
Subcategory
Exhibit 15: Top 25 SNAP Household Vegetables Subcommodity
Expenditures
Exhibit 16: Top 25 SNAP Household Composite Subcommodity
Expenditures
Exhibit 17: Composite Expenditures by Subcategory
Exhibit 18: Top 25 SNAP Household Other Subcommodity Expenditures
Exhibit 19: Other Expenditures by Subcategory
Exhibit 20: SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Food Expenditure Patterns
Executive Summary
Purpose and Overview
The Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) awarded a contract to IMPAQ
International, LLC, to determine what foods are typically purchased by
households receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
benefits. This study examined point-of-sale (POS) food purchase data to
determine for what foods SNAP households have the largest expenditures,
including both SNAP benefits and other resources, and how their
expenditures compare to those made by non-SNAP households.
SNAP, administered by FNS, is the nation's largest nutrition
assistance program. In 2011, SNAP participants redeemed over $71
billion in SNAP benefits in more than 230,000 SNAP-authorized
stores.\1\ Given the magnitude of SNAP, FNS has a sustained interest in
understanding the effects of the program. To date, FNS has studied SNAP
household food consumption and expenditures using national surveys that
generally rely on consumers to recall what they ate or to report or
scan every purchase. This previous research has shown that the
similarities in food purchases, consumption patterns, and dietary
outcomes among low-income families and higher-income households are
more striking than the differences.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ USDA FNS. (2011). Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
2011 Annual Report. Benefit Redemption Division. Available at http://
www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/pdfs/2011-annual-report-revised.pdf.
\2\ See, for example, Office of Research and Analysis (2012).
Building a Healthy America: A Profile of the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program. Food and Nutrition Service, USDA (available on line
at www.fns.usda.gov/ora/MENU/Published/snap/FILES/Other/BuildingHealthy
America.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By using POS data to compare the purchases of SNAP households to
those of non-SNAP households, the current study provides more detail on
food expenditure patterns than previous studies. This study examines
two major questions:

What food items are purchased by SNAP households?

How do foods purchased by SNAP households compare to food
purchased by non-SNAP households?
Methodology
Data Overview
POS transaction data from January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011
from a leading grocery retailer were examined for this study.\3\ The
majority of stores from which the data came would be classified as
grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and drug stores per
FNS Retailer Policy and Management Division food retailer
definitions.\4\ On average, each of the 12 monthly data files contained
over one billion records of food items purchased by 26.5 million
households, reflecting 127 million unique transactions. Each monthly
data file included an average of 3.2 million SNAP households,
identified using the methodology described below. Total expenditures on
all SNAP-eligible food items in the dataset by SNAP and non-SNAP
households over the 12 months were $39.0 billion, or approximately $3.3
billion per month. SNAP households spent approximately $555 million on
SNAP-eligible items each month in this dataset, using both SNAP
benefits and other resources such as cash or credit cards.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Per the data sharing agreement between the data provider and
IMPAQ, a description of the source of these data must be limited to the
following: ``From a leading U.S. grocery retailer data examining POS
transactions from January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011 across
approximately 11 million SNAP households. The majority of stores would
be classified as grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and
drug stores per USDA/FNS food retailer definitions.''
\4\ Stores that opened or closed during 2011 were not included in
these analyses.
\5\ By way of comparison, in FY 2011, 21.1 million households
participated in SNAP in an average month (http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/
MENU/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2011Characteristics.pdf) and
redeemed $6.0 billion in benefits in an average month (http://
www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/pdfs/2011-annual-report-revised.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Identifying SNAP Households and Creating Analysis Categories
SNAP households were identified in the data for each month. This
identification was performed monthly because, in any given month, some
households enter or leave the program. The analysis identified SNAP
households each month by first identifying any transaction in which
SNAP electronic benefit transfer (EBT) was used to pay for at least \1/
2\ of the value of the purchase and designating the household that made
that transaction as a SNAP household.\6\ It then linked all other
transactions made by that household during that month to estimate total
monthly spending by SNAP households. All other transactions in these
stores were designated as non-SNAP household purchases.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ SNAP transactions in which SNAP EBT was not the majority tender
were not identifiable in the data.
\7\ Some of these transactions may, in fact, have included SNAP
purchases. Some SNAP households may never have presented EBT as the
majority tender in any transaction, for example.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IMPAQ analyzed SNAP-eligible food items given the focus of the
study. Per the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (the Act), eligible food
includes any food or food product for home consumption, as well as
seeds and plants which produce food for consumption. The Act precludes
alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, hot food and any food sold for
on-premises consumption from being purchased with SNAP benefits.\8\ The
unit of analysis for the study was a food-related subcommodity, with
subcommodities and commodities defined by the data provider. Each
subcommodity typically consisted of multiple food items, often
distinguished by brand or package size, identified by a Universal
Product Code (UPC) or a Price Look Up (PLU) code. Each commodity was an
aggregation of similar subcommodities. The ``apples'' commodity group,
for example, combined different varieties (Gala, Fuji, Honeycrisp) and
forms (bagged, bulk) that were presented separately as subcommodities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/eligible.htm for
more details.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although subcommodities and commodities provide adequate comparison
reference points, these groupings were designed to help retailers
classify purchases for their own needs (e.g., marketing purposes).
Therefore, this study analyzed purchases at two higher levels of
aggregation. Thirty summary categories were created--for example, meat/
poultry/seafood, fruits, vegetables, and frozen prepared foods--to be
roughly analogous to the major sections or departments in a typical
grocery store. These categories were constructed to enhance discussion
of similarities and differences between purchasing patterns of SNAP and
non-SNAP households. Appendix B provides a crosswalk of subcommodities
to summary categories.
IMPAQ also mapped food subcommodities to USDA Food Pattern
categories (dairy, fruits, grains, oils, protein foods, solid fats and
added sugars (SoFAS), and vegetables). Not all subcommodities could be
classified into a single Food Pattern category. Subcommodities
incorporating multiple food categories, such as foods packaged as
complete meals, were classified as composite foods. In addition, some
subcommodities did not contain any Food Pattern categories, or the
labels were not descriptive enough to permit categorization even with
the addition of the composite category. A ninth category, other, was
created to capture such subcommodities. ``Other'' captured all items
that could not be classified using USDA Food Patterns, such as water,
isotonic drinks, and baby food.
Data Caveats and Limitations
Although POS data provide a wealth of information on the food
purchase patterns of SNAP households, some limitations existed in the
data analyzed for this study. The data used for this study captured
only transactions completed at a specific set of retail outlets. As
stated before, the majority of stores from which the data came would be
classified as grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and
drug stores per FNS Retailer Policy and Management Division food
retailer definitions.\9\ Purchases made at other SNAP-authorized
retailers or other venues (e.g., farmers['] markets) were not included
in these data. On average, SNAP households in the data spent
approximately $229 per month on SNAP-eligible foods using a combination
of SNAP benefits, cash and other forms of payment.\10\ In contrast, the
national average monthly SNAP benefit per household was $284 in FY
2011.\11\ Therefore, although these data account for a significant
proportion of SNAP-eligible food expenditures by SNAP households, they
do not include all SNAP benefit expenditures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Stores that opened or closed during 2011 were not included in
these analyses.
\10\ On average, SNAP households in the data made 8.5 transactions
per month. The average total expenditure on SNAP-eligible foods per
transaction was $26.99.
\11\ http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/19SNAPavg$HH.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP transactions were identified as those for which a SNAP EBT
card was the majority tender. Because some transactions included both
SNAP and cash or credit tenders, these data could not differentiate
between items purchased with SNAP benefits and those purchased with
other funds. These data, therefore, represent food purchases made by
SNAP households, rather than the foods purchased with SNAP EBT
specifically.
Rankings of expenditure categories depend in part on the level of
food item aggregation (whether at the Food Pattern, summary, commodity
or subcommodity levels). As discussed above, the data provider
aggregated food items into subcommodities and commodities, considering
other factors outside of the needs of this particular analysis. These
classifications at times presented analytic challenges that may have
affected the rank ordering of purchases. For example, subcommodity
groups categorized as ``composite'' or ``other'' for these analyses
likely included food items that would more appropriately be included in
one of the Food Pattern categories had more information been available.
Similarly, some distinctions of potential nutritional importance were
not available in these data. For example, it was not possible to
distinguish between fat-free or low-fat varieties of some dairy
products, such as fluid milk or yogurt, from whole milk varieties.
Key Findings
Food Items Purchased by SNAP Households
Overall, the findings from this study indicate that SNAP households
and non-SNAP households purchased similar foods in the retail outlets
in these data. Exhibits 1 and 2 summarize the findings.

There were no major differences in the expenditure patterns
of SNAP and non-SNAP households, no matter how the data were
categorized. Similar to most American households:

About 40  of every dollar of food expenditures by SNAP
households was spent on basic items such as meat, fruits,
vegetables, milk, eggs, and bread.

Another 20  out of every dollar was spent on sweetened
beverages, desserts, salty snacks, candy and sugar.

The remaining 40  were spent on a variety of items
such as cereal, prepared foods, dairy products, rice, and
beans.

The top ten summary categories and the top seven commodities
by expenditure were the same for SNAP and non-SNAP households,
although ranked in slightly different orders.

Expenditure shares for each of the USDA Food Pattern
categories (dairy, fruits, grains, oils, protein foods, solid
fats and added sugars (SoFAS), and vegetables) varied by no
more than 3  per dollar when comparing SNAP and non-SNAP
households. Protein foods represented the largest expenditure
share for both household types, while proportionally more was
spent on fruits and vegetables than on SoFAS, grains, or dairy.

Less healthy food items were common purchases for both SNAP
and non-SNAP households. Sweetened beverages, prepared desserts
and salty snacks were among the top ten summary categories for
both groups. Expenditures were greater for sweetened beverages
compared to all milk for both groups, as well.

Expenditures were concentrated in a relatively small number
of similar food-item categories. The top five summary groups
totaled \1/2\ (50%) of the expenditures for SNAP households and
nearly \1/2\ (47%) for non-SNAP households. Twenty-five
commodities accounted for over forty percent of the food
expenditures in these data with SNAP and non-SNAP households
having 20 of them in common. The top 25 subcommodities for SNAP
households and non-SNAP households, respectively, accounted for
between \1/5\ to \1/4\ of total food expenditures for each
group with 16 subcommodities in common for the two groups.

Exhibit 1: SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Food Expenditure Patterns
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finding             SNAP Households        Non-SNAP  Households
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total annual            $6.7 billion             $32.3 billion
expenditures on SNAP-
eligible foods in
dataset
Percentage of all       12%                      88%
transactions by all
households
Percentage of total     17%                      83%
annual expenditures
by all households
Top 1,000 subcommodity  99%                      98%
(of 1,792)
expenditures as a
percentage of all
expenditures
Top 100 subcommodity    51%                      46%
expenditures as a
percentage of all
expenditures
Top 25 subcommodity     25%                      21%
expenditures as a
percentage of all
expenditures
Top 25 commodity (of    45%                      41%
238) expenditures as
a percentage of all
expenditures
Top 10 summary          Meat/Poultry/Seafood     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
categories (of 30) by
expenditure
Sweetened Beverages      Vegetables
Vegetables               High-fat Dairy/Cheese
Frozen Prepared Foods    Fruits
Prepared Desserts        Sweetened Beverages
High-fat Dairy/Cheese    Prepared Desserts
Bread and Crackers       Bread and Crackers
Fruits                   Frozen Prepared Foods
Milk                     Milk
Salty Snacks             Salty Snacks
Top 10 commodities (of  Soft Drinks              Fluid Milk Products
238) by expenditure
Fluid Milk Products      Soft Drinks
Beef Grinds              Cheese
Bag Snacks               Baked Breads
Cheese                   Bag Snacks
Baked Breads             Beef Grinds
Cold Cereal              Cold Cereal
Chicken Fresh            Candy--Packaged
Frozen Handhelds and     Coffee and Creamers
Snacks
Lunchmeat                Ice Cream, Ice Milk,
and Sherbets
Top 10 subcommodities   Fluid Milk/White Only    Fluid Milk/White Only
(of 1,792) by
expenditure
Soft Drinks 12-18 pack   Soft Drinks 12-18 pack
Lean Beef                Shredded Cheese
Kids' Cereal             Chicken Breast--
Boneless
Shredded Cheese          Frozen Premium
Nutritional Meals
2-Liter Soft Drink       Pure Orange Juice--
Dairy Case
Potato Chips             Lean Beef
Primal Beef              Potato Chips
Lunchmeat--Deli fresh    Large Eggs
Infant Formula/Starter   Bananas
Solution
USDA Food Pattern
categories, by
expenditure:

Dairy        9%                       10%

Fruits       6%                       9%

Grains       12%                      13%

Oils         2%                       2%

Protein      23%                      20%
Foods

Solid Fats   13%                      12%
and Added Sugars

Vegetables   8%                       10%

Composite    19%                      16%

Other        8%                       8%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.

Chapter 1. Introduction and Background
1.1  Introduction
The Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) awarded a contract to IMPAQ
International, LLC, to determine what foods are typically purchased by
households receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
benefits. More specifically, this study examined POS food purchase data
to determine for what foods SNAP households have the largest
expenditures, including both SNAP benefits and other resources, and how
these expenditures compare to those made by non-SNAP households.
1.2  Background
The mission of FNS is to provide children and needy families with
improved access to food and a more healthful diet through a range of
nutrition assistance programs and comprehensive nutrition education
efforts. SNAP, administered by FNS, is the nation's largest nutrition
assistance program, providing benefits to more than 15% of the U.S.
population. In 2011, SNAP participants redeemed over $71 billion in
SNAP benefits in more than 230,000 SNAP-authorized stores.\12\ Total
program costs in FY 2011 were nearly $76 billion.\13\ Given the
magnitude of SNAP, FNS has a sustained interest in understanding the
effects of the program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ USDA FNS. (2011). Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
2011 Annual Report. Benefit Redemption Division. Available at http://
www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/pdfs/2011-annual-report-revised.pdf.
\13\ http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/SNAPsummary.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP aims to alleviate hunger and improve the nutritional status of
participants by increasing the resources available to households to
purchase food. Paradoxically, one-in-six people in the U.S. experiences
food insecurity,\14\ while \2/3\ of adults and \1/3\ of children are
overweight or obese.\15\ These public health problems
disproportionately affect low-income populations.\16\ While no evidence
exists that SNAP participation causes obesity, the high rates of
obesity and food insecurity among low-income Americans underscore the
importance of exploring ways to continue to employ SNAP strategically
as a tool to promote healthier nutrition, as well as to reduce obesity
rates among program participants of whom nearly 50% are children.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Coleman-Jensen, A., Nord, M., Andrews, M., & Carlson, S.
(2011). Household food security in the United States in 2010. Economic
Research Report, No. ERR-125. Available at http://www.ers.usda.gov/
media/884525/err141.pdf.
\15\ Flegal, K.M., Carroll, M.D., Ogden, C.L., & Curtin, L.R.
(2010). ``Prevalence and trends in obesity among U.S. adults, 1999-
2008,'' Journal of the American Medical Association, 303, 235-241;
Burgstahler, R., Gundersen, C., & Garasky, S. (forthcoming). ``The
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, financial stress, and
childhood obesity.'' Agricultural and Resource Economics Review;
Eisenmann, J.C., Gundersen, C., Lohman, B.J., Garasky, S., & Stewart,
S.D. (2011). ``Is food insecurity related to overweight and obesity in
children and adolescents? A summary of studies, 1995-2009.'' Obesity
Reviews, 12, e73-e83; Lohman, B.J., Stewart, S., Gundersen, C.,
Garasky, S., & Eisenmann, J.C. (2009). ``Adolescent overweight and
obesity: Links to food insecurity and individual, maternal, and family
stressors.'' Journal of Adolescent Health, 45, 230-237; Gundersen, C.,
Garasky, S., & Lohman, B.J. (2009) ``Food insecurity is not associated
with childhood obesity as assessed using multiple measures of
obesity.'' Journal of Nutrition, 139, 1173-1178.
\16\ Trust for America's Health. (2011). F as in fat: How obesity
threatens America's future. Available at http://healthyamericans.org/
reports/obesity2010/Obesity2010Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.3  Research Questions
The project addressed two key research questions.
Research Question 1: What food items are purchased by SNAP
households? Specifically, the study examined SNAP household food
expenditure data by four categorizations: U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) Food Pattern categories, ``summary categories,''
commodities, and subcommodities.
Research Question 2: How do foods purchased by SNAP households
compare to purchases made by non-SNAP households? Analyses paralleled
those for Research Question 1, but for non-SNAP households. Comparisons
were then drawn between the food expenditures of SNAP and non-SNAP
households.
1.4  Challenges of Collecting Point-of-Sale Data
Understanding the food choices and purchasing patterns of SNAP
participants is an important part of promoting healthy choices. FNS
analyzes various extant data that describe the diets and food
purchasing patterns of SNAP households. For example, The National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey is an annual nationally
representative survey of approximately 5,000 respondents that collects,
among other data, dietary behavior and 24-hour dietary recall data.\17\
The Nielsen Homescan data include a panel of households that records
grocery purchases using a scanning device.\18\ Panelists scan the
barcodes of the products they purchase, recording information such as
price and quantity. The Consumer Expenditure Survey gathers expenditure
information from participants every 3 months over a 15 month period
through interviews and a diary survey.\19\ The interview is designed to
gather expenditure data on items that are easy to recall, while the
diary survey records purchases made each day during a 2 week period.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/tutorials/Dietary/SurveyOrientation/
intro.htm.
\18\ http://www.ncppanel.com.
\19\ http://www.bls.gov/cex.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
An outstanding question is whether food purchase data collected at
the point-of-sale offers a different or more detailed perspective on
the food choices of SNAP and other households. Ideally, retail data on
SNAP electronic benefit transfer (EBT) purchases would be collected in
a timely manner--preferably at the point of sale--and with sufficient
sample size to be nationally representative. To date, there have been
numerous challenges to collecting such retail data:

The immense volume of SNAP retail data--in FY 2011, over $71
billion in SNAP benefits were redeemed at over 230,000
participating stores, farmers['] markets and other venues
authorized to accept SNAP benefits.\20\ These transactions
represent billions of food items purchased each month via an
estimated 250 million or more unique transactions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, USDA FNS Benefit
Redemption Division 2011 Annual Report. Available from http://
www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/pdfs/2011-annual-report-revised.pdf.

The wide variety of food products and package sizes sold by
the over 230,000 SNAP-authorized retailers--roughly 40,000
items in larger stores \21\--and the diverse ways retailers
identify and track these items.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ http://www.fmi.org/facts_figs/?fuseaction=superfact.

Industry reluctance to share detailed sales data, a key
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
competitive tool for food marketers.

Equipment and system changes needed to capture item-level
data at SNAP-approved stores. The numerous cash register
technologies currently in use vary in their sophistication and
their ability to collect item-level data. Data transmission and
storage are also important issues.

Distinguishing between SNAP and non-SNAP transactions and
purchases, given that SNAP households at times combine SNAP
benefits and their own funds when making purchases.

The current study provides a snapshot of food purchasing patterns
using POS data from a set of retailers to compare expenditures on SNAP-
eligible food items made by SNAP and non-SNAP households.
Chapter 2. Methodology
2.1  Data Overview
POS transaction data from January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011
from a leading grocery retailer were examined in this study.\22\ The
majority of stores from which the data came would be classified as
grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and drug stores per
FNS Retailer Policy and Management Division food retailer
definitions.\23\ On average, each of the 12 monthly data files
contained over one billion records of food items purchased by 26.5
million households, reflecting 127 million unique transactions. Each
monthly data file included an average of 3.2 million SNAP households,
identified using the methodology described below. Total expenditures on
all SNAP-eligible food items in the dataset by SNAP and non-SNAP
households over the 12 months were $39.0 billion, or approximately $3.3
billion per month. SNAP households expended approximately $555 million
on SNAP-eligible food items each month in this dataset, using both SNAP
benefits and other resources such as cash or credit cards.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Per the data sharing agreement between the data provider and
IMPAQ, a description of the source of these data must be limited to the
following: ``From a leading U.S. grocery retailer data examining POS
transactions from January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011 across
approximately 11 million SNAP households. The majority of stores would
be classified as grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and
drug stores per USDA/FNS food retailer definitions.''
\23\ Stores that opened or closed during 2011 were not included in
these analyses.
\24\ By way of comparison, in FY 2011, 21.1 million households
participated in SNAP in an average month (http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/
MENU/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2011Characteristics.pdf) and
redeemed $6.0 billion in benefits in an average month (http://
www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/pdfs/2011-annual-report-revised.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.2  Identification of SNAP Households and Creation of Analysis
Categories
SNAP households were identified in the data for each month. This
identification was performed monthly because, in any given month, some
households enter or leave the program. The analysis identified SNAP
households each month by first identifying any transaction in which
SNAP EBT was used to pay for at least \1/2\ of the value of the
purchase and designating the household that made that transaction as a
SNAP household.\25\ It then linked all other transactions made by that
household during that month to estimate total monthly spending by SNAP
households. All other transactions in these stores were designated as
non-SNAP household purchases.\26\ Exhibit 2 illustrates the
identification of SNAP households.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ SNAP transactions in which SNAP EBT was not the majority
tender were not identifiable in the data.
\26\ Some of these transactions may, in fact, have included SNAP
purchases. Some SNAP households may never have presented EBT as the
majority tender in any transaction, for example.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exhibit 2: Conceptual Map for Identification of SNAP Households in the
POS Data

IMPAQ analyzed SNAP-eligible food items given the focus of the
study. Per the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (the Act), eligible food
include any food or food product for home consumption, as well as seeds
and plants which produce food for consumption. The Act precludes
alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, hot food and any food sold for
on-premises consumption from being purchased with SNAP benefits.\27\
The unit of analysis for the study was a food-related subcommodity,
with subcommodities and commodities defined by the data provider. Each
subcommodity typically consisted of multiple food items, often
distinguished by brand or package size, identified by a Universal
Product Code (UPC) or a Price Look Up (PLU) code. Each commodity was an
aggregation of similar subcommodities. The ``apples'' commodity group,
for example, combined different varieties (Gala, Fuji, Honeycrisp) and
forms (bagged, bulk) that were presented separately as subcommodities.
The decision to rely on subcommodity groupings follows procedures
established in published studies.\28\ These studies prefer
subcommodity-level analyses over item-level analyses because UPCs and
PLUs assigned by manufacturers and retailers can change over time.
Additionally, the same food item may be sold in multiple forms with
different brands and labels, each with its own unique UPC.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ See http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/eligible.htm for
more details.
\28\ For examples, see Hamilton, S., et al. (2007). ``Food and
nutrient availability in New Zealand: An analysis of supermarket sales
data.'' Public Health Nutrition, 10(12): 1448-1455; Van Wave, T.W., &
Decker, M. (2003). ``Secondary analysis of a marketing research
database reveals patterns in dairy product purchases over time.''
Journal of American Dietetic Association, 103(4), 445-453.
\29\ Baxter, J., et al. (1996). Experiences in using computerized
sales data to evaluate a nutrition intervention program. Journal of
Nutrition Education, 28, 443-445.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exhibit 3 details expenditures on SNAP-eligible food items in the
dataset. As can be seen, expenditures on all 1,792 subcommodities in
the dataset sum up to $6.7 billion and $32.3 billion for SNAP and non-
SNAP households, respectively. Notably, expenditures on the top 1,000
subcommodities account for 99% of expenditures for SNAP households and
98% for non-SNAP households. For this reason, all subsequent analyses
and tables in the report are generated using the top 1,000
subcommodities.

Exhibit 3: Summary of SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Food Expenditures in
the Dataset by Subcommodity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-SNAP
Finding                SNAP Households       Households
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total annual expenditures on SNAP-       $6.7 billion      $32.3 billion
eligible foods in dataset
Percentage of all transactions by                 12%                88%
all households
Percentage of total annual                        17%                83%
expenditures by all households
Top 1,000 (of 1,792) subcommodity                 99%                98%
expenditures as a percentage of
all expenditures
Top 100 (of 1,792) subcommodity                   51%                46%
expenditures as a percentage of
all expenditures
Top 25 (of 1,792) subcommodity                    25%                21%
expenditures as a percentage of
all expenditures
Top 25 commodity (of 238)                         45%                41%
expenditures as a percentage of
all expenditures
-------------------------------------
Total annual expenditures on top    $6.5805 billion   $31.5138 billion
1,000 subcommodities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.

The data provider aggregated the subcommodities to commodities. The
top 1,000 subcommodities represented 238 commodities. Although
subcommodities and commodities provide adequate comparison reference
points, these groupings were designed to help retailers classify
purchases for their own needs (e.g., marketing purposes). Therefore,
this study analyzed purchases at two higher levels of aggregation.
Thirty summary categories were created--for example, meat/poultry/
seafood, fruits, vegetables, cereal, candy, and frozen prepared foods--
to be roughly analogous to the major sections or departments in a
typical grocery store. These categories were constructed to enhance
discussion of similarities and differences between the purchasing
patterns of SNAP and non-SNAP households. Appendix B provides a
crosswalk of subcommodities to summary categories.
IMPAQ also mapped food subcommodities to USDA Food Pattern
categories (dairy, fruits, grains, oils, protein foods, solid fats and
added sugars (SoFAS), and vegetables).\30\ A crosswalk of
subcommodities to USDA Food Pattern categories can be found in Appendix
C. Relative to the 30 summary categories, there are only seven USDA
Food Pattern categories. As a result, more subcommodities were included
in each Food Pattern category, on average, relative to the summary
categories which at times lead to differing results for categories with
the same name. For example, for the USDA Food Patterns analysis, 100%
pure orange juice was classified as a fruit. Juice, however, is a
specific category among the summary categories. Therefore, expenditures
on 100% orange juice were not included as fruit expenditures for the
summary categories analysis as they were for the Food Patterns
analysis. Readers should keep this in mind when comparing results for
categories such as fruits or vegetables across analyses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ USDA Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion Food Patterns
(http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/USDAFoodPatterns.htm).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not all subcommodities could be classified into single Food Pattern
categories. Subcommodities incorporating multiple food categories, such
as foods packaged as complete meals, were classified as composite
foods. In addition, some subcommodities did not fit any Food Pattern
categories, or the labels were not descriptive enough to permit
categorization even with the addition of the composite category. A
ninth category, other, was created to capture such subcommodities.
``Other'' captured all items that could not be classified using USDA
Food Patterns, such as water, isotonic drinks, and baby food. Exhibit 4
describes the aggregations of food items used for these analyses, using
fluid milk products as an example.
Exhibit 4: Aggregating Food Items

Note: The vast majority of commodities included
subcommodities that could be mapped to a single summary
category as shown above. However, a small number of commodities
included subcommodities that did not map to the same summary
category. For example, the commodity group Authentic Hispanic
Foods and Products included authentic vegetables and foods,
Hispanic carbonated beverages, and authentic pasta/rice/beans
subcommodities which mapped to the vegetables, sweetened
beverages, and rice summary categories, respectively. The top
1,000 subcommodities accounted for 99% of all expenditures on
SNAP-eligible food items in the dataset for SNAP households and
98% of all expenditures on SNAP-eligible food items by non-SNAP
households.
2.3  Data Caveats and Limitations
Although POS data provide a wealth of information on the food
purchase patterns of SNAP households, some limitations existed in the
data analyzed for this study. The data used for this study captured
only transactions completed at a specific set of retail outlets. As
stated before, the majority of stores from which the data came would be
classified as grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and
drug stores per FNS Retailer Policy and Management Division food
retailer definitions.\31\ Purchases made at other SNAP-authorized
retailers or other venues (e.g., farmers['] markets) were not included
in these data. On average, SNAP households in the data spent
approximately $229 per month on SNAP-eligible foods using a combination
of SNAP benefits, cash and other forms of payment.\32\ In contrast, the
national average monthly SNAP benefit per household was $284 in FY
2011.\33\ Therefore, although these data account for a significant
proportion of SNAP-eligible food expenditures by SNAP households, they
do not include all SNAP benefit expenditures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Stores that opened or closed during 2011 were not included in
these analyses.
\32\ On average, SNAP households in the data made 8.5 transactions
per month. The average total expenditure on SNAP-eligible foods per
transaction was $26.99.
\33\ http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/19SNAPavg$HH.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP transactions were identified as those for which a SNAP EBT
card was the majority tender. Because some transactions included both
SNAP and cash or credit tenders, these data could not differentiate
between items purchased with SNAP benefits and those purchased with
other funds. These data, therefore, represent food purchases made by
SNAP households rather than the foods purchased with SNAP EBT.
Rankings of expenditure categories depend in part on the level of
food item aggregation (whether at the Food Pattern category, summary
category, commodity or subcommodity levels). As discussed above, the
data provider aggregated food items into subcommodities and commodities
considering other factors outside of the needs of this particular
analysis. These classifications at times presented analytic challenges
that may have affected the rank ordering of expenditures. For example,
subcommodity groups categorized as ``composite'' or ``other'' for these
analyses likely included food items that would more appropriately be
included in one of the Food Pattern categories had more information
been available. Similarly, some distinctions of potential nutritional
importance were not available in these data. For example, it was not
possible to distinguish between fat-free or low-fat varieties of some
dairy products, such as fluid milk or yogurt, from whole milk
varieties.
Chapter 3. Findings: Top Expenditures by SNAP and Non-SNAP Households

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Key Findings

There were no major differences in the expenditure patterns
of SNAP and non-SNAP households, no matter how the data were
categorized. Similar to most American households:

About 40  of every dollar of food expenditures by SNAP
households was spent on basic items such as meat, fruits,
vegetables, milk, eggs, and bread.

Another 20  out of every dollar was spent on sweetened
beverages, desserts, salty snacks, candy and sugar.

The remaining 40  were spent on a variety of items such as
cereal, prepared foods, dairy products, rice, and beans.

The top ten summary categories and the top seven
commodities by expenditure were the same for SNAP and non-SNAP
households, although ranked in slightly different orders.

Less healthy food items were common purchases for both SNAP
and non-SNAP households. Sweetened beverages, prepared desserts and
salty snacks were among the top ten summary categories for both
groups. Expenditures were greater for sweetened beverages compared
to all milk for both groups, as well.

Expenditures were concentrated in a relatively small number
of similar food-item categories. The top five summary groups
totaled \1/2\ (50%) of the expenditures for SNAP households and
nearly \1/2\ (47%) for non-SNAP households. Twenty-five commodities
accounted for nearly \1/2\ of the food expenditures in these data
with SNAP and non-SNAP households having 20 of them in common. The
top 25 subcommodities for SNAP households and non-SNAP households,
respectively, accounted for over \1/5\ of food expenditures for
each group with 16 subcommodities in common for the two groups.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1  Distribution of Expenditures by Summary Categories
Exhibit 5 provides an overview of expenditures by the summary
categories described in Chapter 2. In general, SNAP and non-SNAP
household expenditure rankings and proportions were similar.
Expenditures on basic or staple foods (meat/poultry/seafood, fruits,
vegetables, milk, eggs and bread/crackers) comprised over 40  of every
food purchase dollar for both SNAP and non-SNAP households (41  and
44 /dollar, respectively). Another 20  per dollar was spent on less
healthy foods such as sweetened beverages, prepared desserts, salty
snacks, candy and sugars by both household groups (SNAP households--
23 ; non-SNAP households--20 ).
Expenditures were generally concentrated in a small number of
summary groups for both SNAP and non-SNAP households. The top five
groups total \1/2\ (50%) of the expenditures for SNAP households and
nearly \1/2\ (47%) for non-SNAP households. The top three categories by
expenditures for SNAP households were meat/poultry/seafood, sweetened
beverages, and vegetables. The top three categories for non-SNAP
households were meat/poultry/seafood, vegetables, and high fat dairy/
cheese; sweetened beverages ranked fifth. Both SNAP and non-SNAP
households spent a greater proportion of total expenditures on meat,
poultry and seafood than any other category. Both household groups
spent more on fruits and vegetables than on prepared foods, and more on
sweetened beverages than on milk.

Exhibit 5: Summary Categories by Expenditure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summary Category                         $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Meat, Poultry and Seafood                    1    $1,262.9          19.19%         1    $5,016.3          15.92%
Sweetened Beverages                          2      $608.7           9.25%         5    $2,238.8           7.10%
Vegetables                                   3      $473.4           7.19%         2    $2,873.9           9.12%
Frozen Prepared Foods                        4      $455.2           6.92%         8    $1,592.3           5.05%
Prepared Desserts                            5      $453.8           6.90%         6    $2,021.2           6.41%
High Fat Dairy/Cheese                        6      $427.8           6.50%         3    $2,483.2           7.88%
Bread and Crackers                           7      $354.9           5.39%         7    $1,978.2           6.28%
Fruits                                       8      $308.2           4.68%         4    $2,271.2           7.21%
Milk                                         9      $232.7           3.54%         9    $1,211.0           3.84%
Salty Snacks                                10      $225.6           3.43%        10      $969.7           3.08%
Prepared Foods                              11      $202.2           3.07%        14      $707.0           2.24%
Cereal                                      12      $186.9           2.84%        11      $933.9           2.96%
Condiments and Seasoning                    13      $174.6           2.65%        12      $878.9           2.79%
Fats and Oils                               14      $155.1           2.36%        13      $766.9           2.43%
Candy                                       15      $138.2           2.10%        15      $701.4           2.23%
Baby Food                                   16      $126.8           1.93%        27      $198.2           0.63%
Juices                                      17      $110.4           1.68%        16      $605.4           1.92%
Coffee and Tea                              18       $83.4           1.27%        17      $568.8           1.80%
Bottled Water                               19       $78.1           1.19%        22      $377.4           1.20%
Eggs                                        20       $73.8           1.12%        21      $388.2           1.23%
Other Dairy Products                        21       $69.8           1.06%        18      $549.5           1.74%
Pasta, Cornmeal, Other Cereal               22       $66.4           1.01%        23      $281.5           0.89%
Products
Soups                                       23       $62.7           0.95%        20      $414.1           1.31%
Sugars                                      24       $60.9           0.93%        24      $260.3           0.83%
Nuts and Seeds                              25       $53.2           0.81%        19      $445.9           1.41%
Beans                                       26       $38.3           0.58%        25      $234.5           0.74%
Rice                                        27       $30.1           0.46%        28      $131.0           0.42%
Jams, Jellies, Preserves and Other          28       $29.1           0.44%        29      $117.5           0.37%
Sweets
Flour and Prepared Flour Mixes              29       $18.7           0.28%        30       $94.9           0.30%
Miscellaneous                               30       $18.6           0.28%        26      $202.6           0.64%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Total Summary Category                          $6,580.5            100%             $31,513.8            100%
Expenditures (Top 1,000
subcommodities)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

3.2  Distribution of Expenditures by Commodities
Exhibit 6 examines expenditures at the commodity level, listing the
top 100 commodities by expenditure for SNAP households while providing
corresponding rankings of these commodities for non-SNAP households.
The top 100 commodities accounted for nearly all expenditures for both
SNAP (87%) and non-SNAP (82%) households. The top 25 SNAP household
commodities accounted for nearly \1/2\ (46%) of the food expenditures
for SNAP households; the top 25 commodities for non-SNAP households
accounted for 42%. Among the top 25 commodities, the two households
groups had 20 in common.
The top two commodities were the same for SNAP and non-SNAP
households, namely soft drinks and fluid milk products, although the
order was reversed with soft drinks ranked first for SNAP households
compared to fluid milk products for non-SNAP households. However, while
expenditure proportions were similar for fluid milk products across the
two household types (4  per dollar), expenditure proportions on soft
drinks were slightly higher for SNAP households compared to non-SNAP
households (5  versus 4  per dollar). Overall, the expenditure rankings
and patterns should be assessed with caution as a small difference in
the expenditure share of a commodity can lead to a major difference in
the ranking of the commodity. For example, among SNAP households, the
difference in expenditure shares between lunchmeat, ranked tenth, and
aseptic juice, ranked sixty-ninth, is approximately 1  per dollar.

Exhibit 6: Top 100 Commodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commodity                            $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soft drinks                                  1      $357.7           5.44%         2    $1,263.3           4.01%
Fluid milk products                          2      $253.7           3.85%         1    $1,270.3           4.03%
Beef grinds                                  3      $201.0           3.05%         6      $621.1           1.97%
Bag snacks                                   4      $199.3           3.03%         5      $793.9           2.52%
Cheese                                       5      $186.4           2.83%         3      $948.9           3.01%
Baked breads                                 6      $163.7           2.49%         4      $874.8           2.78%
Cold cereal                                  7      $139.2           2.12%         7      $583.9           1.85%
Chicken fresh                                8      $121.4           1.85%        11      $477.8           1.52%
Frozen handhelds and snacks                  9      $101.5           1.54%        47      $214.6           0.68%
Lunchmeat                                   10       $99.4           1.51%        17      $386.1           1.23%
Candy--packaged                             11       $96.2           1.46%         8      $527.7           1.67%
Infant formula                              12       $95.7           1.45%        80      $124.8           0.40%
Frozen pizza                                13       $90.2           1.37%        23      $305.7           0.97%
Refrigerated juices/drinks                  14       $88.5           1.35%        14      $412.8           1.31%
Ice cream, ice milk, sherbets               15       $86.0           1.31%        10      $481.8           1.53%
Coffee and creamers                         16       $82.3           1.25%         9      $519.4           1.65%
Cookies                                     17       $78.2           1.19%        16      $408.3           1.30%
Water--(sparkling and still)                18       $77.0           1.17%        18      $379.2           1.20%
Shelf stable juice                          19       $73.1           1.11%        28      $282.2           0.90%
Eggs/muffins/potatoes                       20       $72.0           1.09%        20      $358.7           1.14%
Frozen single serving premium meals         21       $68.6           1.04%        12      $447.1           1.42%
Cakes                                       22       $68.2           1.04%        38      $240.9           0.76%
Bacon                                       23       $66.1           1.00%        27      $283.2           0.90%
Traditional Mexican foods                   24       $62.6           0.95%        25      $286.9           0.91%
Yogurt                                      25       $59.9           0.91%        13      $442.3           1.40%
Salad dressing and sandwich spreads         26       $59.7           0.91%        30      $280.9           0.89%
Dinner sausage                              27       $59.3           0.90%        46      $222.6           0.71%
Frozen prepared chicken                     28       $58.6           0.89%        74      $136.4           0.43%
Baked sweet goods                           29       $57.5           0.87%        62      $159.6           0.51%
Beef loins                                  30       $56.3           0.86%        31      $280.3           0.89%
Chicken frozen                              31       $54.8           0.83%        85      $123.0           0.39%
Deli meat: bulk                             32       $54.6           0.83%        15      $411.0           1.30%
Frozen multi-serve meals                    33       $53.0           0.81%        54      $183.5           0.58%
Dinner mixes-dry                            34       $51.8           0.79%        72      $140.3           0.45%
Frozen breakfast foods                      35       $51.3           0.78%        55      $180.9           0.57%
Crackers and misc baked food                36       $50.9           0.77%        21      $323.7           1.03%
Frozen novelties-water ice                  37       $50.7           0.77%        43      $229.7           0.73%
Margarines                                  38       $50.3           0.76%        24      $303.0           0.96%
Condiments and sauces                       39       $49.8           0.76%        52      $187.2           0.59%
Potatoes                                    40       $48.8           0.74%        34      $265.2           0.84%
Frozen vegetable and veg dish               41       $48.2           0.73%        33      $266.9           0.85%
Hot dogs                                    42       $45.5           0.69%        63      $158.4           0.50%
Can vegetables--shelf stable                43       $45.3           0.69%        50      $191.7           0.61%
Shortening and oil                          44       $44.6           0.68%        57      $174.2           0.55%
Sugars and sweeteners                       45       $43.3           0.66%        60      $162.4           0.52%
Isotonic drinks                             46       $42.8           0.65%        53      $185.3           0.59%
Salad mix                                   47       $42.8           0.65%        22      $319.4           1.01%
Milk by-products                            48       $42.5           0.65%        32      $268.9           0.85%
Pork boneless loin/rib                      49       $41.5           0.63%        58      $168.0           0.53%
Convenience breakfasts and wholesome        50       $41.1           0.62%        45      $226.1           0.72%
snacks
Frozen single serve economy meals           51       $40.9           0.62%       109       $80.7           0.26%
Refrigerated dough products                 52       $40.5           0.62%        56      $176.6           0.56%
Beef round                                  53       $40.4           0.61%        75      $134.2           0.43%
Dry bean vegetables and rice                54       $39.9           0.61%        59      $166.1           0.53%
Convenient meals                            55       $38.7           0.59%       108       $81.0           0.26%
Tomatoes                                    56       $38.3           0.58%        35      $261.7           0.83%
Candy--checklane                            57       $37.9           0.58%        64      $154.0           0.49%
Berries                                     58       $37.4           0.57%        19      $373.5           1.19%
Grapes                                      59       $36.1           0.55%        39      $235.7           0.75%
Bananas                                     60       $36.1           0.55%        36      $261.4           0.83%
Peanut                                      61       $36.0           0.55%        42      $231.0           0.73%
Pork thin meats                             62       $35.0           0.53%        93      $106.8           0.34%
Citrus                                      63       $34.3           0.52%        37      $251.7           0.80%
Breakfast sausage                           64       $34.2           0.52%        79      $126.7           0.40%
Dry sauce, gravy, potatoes, stuffing        65       $34.0           0.52%        87      $119.2           0.38%
Salad and dips                              66       $33.9           0.52%        40      $235.3           0.75%
Apples                                      67       $33.7           0.51%        29      $281.7           0.89%
Meat--shelf stable                          68       $33.3           0.51%        91      $109.2           0.35%
Aseptic juice                               69       $33.1           0.50%       112       $78.9           0.25%
Sweet goods                                 70       $32.5           0.49%        66      $152.9           0.49%
Frozen potatoes                             71       $32.2           0.49%        95      $104.5           0.33%
Meat frozen                                 72       $31.9           0.48%       120       $69.9           0.22%
Baby foods                                  73       $30.6           0.46%       121       $67.8           0.22%
Vegetables salad                            74       $30.0           0.46%        44      $228.6           0.73%
Beef: thin meats                            75       $30.0           0.46%        78      $127.7           0.41%
Seafood--shrimp                             76       $29.8           0.45%        84      $123.1           0.39%
Canned soups                                77       $29.7           0.45%        65      $153.6           0.49%
Baking mixes                                78       $28.3           0.43%        69      $148.1           0.47%
Pasta and pizza sauce                       79       $27.6           0.42%        99       $96.7           0.31%
Dry noodles and pasta                       80       $27.5           0.42%        71      $141.5           0.45%
Can seafood--shelf stable                   81       $26.5           0.40%        77      $132.3           0.42%
Rts/micro soup/broth                        82       $26.0           0.40%        48      $200.8           0.64%
Canned pasta and microwave food             83       $25.9           0.39%       135       $56.7           0.18%
Smoked hams                                 84       $25.7           0.39%        92      $108.8           0.35%
Nuts                                        85       $25.6           0.39%        41      $234.2           0.74%
Value-added fruit                           86       $25.3           0.38%        70      $146.6           0.47%
Can beans                                   87       $24.0           0.36%        82      $123.3           0.39%
Dry/ramen bouillon                          88       $21.7           0.33%       133       $61.0           0.19%
Powder and crystal drink mix                89       $21.6           0.33%       119       $75.2           0.24%
Rtd tea/new age juice                       90       $21.5           0.33%       103       $93.8           0.30%
Baking needs                                91       $21.3           0.32%        51      $188.9           0.60%
Can fruit/jar applesauce                    92       $20.9           0.32%        96      $104.0           0.33%
Spices and extracts                         93       $20.4           0.31%        86      $121.9           0.39%
Energy drinks                               94       $20.1           0.30%       102       $94.1           0.30%
Onions                                      95       $20.0           0.30%        81      $123.5           0.39%
Tropical fruit                              96       $19.8           0.30%        61      $160.1           0.51%
Bagels and cream cheese                     97       $19.8           0.30%        83      $123.2           0.39%
Frozen bread/dough                          98       $19.7           0.30%       114       $77.7           0.25%
Rolls                                       99       $18.9           0.29%        88      $113.9           0.36%
Hot cereal                                 100       $18.9           0.29%       100       $96.1           0.30%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Expenditures on Listed Commodities              $5,700.3          86.62%             $25,800.4          81.93%
============================          ===========================
Expenditures on Top 1,000                     $6,580.5            100%             $31,513.8            100%
Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 100 commodities for SNAP households and the corresponding rankings of these
commodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

3.3  Distribution of Expenditures by Subcommodities
Exhibit 7 presents the top 100 subcommodities purchased by SNAP
households, along with corresponding expenditures and ranks of these
subcommodities for non-SNAP households.\34\ These 100 subcommodities
accounted for over \1/2\ (51%) of the food expenditures in these data
for SNAP households. Comparatively, the food purchases of non-SNAP
households on these 100 subcommodities represented only 43% of their
total expenditures. As expected, the level of detail provided by the
subcommodity classifications resulted in relatively small proportions
of total expenditures being spent on any single subcommodity.
Individually, only six subcommodities represented more than 1% of the
expenditures of SNAP households. As with the commodity rankings, a
small difference in the expenditure share of a subcommodity translated
into a substantial difference in its ranking. For example, among SNAP
households, the difference in shares of expenditures between potato
chips, ranked seventh, and bananas, ranked thirty-fifth, is less than
\1/2\ of one percentage point.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ See Appendix A for the commodity that corresponds to each
subcommodity for the top 1,000 subcommodities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The top two subcommodities purchased by SNAP households, fluid
milk/white only and carbonated soft drinks in 12-18 can packages, were
the top subcommodities for non-SNAP households as well. An interesting
difference in rankings of subcommodities between SNAP households and
non-SNAP households was for infant formula/starter solution. This
subcommodity ranked tenth among SNAP households. The majority of these
formula purchases were made when SNAP EBT was not the majority tender
(results not presented here), perhaps because WIC (Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children) benefits were used.
Infant formula/starter solution purchases ranked well out of the top
100 for non-SNAP households, at 190.

Exhibit 7: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subcommodity                           $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/White Only                        1      $191.1           2.90%         1      $853.8           2.71%
Soft Drinks 12/18 &15pk Can Car              2      $164.6           2.50%         2      $601.2           1.91%
Lean [Beef]                                  3      $112.4           1.71%         7      $257.9           0.82%
Kids' Cereal                                 4       $78.1           1.19%        20      $186.4           0.59%
Shredded Cheese                              5       $74.7           1.14%         3      $342.0           1.09%
Soft Drink 2 Liter Btl Carb Incl             6       $70.9           1.08%        12      $230.1           0.73%
Potato Chips                                 7       $64.4           0.98%         8      $253.2           0.80%
Primal [Beef]                                8       $62.4           0.95%        14      $219.8           0.70%
Lunchmeat--Deli Fresh                        9       $55.8           0.85%        11      $242.6           0.77%
Infant Formula Starter/Solution             10       $54.2           0.82%       190       $45.3           0.14%
Eggs--Large                                 11       $52.1           0.79%         9      $251.6           0.80%
Chicken Breast Boneless                     12       $49.6           0.75%         4      $292.9           0.93%
Still Water Drinking/Mineral Water          13       $48.8           0.74%        19      $187.7           0.60%
Mainstream White Bread                      14       $48.0           0.73%        39      $136.8           0.43%
Tortilla/Nacho Chips                        15       $47.4           0.72%        17      $209.0           0.66%
Snacks/Appetizers                           16       $44.6           0.68%        65      $100.5           0.32%
American Single Cheese                      17       $44.1           0.67%        41      $136.6           0.43%
Frozen Single Serve Premium                 18       $43.8           0.67%        24      $175.4           0.56%
Traditional Meals
Dairy Case 100% Pure Juice--Orange          19       $43.5           0.66%         6      $269.0           0.85%
Snack Cake--Multi-Pack                      20       $41.6           0.63%        63      $101.7           0.32%
Enhanced [Pork Boneless Loin/Rib]           21       $41.5           0.63%        27      $168.0           0.53%
Unflavored Can Coffee                       22       $41.3           0.63%        18      $198.0           0.63%
Frozen Single Serve Economy Meals           23       $40.9           0.62%        81       $80.7           0.26%
All
Bacon--Trad 16oz Or Less                    24       $40.7           0.62%        29      $157.6           0.50%
Soft Drinks 20pk & 24pk Can Carb            25       $39.7           0.60%        60      $106.4           0.34%
Pizza/Premium                               26       $39.7           0.60%        32      $153.3           0.49%
Mainstream Variety Breads                   27       $38.4           0.58%        26      $173.2           0.55%
Sugar                                       28       $36.9           0.56%        55      $112.7           0.36%
All Family Cereal                           29       $36.2           0.55%        16      $214.9           0.68%
Sandwiches and Handhelds                    30       $35.9           0.54%        91       $73.6           0.23%
Potatoes Russet (Bulk & Bag)                31       $35.8           0.54%        30      $154.5           0.49%
Natural Cheese Chunks                       32       $35.3           0.54%        15      $216.1           0.69%
Ribs [Pork]                                 33       $35.0           0.53%        59      $106.8           0.34%
Convenient Meals--Kids Meal                 34       $34.2           0.52%        96       $69.7           0.22%
Bananas                                     35       $34.2           0.52%        10      $242.7           0.77%
Soft Drink Mlt-Pk Btl Carb                  36       $34.0           0.52%        25      $173.6           0.55%
Premium [Ice Cream & Sherbert]              37       $31.2           0.47%        13      $226.0           0.72%
Isotonic Drinks Single Serve                38       $30.5           0.46%        47      $119.5           0.38%
Frozen Chicken--White Meat                  39       $30.0           0.46%        66       $99.8           0.32%
Condensed Soup                              40       $29.7           0.45%        31      $153.6           0.49%
Pourable Salad Dressings                    41       $29.0           0.44%        37      $139.4           0.44%
Choice Beef                                 42       $28.4           0.43%        40      $136.6           0.43%
Select Beef                                 43       $27.9           0.42%        36      $143.7           0.46%
Soft Drink Single Srv Btl Carb              44       $27.8           0.42%        94       $71.4           0.23%
Frozen Family Style Entrees                 45       $27.6           0.42%        77       $83.5           0.26%
Mayonnaise & Whipped Dressing               46       $27.3           0.41%        48      $119.1           0.38%
Frozen Bag Vegetables--Plain                47       $25.7           0.39%        42      $131.9           0.42%
Traditional [Ice Cream and Sherbert]        48       $25.6           0.39%        49      $118.7           0.38%
Hot Dogs--Base Meat                         49       $25.1           0.38%       138       $56.8           0.18%
Adult Cereal                                50       $24.9           0.38%        21      $182.6           0.58%
Frozen Single Serve Premium                 51       $24.7           0.38%         5      $271.6           0.86%
Nutritional Meals
Macaroni and Cheese Dinners                 52       $24.3           0.37%       125       $59.7           0.19%
Aseptic Pack Juice and Drinks               53       $24.2           0.37%       134       $57.1           0.18%
Refrigerated Coffee Creamers                54       $24.1           0.37%        34      $147.2           0.47%
Choice Beef                                 55       $24.0           0.37%        92       $72.5           0.23%
Mexican Soft Tortillas and Wraps            56       $23.7           0.36%        54      $113.1           0.36%
Strawberries                                57       $23.5           0.36%        22      $178.4           0.57%
Margarine: Tubs and Bowls                   58       $23.4           0.36%        64      $100.9           0.32%
Mainstream [Pasta & Pizza]                  59       $23.0           0.35%        80       $81.0           0.26%
Chicken Wings                               60       $22.2           0.34%       300       $28.6           0.09%
Can Pasta                                   61       $22.2           0.34%       179       $47.7           0.15%
Frozen Chicken--Wings                       62       $22.2           0.34%       452       $17.4           0.06%
Lunchmeat--Bologna/Sausage                  63       $21.8           0.33%       121       $60.9           0.19%
Multi-Pack Bag Snacks                       64       $21.6           0.33%       199       $43.4           0.14%
Candy Bags-Chocolate                        65       $21.5           0.33%        33      $147.5           0.47%
Sweet Goods: Donuts                         66       $21.3           0.32%        78       $82.3           0.26%
Tuna                                        67       $21.1           0.32%        57      $109.9           0.35%
Vegetable Oil                               68       $20.5           0.31%       246       $35.4           0.11%
Frozen French Fries                         69       $20.5           0.31%       163       $50.3           0.16%
Peanut Butter                               70       $20.4           0.31%        43      $127.8           0.41%
Pizza/Economy                               71       $19.8           0.30%       192       $45.1           0.14%
Butter                                      72       $19.6           0.30%        23      $175.6           0.56%
Meat: Turkey Bulk                           73       $19.3           0.29%        28      $159.6           0.51%
Frozen Breakfast Sandwiches                 74       $19.1           0.29%       142       $55.7           0.18%
Frozen Meat--Beef                           75       $19.0           0.29%       185       $46.3           0.15%
Frozen Skillet Meals                        76       $18.8           0.29%        83       $79.3           0.25%
Value Forms/18oz and Larger                 77       $18.6           0.28%       209       $42.6           0.14%
[Chicken]
Cakes: Birthday/Celebration                 78       $18.6           0.28%       164       $50.3           0.16%
Sandwich Cookies                            79       $18.0           0.27%        93       $71.8           0.23%
Pizza/Traditional                           80       $17.9           0.27%       111       $64.1           0.20%
Fruit Snacks                                81       $17.6           0.27%       202       $43.2           0.14%
Rts Soup: Chunky/Homestyle                  82       $17.6           0.27%        46      $119.9           0.38%
Sour Creams                                 83       $17.5           0.27%        70       $95.2           0.30%
Waffles/Pancakes/French Toast               84       $17.3           0.26%        90       $77.4           0.25%
Chicken Drums                               85       $17.3           0.26%       270       $31.5           0.10%
Cream Cheese                                86       $17.2           0.26%        51      $115.5           0.37%
Angus [Beef]                                87       $17.1           0.26%        61      $103.8           0.33%
Bagged Cheese Snacks                        88       $17.1           0.26%       157       $52.0           0.16%
Salsa and Dips                              89       $17.1           0.26%       135       $57.0           0.18%
Sandwiches--(Cold)                          90       $16.9           0.26%       106       $67.7           0.21%
Ramen Noodles/Ramen Cups                    91       $16.7           0.25%       304       $28.1           0.09%
Cheese Crackers                             92       $16.5           0.25%        72       $90.2           0.29%
Dinner Sausage--Links Pork                  93       $16.4           0.25%       233       $37.6           0.12%
Candy Bars (Singles)                        94       $16.3           0.25%       146       $54.9           0.17%
Hamburger Buns                              95       $16.2           0.25%        95       $70.2           0.22%
Hot Dog Buns                                96       $16.2           0.25%       117       $62.2           0.20%
Spring Water                                97       $16.2           0.25%        69       $95.6           0.30%
Dairy Case Juice Drink Under 10oz           98       $16.0           0.24%       177       $48.0           0.15%
Flavored Milk                               99       $16.0           0.24%       128       $59.4           0.19%
Sweet Goods--Full Size                     100       $15.8           0.24%       133       $57.9           0.18%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Expenditures on Listed                          $3,372.2          51.01%             $13,390.0          42.14%
Subcommodities
============================          ===========================
Expenditures on Top 1,000                     $6,580.5            100%             $31,513.8            100%
subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 100 subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding rankings of these
subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

3.4  Distribution of Expenditures by Household Demographics, Store
Characteristics, Type of Resource Used, and Month of Purchase
In addition to analyzing purchase patterns as a whole, IMPAQ also
analyzed the POS purchase data by household demographic and store
characteristic subgroups based on information from the data provider.
Appendix E provides these analyses. More transactions in these data
were made by households without children than by households with
children. In addition, a larger proportion of transactions were made at
retail outlets in metropolitan areas than in rural or suburban areas;
\35\ at larger stores rather than smaller ones; \36\ and in counties
with 10-20% poverty rates, the median of the three poverty rate
categories into which the counties in which the stores were located
were classified.\37\ Compared to non-SNAP household transactions, SNAP
household transactions were more likely to be made by households headed
by adults 19-44 years of age, in stores located in the Midwest, and in
medium-sized grocery stores. A larger proportion of SNAP household
transactions than of non-SNAP household transactions took place in the
most impoverished counties (counties with poverty rates greater than
20%). Notably, the distribution of transactions by household
demographic and store characteristics was relatively consistent whether
SNAP households used SNAP benefits or other resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ USDA Economic Research Service Urban Influence Codes (http://
www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/urban-influence-codes.aspx).
\36\ Following Food Marketing Institute conventions from http://
www.fmi.org/about/ and http://www.fmi.org/facts--figs/
?fuseaction=superfact and FNS Retailer Policy and Management Division
food retailer definitions from http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/retailers/
pdfs/2012-annual-report.pdf.
\37\ Census Bureau data from http://www.census.gov/did/www/saipe/
county.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to analyzing the POS data for the full year, analyses
were completed at the monthly level to investigate monthly or seasonal
patterns in purchases. There was little month-to-month variation in
expenditure patterns for either SNAP or non-SNAP households. A notable
exception was that for both household types expenditure shares for
vegetables were 2-3 percentage points lower during the summer months,
while expenditure shares for fruits were 2-3 percentage points higher
(data not shown).
Chapter 4. Findings: Top Expenditures by USDA Food Pattern Categories

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Key Findings

Overall, there were few differences between SNAP and non-
SNAP household expenditures by USDA Food Pattern categories.
Expenditure shares for each of the USDA Food Pattern categories
(dairy, fruits, grains, oils, protein foods, solid fats and added
sugars (SoFAS), and vegetables) varied by no more than 3  per
dollar when comparing SNAP and non-SNAP households.

Protein foods represented the largest expenditure share for
both household types, while proportionally more was spent on fruits
and vegetables than on solid fats and added sugars, grains or
dairy.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Expenditures by USDA Food Pattern
Categories

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SNAP Households                    Non-SNAP Households

Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.
4.1  Top Expenditures for Dairy
There are few differences in dairy expenditure patterns between
SNAP households and non-SNAP households. Shown in Exhibit 8, the top
four dairy subcommodities for both household groups were identical--
fluid milk/white only, shredded cheese, American single cheese, and
natural cheese chunks. These top four accounted for 60% of all dairy
expenditures for SNAP households and 47% for non-SNAP households. The
biggest driver of the proportional difference was the purchase of fluid
milk/white only. Fluid white milk was the top subcommodity representing
33% of all dairy expenditures by SNAP households. In comparison, this
subcommodity accounted for 26% of non-SNAP household dairy
expenditures. Overall, 23 dairy subcommodities in the top 25 for SNAP
households were also among the top 25 for non-SNAP households. The top
25 dairy subcommodities for SNAP households represented almost all
dairy expenditures, 93%, while these 25 subcommodities represented 85%
of dairy expenditures for non-SNAP households.

Exhibit 8: Top 25 SNAP Household Dairy Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dairy Subcommodity                        $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/White Only                        1      $191.1          33.25%         1      $853.8          25.69%
Shredded Cheese                              2       $74.7          13.00%         2      $342.0          10.29%
American Single Cheese                       3       $44.1           7.67%         4      $136.6           4.11%
Natural Cheese Chunks                        4       $35.3           6.14%         3      $216.1           6.50%
Bagged Cheese Snacks                         5       $17.1           2.98%        16       $52.0           1.56%
Flavored Fluid Milk                          6       $16.0           2.78%        14       $59.4           1.79%
String Cheese                                7       $15.1           2.63%         9       $99.0           2.98%
Yogurt/Kids                                  8       $14.0           2.44%        20       $42.4           1.28%
Cottage Cheese                               9       $13.9           2.42%         7      $108.8           3.27%
Natural Cheese Slices                       10       $13.4           2.33%         6      $113.2           3.41%
Yogurt/Single Serving Regular               11       $11.0           1.91%        11       $69.0           2.07%
Loaf Cheese                                 12       $10.9           1.90%        23       $38.1           1.15%
Yogurt/Single Serve Light                   13       $10.2           1.78%         8      $103.1           3.10%
Yogurt/Pro Active Health                    14        $7.4           1.29%        13       $63.5           1.91%
Yogurt/Adult Multi-Packs                    15        $7.2           1.25%        19       $42.5           1.28%
Specialty/Lactose Free Milk                 16        $6.7           1.17%        17       $48.4           1.46%
Grated Cheese                               17        $6.2           1.08%        25       $33.6           1.01%
Bulk Semi-Hard (Cheese)                     18        $6.1           1.05%        18       $44.0           1.32%
Fluid Milk                                  19        $5.9           1.02%         5      $113.3           3.41%
Canned Milk                                 20        $5.5           0.96%        27       $27.9           0.84%
Yogurt/Specialty Greek                      21        $5.0           0.86%        10       $77.4           2.33%
Half & Half                                 22        $4.4           0.77%        15       $54.6           1.64%
Yogurt/Large Size (16oz or More)            23        $4.4           0.76%        22       $40.4           1.22%
Miscellaneous Cheese                        24        $3.8           0.67%        21       $42.1           1.27%
Bulk Processed (Cheese)                     25        $3.4           0.59%        29       $19.8           0.60%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Dairy Expenditures                  $532.9          92.70%              $2,841.0          85.49%
============================          ===========================
Total Dairy Expenditures Among                  $571.2            100%              $3,257.4            100%
Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 dairy subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking of these
subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

4.2  Top Expenditures for Fruits
The top 25 fruit subcommodities by expenditure for SNAP households
included whole fruits as well as 100% fruit juices, as shown in Exhibit
9 below. The top fruit subcommodity for both SNAP and non-SNAP
households was 100% orange juice. This top fruit subcommodity
represented 10% of all SNAP household fruit expenditures, 9% for non-
SNAP households. Bananas and strawberries rank second and third,
respectively, for both household groups. Together, the top three fruit
subcommodities account for about \1/4\ (24%) of the fruit expenditures
for both SNAP and non-SNAP households. The top 25 SNAP household fruit
subcommodities accounted for 71% of all SNAP household fruit
expenditures. These 25 subcommodities accounted for 66% of fruit
expenditures for non-SNAP households. Twenty-one of the top 25 fruit
subcommodities for SNAP households were also in the top 25 for non-SNAP
households.

Exhibit 9: Top 25 SNAP Household Fruit Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fruit Subcommodity                        $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
100% Pure Juice--Orange; Dairy Case          1       $43.5          10.18%         1      $269.0           9.35%
Bananas                                      2       $34.2           8.00%         2      $242.7           8.43%
Strawberries                                 3       $23.5           5.48%         3      $178.4           6.20%
Fruit Snacks                                 4       $17.6           4.13%        17       $43.2           1.50%
Grapes Red                                   5       $15.8           3.70%         4      $121.7           4.23%
Grapes White                                 6       $15.5           3.61%         6       $84.9           2.95%
Apple Juice & Cider (Over 50% Pure           7       $13.3           3.11%        14       $45.8           1.59%
Juice)
Instore Cut Fruit                            8       $13.2           3.09%         5       $85.8           2.98%
Oranges Navels                               9       $12.6           2.94%         8       $79.3           2.75%
Fruit Cup                                   10       $10.6           2.47%        19       $42.7           1.49%
Blended Juice & Combinations                11        $9.3           2.17%        29       $29.6           1.03%
Clementines                                 12        $8.8           2.06%         9       $78.6           2.73%
Melons Instore Cut                          13        $8.2           1.93%        18       $42.8           1.49%
Watermelon Seedless Whole                   14        $7.9           1.84%        16       $43.9           1.53%
Cherries Red                                15        $6.9           1.61%        11       $56.7           1.97%
Apples Gala (Bulk & Bag)                    16        $6.6           1.54%        10       $69.3           2.41%
Cranapple/Cran Grape Juice                  17        $6.1           1.43%        31       $27.3           0.95%
Apples Red Delicious (Bulk & Bag)           18        $5.8           1.35%        23       $35.2           1.22%
100% Pure Juice--Other; Dairy Case          19        $5.4           1.26%        25       $32.3           1.12%
Cantaloupe Whole                            20        $5.3           1.24%        15       $44.4           1.54%
Blueberries                                 21        $5.1           1.19%         7       $79.4           2.76%
Pineapple                                   22        $4.9           1.15%        33       $24.0           0.83%
Peaches Yellow Flesh                        23        $4.8           1.13%        22       $35.6           1.24%
Grape Juice (Over 50% Juice)                24        $4.8           1.12%        44       $17.1           0.60%
Lemons                                      25        $4.6           1.08%        24       $33.6           1.17%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Fruit Expenditures                  $294.3          68.81%              $1,843.4          64.06%
============================          ===========================
Total Fruit Expenditures Among                  $416.8            100%              $2,772.4            100%
Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 fruit subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding rankings of
these subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

4.3  Top Expenditures for Grains
Exhibit 10 details the top 25 grain subcommodities purchased by
SNAP households. Cereals are a popular purchase among grain
subcommodities for both SNAP and non-SNAP households. The top grain
subcommodity for SNAP households was kids cereal, representing almost
10% of all grain expenditures. Kids cereal, ranked third for non-SNAP
households. All family cereal was ranked first for non-SNAP households
and fifth for SNAP households. Adult cereals were also common purchases
ranking sixth for SNAP households and fourth for non-SNAP households.
The top 25 grain subcommodities purchased by SNAP households made up
67% of their grain expenditures. Comparatively, these 25 subcommodities
comprised 57% of expenditures on grains subcommodities for non-SNAP
households. Ninteen subcommodities in the top 25 for SNAP households
were also among the top 25 for non-SNAP households.

Exhibit 10: Top 25 SNAP Household Grains Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grains Subcommodity                       $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kids Cereal                                  1       $78.1           9.88%         3      $186.4           4.51%
Mainstream White Bread                       2       $48.0           6.07%         7      $136.8           3.31%
Tortilla/Nacho Chips                         3       $47.4           5.99%         2      $209.0           5.05%
Mainstream Variety Breads                    4       $38.4           4.86%         5      $173.2           4.19%
All Family Cereal                            5       $36.2           4.58%         1      $214.9           5.20%
Adult Cereal                                 6       $24.9           3.15%         4      $182.6           4.42%
Mexican Soft Tortillas and Wraps             7       $23.7           3.00%         8      $113.1           2.74%
Waffles/Pancakes/French Toast                8       $17.3           2.19%        13       $77.4           1.87%
Ramen Noodles/Ramen Cups                     9       $16.7           2.12%        43       $28.1           0.68%
Cheese Crackers                             10       $16.5           2.08%        10       $90.2           2.18%
Hamburger Buns                              11       $16.2           2.05%        14       $70.2           1.70%
Hot Dog Buns                                12       $16.2           2.05%        18       $62.2           1.50%
Refrigerated Biscuits                       13       $14.7           1.86%        30       $45.2           1.09%
Butter Spray Crackers                       14       $14.6           1.85%        15       $68.7           1.66%
Toaster Pastries                            15       $14.0           1.77%        27       $47.6           1.15%
Rice Side Dish Mixes Dry                    16       $14.0           1.76%        28       $46.7           1.13%
Popcorn--Microwave                          17       $13.1           1.65%        17       $63.4           1.53%
Long Cut Pasta                              18       $13.0           1.64%        19       $60.4           1.46%
Granola Bars                                19       $12.8           1.61%        11       $88.9            .15%
Premium Bread                               20       $12.3           1.55%         6      $144.7           3.50%
Cereal Bars                                 21       $10.9           1.38%        12       $78.4           1.90%
Short Cut Pasta                             22        $9.9           1.25%        21       $56.2           1.36%
Rolls: Dinner                               23        $9.5           1.21%        23       $50.5           1.22%
Frozen Garlic Toast                         24        $9.1           1.16%        44       $27.8           0.67%
Corn Chips                                  25        $9.1           1.15%        29       $45.6           1.10%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Grain Expenditures                  $536.6          67.86%              $2,368.4          57.27%
============================          ===========================
Total Grain Expenditures Among                  $783.8            100%              $4,049.9            100%
Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 grain subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking of these
subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

4.4  Top Expenditures for Oils
The top oils subcommodity expenditures are shown in Exhibit 11.
Pourable salad dressings was the top oils subcommodity by expenditure
for both SNAP and non-SNAP households, accounting for nearly \1/4\ of
their total expenditures on oils. The second and third ranked oils
subcommodities, mayonnaise/whipped dressing and margarine in tubs and
bowls, were the same for both household groups, as well.

Exhibit 11: Oils Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oils Subcommodity                        $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pourable Salad Dressings                     1       $29.0          22.71%         1      $139.4          24.28%
Mayonnaise and Whipped Dressing              2       $27.3          21.34%         2      $119.1          20.73%
Margarine: Tubs and Bowls                    3       $23.4          18.37%         3      $100.9          17.56%
Vegetable Oils                               4       $20.5          16.07%         5       $35.4           6.16%
Canola Oils                                  5        $8.3           6.49%         6       $29.3           5.10%
Olive Oils                                   6        $7.3           5.69%         4       $63.8          11.11%
Cooking Sprays                               7        $3.2           2.49%         7       $21.0           3.65%
Dressing Creamy                              8        $1.6           1.23%         8       $14.5           2.53%
Sandwich/Horseradish and Tartar              9        $1.4           1.14%        10        $7.2           1.26%
Sauce
Corn Oils                                   10        $1.3           1.01%        14        $4.1           0.71%
Cooking Oils: Peanut/Safflower              11        $1.1           0.89%        11        $6.7           1.17%
Dressing Blue Cheese                        12        $0.9           0.71%         9        $9.5           1.65%
Margarine: Squeeze                          13        $0.6           0.44%        13        $4.2           0.74%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Oils Expenditures                   $125.9          98.58%                $555.0          96.65%
============================          ===========================
Total Oils Expenditures Among                   $125.9            100%                $555.0            100%
the Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The data included only 13 oils subcommodities in the top 1,000 subcommodities. Columns may not sum to
total shown due to rounding.

4.5  Top Expenditures for Protein Foods
The top 25 protein foods subcommodities based on expenditures of
SNAP households are shown in Exhibit 12. For SNAP households, the top
25 represented over \1/2\ (54%) of all protein foods expenditures.
These same 25 subcommodities comprised 48% of the protein foods
expenditures for non-SNAP households. The top five subcommodities were
the same for both household groups, although in slightly different
order and accounted for \1/5\ of all protein expenditures for both
households. The protein foods included in the top five were beef,
lunchmeat, eggs and chicken. Lean ground beef was the top protein foods
subcommodity by expenditure for SNAP households, totaling just over 7%
of all protein foods expenditures. The top protein foods subcommodity
for non-SNAP households was boneless chicken breasts at 5% of their
expenditures. Eighteen of the SNAP household top 25 subcommodities were
also ranked in the top 25 for non-SNAP households.

Exhibit 12: Top 25 SNAP Household Protein Foods Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Protein Foods Subcommodity                    $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lean Ground Beef                             1      $112.4           7.38%         2      $257.9           4.03%
Primal Ground Beef                           2       $62.4           4.10%         5      $219.8           3.43%
Lunchmeat--Deli Fresh                        3       $55.8           3.67%         4      $242.6           3.79%
Eggs--Large                                  4       $52.1           3.43%         3      $251.6            .93%
Chicken Breast Boneless                      5       $49.6           3.26%         1      $292.9           4.57%
Enhanced Pork Boneless Loin/Rib              6       $41.5           2.73%         6      $168.0           2.62%
Bacon--Trad 16oz Or Less                     7       $40.7           2.68%         8      $157.6           2.46%
Ribs (Pork)                                  8       $35.0           2.30%        15      $106.8           1.67%
Frozen Chicken--White Meat                   9       $30.0           1.97%        17       $99.8           1.56%
Choice Beef (Loins)                         10       $28.4           1.87%        11      $136.6           2.13%
Select Beef                                 11       $27.9           1.83%         9      $143.7           2.24%
Hot Dogs--Base Meat                         12       $25.1           1.65%        27       $56.8           0.89%
Choice Beef (Rounds)                        13       $24.0           1.58%        20       $72.5           1.13%
Chicken Wings                               14       $22.2           1.46%        58       $28.6           0.45%
Frozen Chicken--Wings                       15       $22.2           1.46%        97       $17.4           0.27%
Lunchmeat--Bologna/Sausage                  16       $21.8           1.43%        24       $60.9           0.95%
Tuna                                        17       $21.1           1.39%        14      $109.9           1.72%
Peanut Butter                               18       $20.4           1.34%        12      $127.8           1.99%
Meat: Turkey Bulk                           19       $19.3           1.27%         7      $159.6           2.49%
Frozen Meat--Beef                           20       $19.0           1.25%        34       $46.3           0.72%
Value Forms/18oz & Larger                   21       $18.6           1.22%        41       $42.6           0.67%
Chicken Drumsticks                          22       $17.3           1.14%        49       $31.5           0.49%
Angus Beef                                  23       $17.1           1.13%        16      $103.8           1.62%
Dinner Sausage--Links Pork Ckd              24       $16.4           1.08%        45       $37.6           0.59%
Meat: Ham Bulk                              25       $15.3           1.00%        13      $115.9           1.81%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Protein Foods                       $815.7          53.62%              $3,088.3          48.22%
Expenditures
============================          ===========================
Total Protein Foods Expenditures              $1,512.2            100%              $6,288.8            100%
Among Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 protein foods subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking
of these subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

4.6  Top Expenditures for Solid Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS)
The top 25 SoFAS subcommodities by expenditure for SNAP households
are shown in Exhibit 13. Twenty two subcommodities in the top 25 for
SNAP households were also among the top 25 for non-SNAP households. In
addition, the top two subcommodities were the same. They were
carbonated soft drinks packaged as 12-18 pack cans and 2-liter bottles.
These two subcommodities represented approximately \1/4\ of the SoFAS
expenditures for both types of households. Sugar, ranked fourth, was
the highest ranked non-beverage SoFAS subcommodity for SNAP households.
It was eighth ranked for non-SNAP households. Butter ranked higher
(third) for non-SNAP households compared to tenth for SNAP households.
Overall, the top 25 SNAP household SoFAS subcommodities in Exhibit 13
totaled 75% of SNAP household SoFAS expenditures. These 25
subcommodities totaled 71% of the SoFAS expenditures for non-SNAP
households.

Exhibit 13: Top 25 SNAP Household Solid Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS) Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
Solid Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subcommodity                           $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soft Drinks 12/18 & 15pk Can Car             1      $164.6          18.86%         1      $601.2          16.11%
Soft Drinks 2 Liter Btl Carb Incl            2       $70.9           8.12%         2      $230.1           6.17%
Soft Drinks 20pk & 24pk Can Carb             3       $39.7           4.55%         9      $106.4           2.85%
Sugar                                        4       $36.9           4.23%         8      $112.7           3.02%
Soft Drink Mlt-Pk Btl Carb                   5       $34.0           3.90%         4      $173.6           4.65%
Soft Drink Single Serve Btl Carb             6       $27.8           3.18%        11       $71.4           1.91%
Aseptic Pack Juice And Drinks                7       $24.2           2.78%        16       $57.1           1.53%
Refrigerated Coffee Creamers                 8       $24.1           2.76%         6      $147.2           3.95%
Candy Bags-Chocolate                         9       $21.5           2.46%         5      $147.5           3.95%
Butter                                      10       $19.6           2.24%         3      $175.6           4.71%
Sour Creams                                 11       $17.5           2.00%        10       $95.2           2.55%
Cream Cheese                                12       $17.2           1.97%         7      $115.5           3.10%
Candy Bars (Singles)                        13       $16.3           1.87%        18       $54.9           1.47%
Dairy Case Juice Drink Under 10 Oz          14       $16.0           1.83%        22       $48.0           1.29%
Candy Bars (Multi Pack)                     15       $15.6           1.79%        12       $69.6           1.86%
Tea Sweetened                               16       $13.9           1.59%        13       $68.7           1.84%
Chewing Gum                                 17       $13.2           1.51%        14       $68.3           1.83%
Candy Bags-Non Chocolate                    18       $12.6           1.44%        19       $54.9           1.47%
Molasses and Syrups                         19       $11.7           1.34%        15       $58.7           1.57%
Dairy Case Citrus Punch/OJ Subs             20       $11.0           1.26%        27       $34.4           0.92%
Fruit Drinks: Canned & Glass                21       $10.6           1.21%        60       $10.9           0.29%
Non Dairy Creamer                           22       $10.5           1.20%        25       $35.4           0.95%
Seasonal Miscellaneous                      23        $9.2           1.05%        23       $46.9           1.26%
Dairy Case Tea With Sugar                   24        $8.4           0.96%        36       $23.1           0.62%
Seasonal Candy Bags-Chocolate               25        $7.9           0.90%        20       $54.8           1.47%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed SoFAS Expenditures                  $655.0          75.00%              $2,662.3          71.34%
============================          ===========================
Total SoFAS Expenditures Among                  $864.1            100%              $3,673.1            100%
Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 SoFAS subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking of these
subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

SoFAS were divided into three broad subcategories to inform the
analyses: butter/cream/solid fats, candy/sweets, and sweetened
beverages.\38\ The distribution of these subcategories for both
household types is shown in Exhibit 14. As a share of total SoFAS
expenditures, sweetened beverage expenditures were more than ten
percentage points higher in SNAP households than non-SNAP households.
In contrast, non-SNAP households spent a larger share of their SoFAS
expenditures on the butter/cream/solid fats and candy/sweets
subcategories.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Fruit drinks that are over 50% juice are categorized as
fruits. All other fruit drinks are categorized as SoFAS. In our
discussion, fruit drinks that are less than 50% juice are grouped into
``sweetened beverages.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exhibit 14: Solid Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS) Expenditures by
Subcategory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SNAP Households                    Non-SNAP Households

Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.
4.7  Top Expenditures for Vegetables
As shown in Exhibit 15, russet potatoes and plain frozen bag
vegetables were the top two vegetable subcommodities by expenditure
purchased by SNAP and non-SNAP households. Overall, 18 of the top 25
vegetable subcommodities for SNAP households were among the top 25 for
non-SNAP households. The top 25 SNAP household subcommodities comprised
56% of total vegetable expenditures for SNAP households. These same 25
subcommodities comprised 47% of total vegetable expenditures for non-
SNAP households. The top 25 subcommodities for both SNAP and non-SNAP
households for this Food Pattern category included a range of
vegetables such as potatoes, avocados, green beans, corn, lettuce and
cucumbers to name a few.

Exhibit 15: Top 25 SNAP Household Vegetables Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vegetables Subcommodity                     $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Potatoes Russet (Bulk & Bag)                 1       $35.8           6.74%         1      $154.5           4.60%
Frozen Bag Vegetables--Plain                 2       $25.7           4.85%         2      $131.9           3.93%
Mainstream Pasta & Pizza Sauce               3       $23.0           4.33%         6       $81.0           2.41%
Frozen French Fries                          4       $20.5           3.86%        19       $50.3           1.50%
Avocado                                      5       $13.4           2.52%         4      $112.6           3.35%
Blends Salad Mix                             6       $13.1           2.47%         3      $124.0           3.69%
Green Beans: Fs/Whl/Cut                      7       $12.8           2.41%        15       $53.1           1.58%
Potatoes: Dry                                8       $12.3           2.31%        33       $32.3           0.96%
Corn                                         9       $12.1           2.28%        22       $44.0           1.31%
Head Lettuce                                10       $11.6           2.18%        13       $55.5           1.65%
Frozen Steamable Vegetables                 11       $10.5           1.98%         5       $81.4           2.42%
Mexican Sauces and Picante Sauce            12       $10.2           1.93%         9       $62.3           1.85%
Tomatoes Diced                              13        $9.5           1.79%        11       $59.9           1.78%
Tomatoes Hothouse On The Vine               14        $9.2           1.74%         7       $77.7           2.31%
Onions Yellow (Bulk & Bag)                  15        $8.7           1.65%        27       $39.3           1.17%
Cucumbers                                   16        $8.2           1.55%        12       $58.9           1.75%
Vegetable Salads--Prepack                   17        $7.8           1.48%        29       $36.6           1.09%
Peppers Green Bell                          18        $7.8           1.47%        25       $41.5           1.24%
Regular Garden                              19        $7.8           1.46%        35       $31.9           0.95%
Roma Tomatoes (Bulk/Pkg)                    20        $7.5           1.41%        26       $39.6           1.18%
Carrots Mini Peeled                         21        $7.0           1.32%        10       $61.4           1.83%
Onions Sweet (Bulk & Bag)                   22        $6.2           1.16%        20       $47.4           1.41%
Celery                                      23        $5.9           1.11%        17       $51.2           1.52%
Tomatoes Vine Ripe Bulk                     24        $5.7           1.07%        51       $22.5           0.67%
Garden Plus Salad Mix                       25        $5.5           1.03%        36       $31.8           0.95%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Vegetable                           $297.7          56.10%              $1,582.6          47.10%
Expenditures
============================          ===========================
Total Vegetable Expenditures                    $520.5            100%              $3,251.8            100%
Among Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 vegetable subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking of
these subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

4.8  Top Expenditures for Composite Foods
Composite foods include those subcommodities that contain more than
one USDA Food Pattern category. As a result, they could not be assigned
specifically to a single category. For example, composite foods include
both dairy and grains (macaroni and cheese), dairy and SoFAS (ice
cream), vegetables and oils (potato chips), or protein foods,
vegetables and grains (frozen meals). The top 25 composite foods
subcommodities based on the expenditures of SNAP households are
presented in Exhibit 16. Potato chips were the top composite
subcommodity by expenditure for SNAP households, representing 5% of
their overall expenditures on composite items. Potato chips were ranked
second for non-SNAP households. Overall, expenditures on composite
subcommodities were similar for SNAP and non-SNAP households with 19
subcommodities in the top 25 for both groups. The top 25 SNAP household
subcommodities shown in Exhibit 16 represented 58% of all SNAP
household composite foods expenditures, while expenditures on these 25
subcommodities by non-SNAP households accounted for 51% of their total
composite foods expenditures.

Exhibit 16: Top 25 SNAP Household Composite Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Composite Subcommodity                      $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Potato Chips                                 1       $64.4           5.19%         2      $253.2           4.88%
Snacks/Appetizers                            2       $44.6           3.59%        10      $100.5           1.94%
Frozen Single Serve Premium                  3       $43.8           3.53%         4      $175.4           3.38%
Traditional Meals
Snack Cake--Multi Pack                       4       $41.6           3.36%         9      $101.7           1.96%
Frozen Single Serve Economy Meals            5       $40.9           3.30%        15       $80.7           1.56%
Pizza/Premium                                6       $39.7           3.20%         6      $153.3           2.95%
Sandwiches and Handhelds                     7       $35.9           2.89%        17       $73.6           1.42%
Convenient Meals--Kids Meal                  8       $34.2           2.76%        19       $69.7           1.34%
Premium (Ice Cream & Sherbert)               9       $31.2           2.52%         3      $226.0           4.35%
Condensed Soup                              10       $29.7           2.39%         5      $153.6           2.96%
Frozen Family Style Entrees                 11       $27.6           2.23%        13       $83.5           1.61%
Traditional                                 12       $25.6           2.07%         8      $118.7           2.29%
Frozen Single Serve Premium                 13       $24.7           1.99%         1      $271.6           5.23%
Nutritional Meals
Macaroni and Cheese Dinners                 14       $24.3           1.96%        24       $59.7           1.15%
Can Pasta                                   15       $22.2           1.79%        36       $47.7           0.92%
Multi-Pack Bag Snacks                       16       $21.6           1.74%        38       $43.4           0.84%
Sweet Goods: Donuts                         17       $21.3           1.72%        14       $82.3           1.58%
Pizza/Economy                               18       $19.8           1.60%        37       $45.1           0.87%
Frozen Breakfast Sandwiches                 19       $19.1           1.54%        29       $55.7           1.07%
Frozen Skillet Meals                        20       $18.8           1.51%        16       $79.3           1.53%
Cakes: Birthday/Celebration                 21       $18.6           1.50%        33       $50.3           0.97%
Sandwich Cookies                            22       $18.0           1.45%        18       $71.8           1.38%
Pizza/Traditional                           23       $17.9           1.44%        22       $64.1           1.24%
Rts Soup: Chunky/Homestyle                  24       $17.6           1.42%         7      $119.9           2.31%
Salsa and Dips                              25       $17.1           1.38%        28       $57.0           1.10%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Composite                           $720.5          58.07%              $2,637.7          50.83%
Expenditures
============================          ===========================
Total Composite Expenditures                  $1,235.4            100%              $5,132.0            100%
Among Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 composite subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking of
these subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

The composite subcommodities were further categorized as snacks,
soups, desserts, and entree/meal items to inform the analyses. Exhibit
17 suggests some differences in SNAP and non-SNAP household expenditure
distributions on these subgroups. SNAP households spent a larger share
of their composite expenditures on entree/meal subcommodities, while
non-SNAP households spent larger shares on desserts and soup.
Expenditures on snacks were not very different across the two groups.
Exhibit 17: Composite Expenditures by Subcategory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SNAP Households                    Non-SNAP Households

Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.
4.9  Top Expenditures for Other Subcommodities
Some subcommodities did not contain any USDA Food Pattern
categories, or the subcommodity labels were not descriptive enough to
permit categorization even with the addition of the composite category.
As a result, a ninth category, other, was created to capture such
subcommodities. ``Other'' included subcommodities such as water,
isotonic drinks, and baby food. The top 25 other subcommodities based
on the expenditures of SNAP households are shown in Exhibit 18 and
accounted for 66% of their overall other subcommodity expenditures.
These subcommodities accounted for 54% of all other expenditures for
non-SNAP households. Overall, expenditures on other subcommodities were
similar for SNAP and non-SNAP households with 19 subcommodities in
common in the top 25 for both groups. The top other subcommodity
purchased by SNAP households was infant formula/starter solution,
accounting for almost 10% of the total SNAP household expenditures on
these items. Subcommodities reflecting drinking water and coffee were
ranked second and third, respectively. Coffee subcommodities were
ranked first and third for non-SNAP households with the same water
subcommodity that was ranked second for SNAP households ranked second
for non-SNAP households, as well. Interestingly, infant formula/starter
solution that was ranked first for SNAP households was ranked 14th for
non-SNAP households.

Exhibit 18: Top 25 SNAP Household Other Subcommodity Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other Subcommodity                        $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Infant Formula/Starter Solution              1       $54.2           9.60%        14       $45.3           1.70%
Still Water Drinking/Mineral Water           2       $48.8           8.64%         2      $187.7           7.03%
Unflavored Can Coffee                        3       $41.3           7.32%         1      $198.0           7.41%
Isotonic Drinks Single Serve                 4       $30.5           5.40%         4      $119.5           4.47%
Spring Water                                 5       $16.2           2.87%         5       $95.6           3.58%
Traditional Spices                           6       $14.1           2.49%         8       $61.2           2.29%
Bbq Sauce                                    7       $12.3           2.17%        16       $38.6           1.45%
Baby Food--Beginner                          8       $11.7           2.07%        21       $28.1           1.05%
Non-Carb Water Flavor--Drink/Mnr             9       $11.6           2.05%         7       $63.4           2.37%
Catsup                                      10       $11.5           2.03%        15       $41.5           1.55%
Sauce Mixes/Gravy Mixes Dry                 11       $11.5           2.03%        13       $46.7           1.75%
Baby Food Junior/All Brands                 12       $11.2           1.98%        22       $27.5           1.03%
Isotonic Drinks Multi-Pack                  13       $10.8           1.92%         9       $58.1           2.17%
Ice--Crushed/Cubed                          14        $9.3           1.65%        11       $49.9           1.87%
Unflavored Bag Coffee                       15        $8.5           1.50%         3      $137.3           5.14%
Infant Formula Specialty                    16        $8.4           1.49%        71        $9.1           0.34%
Infant Formula Starter Large                17        $8.3           1.46%        30       $22.8           0.85%
Steak & Worchester Sauce                    18        $8.2           1.44%        25       $26.7           1.00%
Unflavored Instant Coffee                   19        $7.6           1.34%        23       $27.3           1.02%
Non-Dairy Milk                              20        $7.1           1.25%         6       $67.7           2.53%
Unsweetened Envelope (Powder Drink          21        $7.0           1.25%        88        $6.2           0.23%
Mix)
Malted Milk/Syrup/Powders/Eggnog            22        $6.9           1.23%        28       $25.3           0.95%
Still Water Flavored Drink/Mineral          23        $6.3           1.11%        17       $38.1           1.43%
Water
Infant Formula Toddler                      24        $6.0           1.06%        55       $12.4           0.46%
Mexican Seasoning Mixes                     25        $5.9           1.05%        33       $20.6           0.77%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Sum of Listed Other Expenditures                  $374.8          66.40%              $1,454.7          54.44%
============================          ===========================
Total Other Expenditures Among                  $550.7            100%              $2,533.2            100%
Top 1,000 Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: The table lists the top 25 ``other'' subcommodities for SNAP households and the corresponding ranking of
these subcommodities for non-SNAP households. Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

All other subcommodities were divided into the following six
subcategories for additional analysis: condiments; infant formula/baby
food; seasoning/baking needs; supplements/meal replacements/energy
drinks; unsweetened beverages; and miscellaneous. Exhibit 19 shows that
SNAP households spent a notably larger share--about 15 percentage
points more than non-SNAP households--on infant formulas and baby foods
in these data. Non-SNAP households spent a larger share on unsweetened
beverages.
Exhibit 19: Other Expenditures by Subcategory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SNAP Households                    Non-SNAP Households

Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.
Chapter 5. Conclusion
IMPAQ analyzed point-of-sale transaction data from January 1, 2011
through December 31, 2011 from a leading grocery retailer to understand
what food items are typically purchased by SNAP households and how
these purchases compare to those made by non-SNAP households. The
majority of stores from which the data came would be classified as
grocery stores, supermarkets, and combination food and drug stores per
FNS Retailer Policy and Management Division food retailer
definitions.\39\ Expenditures on SNAP-eligible food items were examined
at four levels: by USDA Food Pattern categories, summary categories,
commodities, and subcommodities, as shown in Exhibit 20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Stores that opened or closed during 2011 were not included in
these analyses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall, the findings from this study indicate that SNAP households
and non-SNAP households purchased similar foods in the retail outlets
in these data. The findings hold true after assessing food expenditure
patterns of SNAP and non-SNAP households using multiple categorization
methods. Both groups of households spent about 40  of every dollar of
food expenditures on basic items such as meat, fruits, vegetables,
milk, eggs, and bread. Another 20  out of every dollar was spent on
sweetened beverages, desserts, salty snacks, candy and sugar. The
remaining 40  were spent on a variety of items such as cereal, prepared
foods, dairy products, rice, and beans.

Exhibit 20: SNAP and Non-SNAP Household Food Expenditure Patterns
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finding             SNAP Households        Non-SNAP  Households
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total annual            $6.7 billion             $32.3 billion
expenditures on SNAP-
eligible foods in
dataset
Percentage of all       12%                      88%
transactions by all
households
Percentage of total     17%                      83%
annual expenditures
by all households
Top 1,000 (of 1,792)    99%                      98%
subcommodity
expenditures as a
percentage of all
expenditures
Top 100 subcommodity    51%                      46%
expenditures as a
percentage of all
expenditures
Top 25 subcommodity     25%                      21%
expenditures as a
percentage of all
expenditures
Top 25 commodity (of    45%                      41%
238) expenditures as
a percentage of all
expenditures
Top 10 summary          Meat, Poultry and        Meat, Poultry and
categories (of 30) by   Seafood                  Seafood
expenditure
Sweetened Beverages      Vegetables
Vegetables               High-fat Dairy/Cheese
Frozen Prepared Foods    Fruits
Prepared Desserts        Sweetened Beverages
High-fat Dairy/Cheese    Prepared Desserts
Bread and Crackers       Bread and Crackers
Fruits                   Frozen Prepared Foods
Milk                     Milk
Salty Snacks             Salty Snacks
Top 10 commodities (of  Soft Drinks              Fluid Milk Products
238) by expenditure
Fluid Milk Products      Soft Drinks
Beef Grinds              Cheese
Bag Snacks               Baked Breads
Cheese                   Bag Snacks
Baked Breads             Beef Grinds
Cold Cereal              Cold Cereal
Chicken Fresh            Candy--Packaged
Frozen Handhelds and     Coffee and Creamers
Snacks
Lunchmeat                Ice Cream, Ice Milk,
and Sherbets
Top 10 subcommodities   Fluid Milk/White Only    Fluid Milk/White Only
(of 1,792) by
expenditure
Soft Drinks 12-18 pack   Soft Drinks 12-18 pack
Lean Beef                Shredded Cheese
Kids' Cereal             Chicken Breast--
Boneless
Shredded Cheese          Frozen Premium
Nutritional Meals
2-Liter Soft Drink       Pure Orange Juice--
Dairy Case
Potato Chips             Lean Beef
Primal Beef              Potato Chips
Lunchmeat--Deli fresh    Large Eggs
Infant Formula/Starter   Bananas
Solution
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.
* All SNAP totals represent purchases by SNAP households in the dataset,
not SNAP dollars.
In summary, after assessing food expenditure patterns of SNAP households
and non-SNAP households using multiple categorization methods, both
household types made similar food expenditures in 2011 from the retail
outlets included in these data.

Appendix A: Top Purchases by Expenditure for SNAP and Non-SNAP
Households

Exhibit A-1: All Commodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commodity                            $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soft drinks                                  1      $357.7           5.44%         2    $1,263.3           4.01%
Fluid milk products                          2      $253.7           3.85%         1    $1,270.3           4.03%
Beef: grinds                                 3      $201.0           3.05%         6      $621.1           1.97%
Bag snacks                                   4      $199.3           3.03%         5      $793.9           2.52%
Cheese                                       5      $186.4           2.83%         3      $948.9           3.01%
Baked breads                                 6      $163.7           2.49%         4      $874.8           2.78%
Cold cereal                                  7      $139.2           2.12%         7      $583.9           1.85%
Chicken fresh                                8      $121.4           1.85%        11      $477.8           1.52%
Frozen handhelds & snacks                    9      $101.5           1.54%        47      $214.6           0.68%
Lunchmeat                                   10       $99.4           1.51%        17      $386.1           1.23%
Candy--packaged                             11       $96.2           1.46%         8      $527.7           1.67%
Infant formula                              12       $95.7           1.45%        80      $124.8           0.40%
Frozen pizza                                13       $90.2           1.37%        23      $305.7           0.97%
Refrigerated juices/drinks                  14       $88.5           1.35%        14      $412.8           1.31%
Ice cream ice milk & sherbets               15       $86.0           1.31%        10      $481.8           1.53%
Coffee & creamers                           16       $82.3           1.25%         9      $519.4           1.65%
Cookies                                     17       $78.2           1.19%        16      $408.3           1.30%
Water--(sparkling & still)                  18       $77.0           1.17%        18      $379.2           1.20%
Shelf stable juice                          19       $73.1           1.11%        28      $282.2           0.90%
Eggs/muffins/potatoes                       20       $72.0           1.09%        20      $358.7           1.14%
Frozen ss premium meals                     21       $68.6           1.04%        12      $447.1           1.42%
Cakes                                       22       $68.2           1.04%        38      $240.9           0.76%
Bacon                                       23       $66.1           1.00%        27      $283.2           0.90%
Traditional Mexican foods                   24       $62.6           0.95%        25      $286.9           0.91%
Yogurt                                      25       $59.9           0.91%        13      $442.3           1.40%
Salad dressing & sandwich spreads           26       $59.7           0.91%        30      $280.9           0.89%
Dinner sausage                              27       $59.3           0.90%        46      $222.6           0.71%
Frozen prepared chicken                     28       $58.6           0.89%        74      $136.4           0.43%
Baked sweet goods                           29       $57.5           0.87%        62      $159.6           0.51%
Beef loins                                  30       $56.3           0.86%        31      $280.3           0.89%
Chicken frozen                              31       $54.8           0.83%        85      $123.0           0.39%
Deli meat: bulk                             32       $54.6           0.83%        15      $411.0           1.30%
Frozen multi serve                          33       $53.0           0.81%        54      $183.5           0.58%
Dinner mixes--dry                           34       $51.8           0.79%        72      $140.3           0.45%
Frozen breakfast foods                      35       $51.3           0.78%        55      $180.9           0.57%
Crackers & misc baked food                  36       $50.9           0.77%        21      $323.7           1.03%
Frozen novelties--water ice                 37       $50.7           0.77%        43      $229.7           0.73%
Margarines                                  38       $50.3           0.76%        24      $303.0           0.96%
Condiments & sauces                         39       $49.8           0.76%        52      $187.2           0.59%
Potatoes                                    40       $48.8           0.74%        34      $265.2           0.84%
Frozen vegetable & veg dish                 41       $48.2           0.73%        33      $266.9           0.85%
Hot dogs                                    42       $45.5           0.69%        63      $158.4           0.50%
Can vegetables--shelf stable                43       $45.3           0.69%        50      $191.7           0.61%
Shortening & oil                            44       $44.6           0.68%        57      $174.2           0.55%
Sugars & sweeteners                         45       $43.3           0.66%        60      $162.4           0.52%
Isotonic drinks                             46       $42.8           0.65%        53      $185.3           0.59%
Salad mix                                   47       $42.8           0.65%        22      $319.4           1.01%
Milk by-products                            48       $42.5           0.65%        32      $268.9           0.85%
Pork boneless loin/rib                      49       $41.5           0.63%        58      $168.0           0.53%
Cnv breakfast & wholesome snacks            50       $41.1           0.62%        45      $226.1           0.72%
Frozen ss economy meals                     51       $40.9           0.62%       109       $80.7           0.26%
Refrigerated dough products                 52       $40.5           0.62%        56      $176.6           0.56%
Beef: round                                 53       $40.4           0.61%        75      $134.2           0.43%
Dry bean veg & rice                         54       $39.9           0.61%        59      $166.1           0.53%
Convenient meals                            55       $38.7           0.59%       108       $81.0           0.26%
Tomatoes                                    56       $38.3           0.58%        35      $261.7           0.83%
Candy--checklane                            57       $37.9           0.58%        64      $154.0           0.49%
Berries                                     58       $37.4           0.57%        19      $373.5           1.19%
Grapes                                      59       $36.1           0.55%        39      $235.7           0.75%
Bananas                                     60       $36.1           0.55%        36      $261.4           0.83%
Peanut butter/jelly/jams & honey            61       $36.0           0.55%        42      $231.0           0.73%
Pork thin meats                             62       $35.0           0.53%        93      $106.8           0.34%
Citrus                                      63       $34.3           0.52%        37      $251.7           0.80%
Breakfast sausage                           64       $34.2           0.52%        79      $126.7           0.40%
Dry sauce/gravy/potatoes/stuffing           65       $34.0           0.52%        87      $119.2           0.38%
Salad & dips                                66       $33.9           0.52%        40      $235.3           0.75%
Apples                                      67       $33.7           0.51%        29      $281.7           0.89%
Meat--shelf stable                          68       $33.3           0.51%        91      $109.2           0.35%
Aseptic juice                               69       $33.1           0.50%       112       $78.9           0.25%
Sweet goods                                 70       $32.5           0.49%        66      $152.9           0.49%
Frozen potatoes                             71       $32.2           0.49%        95      $104.5           0.33%
Meat frozen                                 72       $31.9           0.48%       120       $69.9           0.22%
Baby foods                                  73       $30.6           0.46%       121       $67.8           0.22%
Vegetables salad                            74       $30.0           0.46%        44      $228.6           0.73%
Beef: thin meats                            75       $30.0           0.46%        78      $127.7           0.41%
Seafood--shrimp                             76       $29.8           0.45%        84      $123.1           0.39%
Canned soups                                77       $29.7           0.45%        65      $153.6           0.49%
Baking mixes                                78       $28.3           0.43%        69      $148.1           0.47%
Pasta & pizza sauce                         79       $27.6           0.42%        99       $96.7           0.31%
Dry noodles & pasta                         80       $27.5           0.42%        71      $141.5           0.45%
Can seafood--shelf stable                   81       $26.5           0.40%        77      $132.3           0.42%
Rts/micro soup/broth                        82       $26.0           0.40%        48      $200.8           0.64%
Canned pasta & mwv fd-shlf stbl             83       $25.9           0.39%       135       $56.7           0.18%
Smoked hams                                 84       $25.7           0.39%        92      $108.8           0.35%
Nuts                                        85       $25.6           0.39%        41      $234.2           0.74%
Value-added fruit                           86       $25.3           0.38%        70      $146.6           0.47%
Can beans                                   87       $24.0           0.36%        82      $123.3           0.39%
Dry/ramen bouillon                          88       $21.7           0.33%       133       $61.0           0.19%
Powder & crystal drink mix                  89       $21.6           0.33%       119       $75.2           0.24%
Rtd tea/new age juice                       90       $21.5           0.33%       103       $93.8           0.30%
Baking needs                                91       $21.3           0.32%        51      $188.9           0.60%
Can fruit/jar applesauce                    92       $20.9           0.32%        96      $104.0           0.33%
Spices & extracts                           93       $20.4           0.31%        86      $121.9           0.39%
Energy drinks                               94       $20.1           0.30%       102       $94.1           0.30%
Onions                                      95       $20.0           0.30%        81      $123.5           0.39%
Tropical fruit                              96       $19.8           0.30%        61      $160.1           0.51%
Bagels & cream cheese                       97       $19.8           0.30%        83      $123.2           0.39%
Frozen bread/dough                          98       $19.7           0.30%       114       $77.7           0.25%
Rolls                                       99       $18.9           0.29%        88      $113.9           0.36%
Hot cereal                                 100       $18.9           0.29%       100       $96.1           0.30%
Tomato products-shelf stable               101       $18.8           0.29%        90      $112.5           0.36%
Bread                                      102       $18.7           0.28%        49      $194.7           0.62%
Frozen desserts                            103       $18.7           0.28%       107       $82.9           0.26%
Chicken & poultry                          104       $18.7           0.28%       140       $50.3           0.16%
Refrigerated dairy case                    105       $18.6           0.28%        26      $284.7           0.90%
Dry cheese                                 106       $18.5           0.28%       111       $79.1           0.25%
Stone fruit                                107       $18.3           0.28%        73      $138.6           0.44%
Molasses/syrups/pancake mixes              108       $17.9           0.27%       110       $80.6           0.26%
Peppers                                    109       $17.7           0.27%        76      $133.4           0.42%
Fruit snacks                               110       $17.6           0.27%       152       $43.2           0.14%
Vegetables cooking bulk                    111       $17.3           0.26%        68      $150.6           0.48%
Sandwiches                                 112       $16.9           0.26%       124       $67.7           0.21%
Service case meat                          113       $16.8           0.26%        97      $101.4           0.32%
Melons                                     114       $16.7           0.25%        89      $113.2           0.36%
Popcorn                                    115       $15.3           0.23%       117       $76.6           0.24%
Warehouse snacks                           116       $14.7           0.22%       125       $67.1           0.21%
Dry mix desserts                           117       $14.7           0.22%       128       $65.0           0.21%
Single serve fruit/applesauce              118       $14.6           0.22%       127       $65.4           0.21%
Frozen seafood                             119       $13.8           0.21%       155       $41.0           0.13%
Flour & meals                              120       $13.8           0.21%       126       $65.7           0.21%
Pickle/relish/pckld veg & olives           121       $13.5           0.21%       106       $83.1           0.26%
Turkey grinds                              122       $13.1           0.20%       113       $78.0           0.25%
Bulk service case cheese                   123       $12.5           0.19%       104       $87.1           0.28%
Pies                                       124       $12.3           0.19%       123       $67.7           0.21%
Water                                      125       $12.3           0.19%       122       $67.8           0.22%
Sushi                                      126       $11.8           0.18%        94      $104.6           0.33%
Teas                                       127       $11.4           0.17%       116       $76.9           0.24%
Authentic Hispanic foods & products        128       $11.0           0.17%       165       $31.7           0.10%
Cookie/cracker multi-pks                   129       $10.9           0.16%       136       $52.7           0.17%
Carrots                                    130       $10.6           0.16%        98       $97.3           0.31%
Pork shoulder                              131       $10.5           0.16%       164       $32.1           0.10%
Cocoa mixes                                132       $10.4           0.16%       153       $43.0           0.14%
Juices super premium                       133       $10.3           0.16%       130       $63.2           0.20%
Snack meat                                 134       $10.3           0.16%       147       $47.9           0.15%
Seafood--catfish                           135        $9.8           0.15%       191       $17.6           0.06%
Turkey frozen                              136        $9.7           0.15%       138       $51.8           0.16%
Specialty cheese pre pack                  137        $9.6           0.15%        67      $152.4           0.48%
Smoked pork                                138        $9.4           0.14%       156       $39.2           0.12%
Frozen ice                                 139        $9.3           0.14%       142       $49.9           0.16%
Seafood--crab                              140        $9.2           0.14%       182       $24.5           0.08%
Mushrooms                                  141        $9.1           0.14%       105       $85.7           0.27%
Value-added vegetables                     142        $9.0           0.14%       115       $77.0           0.24%
Seafood--value-added seafood               143        $8.9           0.14%       178       $25.6           0.08%
Sweet goods & snacks                       144        $8.6           0.13%       146       $48.3           0.15%
Meat snacks                                145        $8.5           0.13%       170       $29.3           0.09%
Single serve/vending--salty snacks         146        $8.4           0.13%       197       $15.8           0.05%
Traditional Asian foods                    147        $8.3           0.13%       134       $59.8           0.19%
Frozen juice and smoothies                 148        $7.7           0.12%       150       $44.9           0.14%
Broccoli/cauliflower                       149        $7.4           0.11%       118       $76.5           0.24%
Beef: rib                                  150        $7.3           0.11%       151       $43.3           0.14%
Refrigerated desserts                      151        $7.0           0.11%       143       $49.5           0.16%
Croutons/bread stick & salad top           152        $6.9           0.11%       171       $29.1           0.09%
Dietary aid product/med liq nutr           153        $6.8           0.10%       132       $62.9           0.20%
Dressings/dips                             154        $6.6           0.10%       139       $51.7           0.16%
Party tray                                 155        $6.6           0.10%       154       $42.6           0.14%
Corn                                       156        $6.5           0.10%       149       $45.3           0.14%
Canned & dry milk                          157        $6.1           0.09%       163       $33.1           0.10%
Fitness & diet                             158        $5.8           0.09%       101       $95.8           0.30%
Juice                                      159        $5.8           0.09%       148       $46.2           0.15%
Single serve sweet goods                   160        $5.7           0.09%       196       $16.2           0.05%
Refrigerated hispanic grocery              161        $5.7           0.09%       177       $26.5           0.08%
Enhancements (Pickles/Spreads)             162        $5.6           0.08%       174       $27.3           0.09%
Convenience/snacking                       163        $5.5           0.08%       173       $28.5           0.09%
Dried fruit                                164        $5.4           0.08%       137       $52.6           0.17%
Seafood--salmon-farm raised                165        $5.0           0.08%       144       $48.8           0.15%
Frozen whipped topping                     166        $5.0           0.08%       167       $30.9           0.10%
Deli meat: presliced                       167        $4.9           0.07%       129       $63.8           0.20%
Herbs/garlic                               168        $4.8           0.07%       141       $50.0           0.16%
Seafood--party trays                       169        $4.8           0.07%       181       $24.8           0.08%
Salad bar                                  170        $4.5           0.07%       188       $18.2           0.06%
Seafood--salmon--wild caught               171        $4.5           0.07%       158       $36.7           0.12%
Frozen fruits                              172        $4.3           0.07%       145       $48.6           0.15%
Single serve/vending--cookie/cracker       173        $4.1           0.06%       211        $9.1           0.03%
Chicken specialty/natural                  174        $3.8           0.06%       166       $31.5           0.10%
Cereals                                    175        $3.8           0.06%       131       $63.0           0.20%
Pork offal                                 176        $3.5           0.05%       232        $4.2           0.01%
Pears                                      177        $3.5           0.05%       162       $33.6           0.11%
Frozen meatless                            178        $3.3           0.05%       169       $30.0           0.10%
Seafood--tilapia                           179        $3.2           0.05%       194       $16.4           0.05%
Non-dairy/dairy aseptic                    180        $3.1           0.05%       168       $30.5           0.10%
Refrigerated italian                       181        $2.9           0.04%       159       $36.6           0.12%
Rice cakes                                 182        $2.8           0.04%       184       $22.4           0.07%
Vinegar & cooking wines                    183        $2.8           0.04%       176       $27.2           0.09%
Seafood--salad/dip/sce/cond                184        $2.8           0.04%       223        $6.2           0.02%
Refrigerated vegetarian                    185        $2.8           0.04%       180       $24.8           0.08%
Cake decor                                 186        $2.7           0.04%       199       $15.4           0.05%
Frozen pasta                               187        $2.6           0.04%       193       $16.9           0.05%
Syrups toppings & cones                    188        $2.6           0.04%       202       $14.1           0.04%
Snacks                                     189        $2.6           0.04%       157       $37.6           0.12%
Trail mix & snacks                         190        $2.5           0.04%       189       $18.1           0.06%
Snack                                      191        $2.5           0.04%       160       $35.6           0.11%
Prepared/pdgd foods                        192        $2.3           0.04%       161       $34.1           0.11%
Turkey fresh                               193        $2.3           0.04%       192       $17.0           0.05%
Condiments                                 194        $2.3           0.03%       175       $27.2           0.09%
Seafood--fin fish other                    195        $2.2           0.03%       225        $5.8           0.02%
Seafood--lobster                           196        $2.2           0.03%       204       $13.0           0.04%
Pre-slice service case cheese              197        $2.1           0.03%       172       $28.6           0.09%
Spices/jarred garlic                       198        $2.1           0.03%       205       $12.4           0.04%
Vegetables cooking packaged                199        $2.0           0.03%       187       $18.3           0.06%
Mixers                                     200        $1.9           0.03%       195       $16.4           0.05%
Poultry other                              201        $1.8           0.03%       219        $6.7           0.02%
Pork bone in loin/rib                      202        $1.8           0.03%       214        $7.6           0.02%
Turkey offal                               203        $1.6           0.02%       235        $2.0           0.01%
Organics fruit & vegetables                204        $1.6           0.02%       185       $22.2           0.07%
Frozen ethnic                              205        $1.6           0.02%       218        $6.7           0.02%
Lamb                                       206        $1.6           0.02%       207       $11.4           0.04%
Seasonal                                   207        $1.5           0.02%       209       $10.3           0.03%
Chicken offal                              208        $1.5           0.02%       230        $4.3           0.01%
Turkey smoked                              209        $1.5           0.02%       234        $2.5           0.01%
Seafood--cod                               210        $1.5           0.02%       206       $12.0           0.04%
Frozen meat alternatives                   211        $1.5           0.02%       203       $13.6           0.04%
Soup                                       212        $1.4           0.02%       179       $25.4           0.08%
Authentic central american fds             213        $1.4           0.02%       227        $5.5           0.02%
Cereal bars                                214        $1.4           0.02%       183       $23.6           0.07%
Frozen entrees                             215        $1.4           0.02%       186       $21.5           0.07%
Authentic asian foods                      216        $1.4           0.02%       208       $11.3           0.04%
Bulk food                                  217        $1.3           0.02%       190       $18.0           0.06%
Baking                                     218        $1.2           0.02%       201       $14.6           0.05%
Random weight meat products                219        $1.1           0.02%       233        $4.0           0.01%
Processed (dry mixes/squeezed fruit)       220        $1.0           0.02%       222        $6.2           0.02%
Mediterranean bar                          221        $1.0           0.02%       198       $15.5           0.05%
Chicken grinds                             222        $0.9           0.01%       217        $6.9           0.02%
Chilled ready meals                        223        $0.9           0.01%       231        $4.2           0.01%
Dry tea/coffee/coco mixes                  224        $0.9           0.01%       210        $9.2           0.03%
Crackers                                   225        $0.8           0.01%       200       $14.6           0.05%
Seafood--trout                             226        $0.7           0.01%       224        $6.0           0.02%
Beverages                                  227        $0.7           0.01%       215        $7.6           0.02%
Seafood--scallops                          228        $0.6           0.01%       221        $6.4           0.02%
Baby food                                  229        $0.6           0.01%       226        $5.5           0.02%
Deli specialties (retail pk)               230        $0.6           0.01%       228        $5.3           0.02%
Buffalo                                    231        $0.5           0.01%       213        $8.3           0.03%
Seafood--smoked seafood                    232        $0.5           0.01%       212        $8.4           0.03%
Pork grinds                                233        $0.5           0.01%       229        $4.3           0.01%
Authentic italian foods                    234        $0.5           0.01%       216        $7.4           0.02%
Bakery party trays                         235        $0.4           0.01%       236        $1.9           0.01%
Candy                                      236        $0.4           0.01%       220        $6.5           0.02%
Authentic caribbean foods                  237        $0.4           0.01%       238        $1.1           0.00%
Seafood--shellfish other                   238        $0.4           0.01%       237        $1.3           0.00%
----------------------------          ---------------------------
Totals                                          $6,580.5            100%             $31,513.8            100%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

Exhibit A-2: Top 1,000 Subcommodities by Expenditures of SNAP Households
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures        Non-SNAP Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commodity        Subcommodity                  $ in          % of                    $ in          % of
Rank     Millions    Expenditures     Rank     Millions    Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk        Milk/White Only            1      $191.1           2.90%         1      $853.8           2.71%
Products
Soft Drinks       Soft Drinks 12/18          2      $164.6           2.50%         2      $601.2           1.91%
& 15pk Can Car
Beef: Grinds      Lean [Beef]                3      $112.4           1.71%         7      $257.9           0.82%
Cold Cereal       Kids Cereal                4       $78.1           1.19%        20      $186.4           0.59%
Cheese            Shredded Cheese            5       $74.7           1.14%         3      $342.0           1.09%
Soft Drinks       Sft Drnk 2 Liter           6       $70.9           1.08%        12      $230.1           0.73%
Btl Carb Incl
Bag Snacks        Potato Chips               7       $64.4           0.98%         8      $253.2           0.80%
Beef: Grinds      Primal [Beef]              8       $62.4           0.95%        14      $219.8           0.70%
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Deli            9       $55.8           0.85%        11      $242.6           0.77%
Fresh
Infant Formula    Infant Formula            10       $54.2           0.82%       190       $45.3           0.14%
Starter/Solution
Eggs/Muffins/     Eggs--Large               11       $52.1           0.79%         9      $251.6           0.80%
Potatoes
Chicken Fresh     Chicken Breast            12       $49.6           0.75%         4      $292.9           0.93%
Boneless
Water--(Sparklin  Still Water               13       $48.8           0.74%        19      $187.7           0.60%
g & Still)        Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Baked Breads      Mainstream White          14       $48.0           0.73%        39      $136.8           0.43%
Bread
Bag Snacks        Tortilla/Nacho            15       $47.4           0.72%        17      $209.0           0.66%
Chips
Frozen Handhelds  Snacks/Appetizers         16       $44.6           0.68%        65      $100.5           0.32%
& Snacks
Cheese            American Single           17       $44.1           0.67%        41      $136.6           0.43%
Cheese
Frzn Ss Premium   Fz Ss Prem                18       $43.8           0.67%        24      $175.4           0.56%
Meals             Traditional Meals
Refrgratd Juices/ Dairy Case 100%           19       $43.5           0.66%         6      $269.0           0.85%
Drinks            Pure Juice--O
Baked Sweet       Snack Cake--Multi         20       $41.6           0.63%        63      $101.7           0.32%
Goods             Pack
Pork Boneless     Enhanced [Pork            21       $41.5           0.63%        27      $168.0           0.53%
Loin/Rib          Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Coffee &          Unflavored Can            22       $41.3           0.63%        18      $198.0           0.63%
Creamers          Coffee
Frzn Ss Economy   Fz Ss Economy             23       $40.9           0.62%        81       $80.7           0.26%
Meals             Meals All
Bacon             Bacon--Trad 16oz          24       $40.7           0.62%        29      $157.6           0.50%
Or Less
Soft Drinks       Soft Drinks 20pk &        25       $39.7           0.60%        60      $106.4           0.34%
24pk Can Carb
Frozen Pizza      Pizza/Premium             26       $39.7           0.60%        32      $153.3           0.49%
Baked Breads      Mainstream Variety        27       $38.4           0.58%        26      $173.2           0.55%
Breads
Sugars &          Sugar                     28       $36.9           0.56%        55      $112.7           0.36%
Sweeteners
Cold Cereal       All Family Cereal         29       $36.2           0.55%        16      $214.9           0.68%
Frozen Handhelds  Sandwiches &              30       $35.9           0.54%        91       $73.6           0.23%
& Snacks          Handhelds
Potatoes          Potatoes Russet           31       $35.8           0.54%        30      $154.5           0.49%
(Bulk & Bag)
Cheese            Natural Cheese            32       $35.3           0.54%        15      $216.1           0.69%
Chunks
Pork Thin Meats   Ribs [Pork]               33       $35.0           0.53%        59      $106.8           0.34%
Convenient Meals  Convenient Meals--        34       $34.2           0.52%        96       $69.7           0.22%
Kids Meal C
Bananas           Bananas                   35       $34.2           0.52%        10      $242.7           0.77%
Soft Drinks       Sft Drnk Mlt-Pk           36       $34.0           0.52%        25      $173.6           0.55%
Btl Carb (Excp)
Ice Cream Ice     Premium [Ice Cream        37       $31.2           0.47%        13      $226.0           0.72%
Milk & Sherbets   & Sherbert]
Isotonic Drinks   Isotonic Drinks           38       $30.5           0.46%        47      $119.5           0.38%
Single Serve
Chicken Frozen    Frzn Chicken--Wht         39       $30.0           0.46%        66       $99.8           0.32%
Meat
Canned Soups      Condensed Soup            40       $29.7           0.45%        31      $153.6           0.49%
Salad Dresing &   Pourable Salad            41       $29.0           0.44%        37      $139.4           0.44%
Sandwich          Dressings
Spreads
Beef: Loins       Choice Beef               42       $28.4           0.43%        40      $136.6           0.43%
Beef: Loins       Select Beef               43       $27.9           0.42%        36      $143.7           0.46%
Soft Drinks       Sft Drnk Sngl Srv         44       $27.8           0.42%        94       $71.4           0.23%
Btl Carb (Ex)
Frzn Multi Serve  Fz Family Style           45       $27.6           0.42%        77       $83.5           0.26%
Entrees
Salad Dresing &   Mayonnaise &              46       $27.3           0.41%        48      $119.1           0.38%
Sandwich          Whipped Dressing
Spreads
Frozen Vegetable  Fz Bag Vegetables--       47       $25.7           0.39%        42      $131.9           0.42%
& Veg Dish        Plain
Ice Cream Ice     Traditional [Ice          48       $25.6           0.39%        49      $118.7           0.38%
Milk & Sherbets   Cream & Sherbert]
Hot Dogs          Hot Dogs--Base            49       $25.1           0.38%       138       $56.8           0.18%
Meat
Cold Cereal       Adult Cereal              50       $24.9           0.38%        21      $182.6           0.58%
Frzn Ss Premium   Fz Ss Prem                51       $24.7           0.38%         5      $271.6           0.86%
Meals             Nutritional Meals
Dinner Mixes-Dry  Macaroni & Cheese         52       $24.3           0.37%       125       $59.7           0.19%
Dnrs
Aseptic Juice     Aseptic Pack Juice        53       $24.2           0.37%       134       $57.1           0.18%
And Drinks
Fluid Milk        Refrigerated              54       $24.1           0.37%        34      $147.2           0.47%
Products          Coffee Creamers
Beef: Round       Choice Beef               55       $24.0           0.37%        92       $72.5           0.23%
Traditional       Mexican Soft              56       $23.7           0.36%        54      $113.1           0.36%
Mexican Foods     Tortillas And
Wraps
Berries           Strawberries              57       $23.5           0.36%        22      $178.4           0.57%
Margarines        Margarine: Tubs           58       $23.4           0.36%        64      $100.9           0.32%
And Bowls
Pasta & Pizza     Mainstream [Pasta         59       $23.0           0.35%        80       $81.0           0.26%
Sauce             & Pizza Sauce]
Chicken Fresh     Chicken Wings             60       $22.2           0.34%       300       $28.6           0.09%
Canned Pasta &    Can Pasta                 61       $22.2           0.34%       179       $47.7           0.15%
Mwv Fd-Shlf
Stbl
Chicken Frozen    Frzn Chicken--            62       $22.2           0.34%       452       $17.4           0.06%
Wings
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Bologna/       63       $21.8           0.33%       121       $60.9           0.19%
Sausage
Bag Snacks        Mult Pk Bag Snacks        64       $21.6           0.33%       199       $43.4           0.14%
Candy--Packaged   Candy Bags-               65       $21.5           0.33%        33      $147.5           0.47%
Chocolate
Sweet Goods       Sw Gds: Donuts            66       $21.3           0.32%        78       $82.3           0.26%
Can Seafood--     Tuna                      67       $21.1           0.32%        57      $109.9           0.35%
Shelf Stable
Shortening & Oil  Vegetable Oil             68       $20.5           0.31%       246       $35.4           0.11%
Frozen Potatoes   Frzn French Fries         69       $20.5           0.31%       163       $50.3           0.16%
Peanut Butter/    Peanut Butter             70       $20.4           0.31%        43      $127.8           0.41%
Jelly/Jams &
Honey
Frozen Pizza      Pizza/Economy             71       $19.8           0.30%       192       $45.1           0.14%
Margarines        Butter                    72       $19.6           0.30%        23      $175.6           0.56%
Deli Meat: Bulk   Meat: Turkey Bulk         73       $19.3           0.29%        28      $159.6           0.51%
Frozen Breakfast  Frzn Breakfast            74       $19.1           0.29%       142       $55.7           0.18%
Foods             Sandwiches
Meat Frozen       Frzn Meat--Beef           75       $19.0           0.29%       185       $46.3           0.15%
Frzn Multi Serve  Fz Skillet Meals          76       $18.8           0.29%        83       $79.3           0.25%
Frzn Prepared     Value Forms/18oz          77       $18.6           0.28%       209       $42.6           0.14%
Chicken           And Larger
[Chicken]
Cakes             Cakes: Birthday/          78       $18.6           0.28%       164       $50.3           0.16%
Celebration
Cookies           Sandwich Cookies          79       $18.0           0.27%        93       $71.8           0.23%
Frozen Pizza      Pizza/Traditional         80       $17.9           0.27%       111       $64.1           0.20%
Fruit Snacks      Fruit Snacks              81       $17.6           0.27%       202       $43.2           0.14%
Rts/Micro Soup/   Soup: Chunky/             82       $17.6           0.27%        46      $119.9           0.38%
Broth Rts         Homestyle
Milk By-Products  Sour Creams               83       $17.5           0.27%        70       $95.2           0.30%
Frozen Breakfast  Waffles/Pancakes/         84       $17.3           0.26%        90       $77.4           0.25%
Foods             French Toast
Chicken Fresh     Chicken Drums             85       $17.3           0.26%       270       $31.5           0.10%
Bagels & Cream    Cream Cheese              86       $17.2           0.26%        51      $115.5           0.37%
Cheese
Beef: Grinds      Angus [Beef]              87       $17.1           0.26%        61      $103.8           0.33%
Bag Snacks        Bagged Cheese             88       $17.1           0.26%       157       $52.0           0.16%
Snacks
Bag Snacks        Salsa & Dips              89       $17.1           0.26%       135       $57.0           0.18%
Sandwiches        Sandwiches--(Cold)        90       $16.9           0.26%       106       $67.7           0.21%
Dry/Ramen         Ramen Noodles/            91       $16.7           0.25%       304       $28.1           0.09%
Bouillon          Ramen Cups
Crackers & Misc   Cheese Crackers           92       $16.5           0.25%        72       $90.2           0.29%
Baked Food
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Links        93       $16.4           0.25%       233       $37.6           0.12%
Pork Ckd
Candy--Checklane  Candy Bars                94       $16.3           0.25%       146       $54.9           0.17%
(Singles)
Baked Breads      Hamburger Buns            95       $16.2           0.25%        95       $70.2           0.22%
Baked Breads      Hot Dog Buns              96       $16.2           0.25%       117       $62.2           0.20%
Water--(Sparklin  Spring Water              97       $16.2           0.25%        69       $95.6           0.30%
g & Still)
Refrgratd Juices/ Dairy Case Juice          98       $16.0           0.24%       177       $48.0           0.15%
Drinks            Drnk Under 10 oz
Fluid Milk        Flavored Milk             99       $16.0           0.24%       128       $59.4           0.19%
Products
Baked Sweet       Sweet Goods--Full        100       $15.8           0.24%       133       $57.9           0.18%
Goods             Size
Grapes            Grapes Red               101       $15.8           0.24%        45      $121.7           0.39%
Candy--Packaged   Candy Bars (Multi        102       $15.6           0.24%        97       $69.6           0.22%
Pack)
Grapes            Grapes White             103       $15.5           0.23%        76       $84.9           0.27%
Cookies           Tray Pack/Choc           104       $15.3           0.23%       153       $53.9           0.17%
Chip Cookies
Deli Meat: Bulk   Meat: Ham Bulk           105       $15.3           0.23%        50      $115.9           0.37%
Cheese            String Cheese            106       $15.1           0.23%        67       $99.0           0.31%
Breakfast         Bkfst Sausage--          107       $15.1           0.23%       119       $61.4           0.19%
Sausage           Fresh Rolls
Seafood--Shrimp   Shrimp--Raw              108       $15.0           0.23%        99       $69.0           0.22%
Seafood--Shrimp   Shrimp--Cooked           109       $14.8           0.22%       152       $54.0           0.17%
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             110       $14.7           0.22%       191       $45.2           0.14%
Products          Biscuits
Crackers & Misc   Butter Spray             111       $14.6           0.22%       101       $68.7           0.22%
Baked Food        Cracker
Frozen            Sticks/Enrobed           112       $14.2           0.22%       126       $59.7           0.19%
Novelties--Wate   [Frozen
r Ice             Novelties]
Spices &          Traditional Spices       113       $14.1           0.21%       120       $61.2           0.19%
Extracts
Frozen            Water Ice [Frozen        114       $14.0           0.21%       160       $50.6           0.16%
Novelties--Wate   Novelties]
r Ice
Yogurt            Yogurt/Kids              115       $14.0           0.21%       212       $42.4           0.13%
Cnv Breakfast &   Toaster Pastries         116       $14.0           0.21%       180       $47.6           0.15%
Wholesome Snks
Dry Bean Veg &    Rice Side Dish           117       $14.0           0.21%       184       $46.7           0.15%
Rice              Mixes Dry
Ice Cream Ice     Pails [Ice Cream &       118       $13.9           0.21%       250       $35.1           0.11%
Milk & Sherbets   Sherbert]
Milk By-Products  Cottage Cheese           119       $13.9           0.21%        58      $108.8           0.35%
Rtd Tea/New Age   Tea Sweetened            120       $13.9           0.21%       102       $68.7           0.22%
Juice
Can Beans         Prepared Beans--         121       $13.4           0.20%       145       $55.3           0.18%
Baked W/Pork
Cheese            Natural Cheese           122       $13.4           0.20%        53      $113.2           0.36%
Slices
Tropical Fruit    Avocado                  123       $13.4           0.20%        56      $112.6           0.36%
Meat--Shelf       Chili: Canned            124       $13.3           0.20%       206       $42.8           0.14%
Stable
Shelf Stable      Apple Juice &            125       $13.3           0.20%       187       $45.8           0.15%
Juice             Cider (Over 50%)
Value-Added       Instore Cut Fruit        126       $13.2           0.20%        74       $85.8           0.27%
Fruit
Candy--Checklane  Chewing Gum              127       $13.2           0.20%       103       $68.3           0.22%
Salad Mix         Blends [Salad Mix]       128       $13.1           0.20%        44      $124.0           0.39%
Popcorn           Popcorn--Microwave       129       $13.1           0.20%       114       $63.4           0.20%
Turkey Grinds     Ground Turkey            130       $13.1           0.20%        87       $78.0           0.25%
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Links       131       $13.0           0.20%       132       $58.0           0.18%
Fresh
Dinner Mixes-Dry  Skillet Dinners          132       $13.0           0.20%       332       $25.8           0.08%
Dry Noodles &     Long Cut Pasta           133       $13.0           0.20%       122       $60.4           0.19%
Pasta
Chicken Fresh     Whole Chicken            134       $12.9           0.20%       136       $56.9           0.18%
(Roasters/Fryer)
Frozen Pizza      Pizza/Single Serve/      135       $12.8           0.19%       203       $43.2           0.14%
Microwave
Can Vegetables--  Green Beans: Fs/         136       $12.8           0.19%       155       $53.1           0.17%
Shelf Stable      Whl/Cut
Cnv Breakfast &   Granola Bars             137       $12.8           0.19%        73       $88.9           0.28%
Wholesome Snks
Candy--Packaged   Candy Bags-Non           138       $12.6           0.19%       147       $54.9           0.17%
Chocolate
Citrus            Oranges Navels All       139       $12.6           0.19%        84       $79.3           0.25%
Baked Breads      Premium Bread            140       $12.3           0.19%        35      $144.7           0.46%
Dry Sce/Gravy/    Potatoes: Dry            141       $12.3           0.19%       262       $32.3           0.10%
Potatoes/
Stuffng
Condiments &      Bbq Sauce                142       $12.3           0.19%       226       $38.6           0.12%
Sauces
Chicken Fresh     Chicken Thighs           143       $12.2           0.19%       165       $50.0           0.16%
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Pork        144       $12.1           0.18%       227       $38.2           0.12%
Rope Ckd
Can Vegetables--  Corn                     145       $12.1           0.18%       197       $44.0           0.14%
Shelf Stable
Bacon             Bacon--Trad              146       $12.0           0.18%       193       $44.6           0.14%
Greater Than 16oz
Ice Cream Ice     Super Premium            147       $11.8           0.18%        71       $91.1           0.29%
Milk & Sherbets   Pints [Ice Cream
& Sherbert]
Baby Foods        Baby Food--              148       $11.7           0.18%       303       $28.1           0.09%
Beginner
Molasses/Syrups/  Molasses & Syrups        149       $11.7           0.18%       130       $58.7           0.19%
Pancake Mixes
Water             Non-Carb Water           150       $11.6           0.18%       115       $63.4           0.20%
Flvr--Drnk/Mnr
Vegetables Salad  Head Lettuce             151       $11.6           0.18%       143       $55.5           0.18%
Condiments &      Catsup                   152       $11.5           0.17%       216       $41.5           0.13%
Sauces
Dry Sce/Gravy/    Sauce Mixes/Gravy        153       $11.5           0.17%       183       $46.7           0.15%
Potatoes/         Mixes Dry
Stuffng
Beef: Thin Meats  Soup/Stew                154       $11.2           0.17%       195       $44.1           0.14%
Baby Foods        Baby Food Junior/        155       $11.2           0.17%       311       $27.5           0.09%
All Brands
Frzn Prepared     Whole Muscle             156       $11.1           0.17%       285       $29.9           0.09%
Chicken           Breaded/18oz
Cakes             Cakes: Cupcakes          157       $11.1           0.17%       247       $35.3           0.11%
Refrgratd Juices/ Dairy Case Citrus        158       $11.0           0.17%       254       $34.4           0.11%
Drinks            Pnch/Oj Subs
Yogurt            Yogurt/Ss Regular        159       $11.0           0.17%       100       $69.0           0.22%
Dry Cheese        Loaf Cheese              160       $10.9           0.17%       229       $38.1           0.12%
Frozen Handhelds  Corn Dogs                161       $10.9           0.17%       401       $20.6           0.07%
& Snacks
Cnv Breakfast &   Cereal Bars              162       $10.9           0.17%        86       $78.4           0.25%
Wholesome Snks
Isotonic Drinks   Isotonic Drinks          163       $10.8           0.16%       131       $58.1           0.18%
Multi-Pack
Cookies           Cookies: Regular         164       $10.8           0.16%       127       $59.6           0.19%
Shelf Stable      Fruit Drinks:            165       $10.6           0.16%       617       $10.9           0.03%
Juice             Canned & Glass
Single Serve      Fruit Cup                166       $10.6           0.16%       207       $42.7           0.14%
Fruit/
Applesauce
Can Beans         Variety Beans--          167       $10.5           0.16%       104       $68.0           0.22%
Kidney/Pinto
Frozen Vegetable  Frzn Steamable           168       $10.5           0.16%        79       $81.4           0.26%
& Veg Dish        Vegetables
Coffee &          Non Dairy Creamer        169       $10.5           0.16%       244       $35.4           0.11%
Creamers
Beef: Thin Meats  Cubed Meats [Beef]       170       $10.5           0.16%       286       $29.8           0.09%
Hot Dogs          Hot Dogs--Base           171       $10.3           0.16%       171       $49.4           0.16%
Beef
Yogurt            Yogurt/Ss Light          172       $10.2           0.16%        62      $103.1           0.33%
Traditional       Mexican Sauces And       173       $10.2           0.16%       116       $62.3           0.20%
Mexican Foods     Picante Sauce
Frozen Handhelds  Burritos                 174       $10.2           0.15%       406       $20.0           0.06%
& Snacks
Eggs/Muffins/     Eggs--Medium             175       $10.1           0.15%       394       $21.0           0.07%
Potatoes
Dry Noodles &     Short Cut Pasta          176        $9.9           0.15%       140       $56.2           0.18%
Pasta
Dinner Mixes-Dry  Microwave Dinners        177        $9.8           0.15%       220       $39.9           0.13%
Cakes             Cakes: Layers            178        $9.8           0.15%       228       $38.2           0.12%
Pork Shoulder     Butts [Pork              179        $9.7           0.15%       292       $29.2           0.09%
Shoulder]
Frzn Prepared     Boneless Snack/          180        $9.6           0.15%       384       $21.5           0.07%
Chicken           18oz And Larger
Rolls             Rolls: Dinner            181        $9.5           0.14%       161       $50.5           0.16%
Chicken &         Chix: Value-Added        182        $9.5           0.14%       323       $26.7           0.08%
Poultry           (Cold)
Tomato Products-  Tomatoes Diced           183        $9.5           0.14%       123       $59.9           0.19%
Shelf Stable
Frozen Ice        Ice--Crushed/Cubed       184        $9.3           0.14%       166       $49.9           0.16%
Beef: Round       Angus [Beef]             185        $9.3           0.14%       271       $31.4           0.10%
Shelf Stable      Blended Juice &          186        $9.3           0.14%       287       $29.6           0.09%
Juice             Combinations
Sushi             Sushi--In Store          187        $9.2           0.14%        75       $85.4           0.27%
Prepared
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Hothouse        188        $9.2           0.14%        88       $77.7           0.25%
On The Vine
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal                 189        $9.2           0.14%       182       $46.9           0.15%
Miscellaneous
[Candy]
Frozen Bread/     Frzn Garlic Toast        190        $9.1           0.14%       307       $27.8           0.09%
Dough
Warehouse Snacks  Canister Snacks          191        $9.1           0.14%       241       $36.4           0.12%
Beef: Grinds      Patties [Beef]           192        $9.1           0.14%       221       $39.7           0.13%
Bag Snacks        Corn Chips               193        $9.1           0.14%       188       $45.6           0.14%
Hot Cereal        Instant Oatmeal          194        $8.9           0.14%       218       $41.1           0.13%
Breakfast         Bkfst Sausage--          195        $8.9           0.14%       325       $26.3           0.08%
Sausage           Fresh Links
Crackers & Misc   Snack Crackers           196        $8.9           0.14%        68       $98.6           0.31%
Baked Food
Citrus            Clementines              197        $8.8           0.13%        85       $78.6           0.25%
Frzn Prepared     Bone-In Wings            198        $8.8           0.13%       586       $12.0           0.04%
Chicken
Onions            Onions Yellow            199        $8.7           0.13%       225       $39.3           0.12%
(Bulk & Bag)
Dry Mix Desserts  Pudding & Gelatin        200        $8.7           0.13%       310       $27.6           0.09%
Cups/Cans
Coffee &          Unflavored Bag           201        $8.5           0.13%        38      $137.3           0.44%
Creamers          Coffee
Refrgratd Juices/ Dairy Case Tea           202        $8.4           0.13%       364       $23.1           0.07%
Drinks            With Sugar
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           203        $8.4           0.13%       687        $9.1           0.03%
Specialty
Ss/Vending--      Salty Snacks             204        $8.4           0.13%       480       $15.8           0.05%
Salty Snacks      Vending
Shortening & Oil  Canola Oils              205        $8.3           0.13%       291       $29.3           0.09%
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           206        $8.3           0.13%       368       $22.8           0.07%
Starter Large
Value-Added       Melons Instore Cut       207        $8.2           0.13%       205       $42.8           0.14%
Fruit
Vegetables Salad  Cucumbers                208        $8.2           0.13%       129       $58.9           0.19%
Smoked Hams       Hams--Half/Port          209        $8.2           0.12%       282       $30.0           0.10%
Bone-In
Crackers & Misc   Saltine/Oyster           210        $8.2           0.12%       204       $43.1           0.14%
Baked Food
Condiments &      Steak & Worchester       211        $8.2           0.12%       321       $26.7           0.08%
Sauces            Sauce
Cookie/Cracker    Multi-Pack               212        $8.0           0.12%       217       $41.3           0.13%
Multi-Pks         Crackers
Frozen            Cones [Frozen            213        $7.9           0.12%       273       $31.2           0.10%
Novelties--Wate   Novelties]
r Ice
Deli Meat: Bulk   Meat: Beef Bulk          214        $7.9           0.12%       154       $53.4           0.17%
Melons            Watermelon               215        $7.9           0.12%       198       $43.9           0.14%
Seedless Whole
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal Candy           216        $7.9           0.12%       148       $54.8           0.17%
Bags--Chocolate
Salad & Dips      Vegetable Salads--       217        $7.8           0.12%       238       $36.6           0.12%
Prepack
Baked Breads      Bagels                   218        $7.8           0.12%       108       $66.9           0.21%
Peppers           Peppers Green Bell       219        $7.8           0.12%       215       $41.5           0.13%
Salad Mix         Regular Garden           220        $7.8           0.12%       265       $31.9           0.10%
Salad
Energy Drinks     Energy Drink--           221        $7.7           0.12%       327       $26.3           0.08%
Single Serve
Smoked Hams       Hams--Spiral             222        $7.6           0.12%       240       $36.5           0.12%
Coffee &          Unflavored Instant       223        $7.6           0.12%       316       $27.3           0.09%
Creamers          Coffee
Tomatoes          Roma Tomatoes            224        $7.5           0.11%       222       $39.6           0.13%
(Bulk/Pkg)
Cookies           Vanilla Wafer/Kids       225        $7.5           0.11%       236       $36.7           0.12%
Cookies
Frozen            Ice Cream                226        $7.4           0.11%       354       $24.2           0.08%
Novelties--Wate   Sandwiches
r Ice
Hot Dogs          Hot Dogs--Premium        227        $7.4           0.11%       208       $42.7           0.14%
Yogurt            Yogurt/Pro Active        228        $7.4           0.11%       113       $63.5           0.20%
Health
Snack Meat        Snack Meat--             229        $7.4           0.11%       263       $32.1           0.10%
Pepperoni
Cakes             Cakes: Creme/            230        $7.4           0.11%       333       $25.8           0.08%
Pudding
Meat Frozen       Frzn Meat--              231        $7.3           0.11%       602       $11.3           0.04%
Breakfast Sausage
Beef: Rib         Angus [Beef]             232        $7.3           0.11%       200       $43.3           0.14%
Shortening & Oil  Olive Oil                233        $7.3           0.11%       112       $63.8           0.20%
Dry Bean Veg &    Noodle Side Dish         234        $7.3           0.11%       390       $21.1           0.07%
Rice              Mixes
Yogurt            Yogurt/Adult Multi-      235        $7.2           0.11%       210       $42.5           0.14%
Packs
Dry Bean Veg &    Rice--Dry Bag And        236        $7.1           0.11%       255       $33.9           0.11%
Rice              Box
Energy Drinks     Energy Drink--           237        $7.1           0.11%       224       $39.5           0.13%
Single Serve
Baked Breads      Sandwich Buns            238        $7.1           0.11%       137       $56.8           0.18%
Refrigerated      Non-Dairy Milks          239        $7.1           0.11%       105       $67.7           0.21%
Dairy Case
Beef: Round       Select Beef              240        $7.1           0.11%       278       $30.4           0.10%
Powder & Crystal  Unsweetened              241        $7.0           0.11%       802        $6.2           0.02%
Drink Mix         Envelope [Powder
Drink Mix]
Refrigerated      Refrigerated             242        $7.0           0.11%       170       $49.5           0.16%
Desserts          Pudding
Carrots           Carrots Mini             243        $7.0           0.11%       118       $61.4           0.19%
Peeled
Baking Mixes      Layer Cake Mix           244        $7.0           0.11%       251       $35.1           0.11%
Cocoa Mixes       Malted Mlk/Syrup/        245        $6.9           0.11%       339       $25.3           0.08%
Pwdrs (Eggnog)
Stone Fruit       Cherries Red             246        $6.9           0.10%       139       $56.7           0.18%
Frzn Seafood      Frz Coated Fish          247        $6.9           0.10%       389       $21.1           0.07%
Fillets
Meat Snacks       Jerky/Nuggets/           248        $6.8           0.10%       334       $25.8           0.08%
Tenders
Dry Bean Veg &    Rice--Instant &          249        $6.8           0.10%       231       $38.0           0.12%
Rice              Microwave
Seafood--Catfish  Catfish--Fillet          250        $6.8           0.10%       544       $13.1           0.04%
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             251        $6.8           0.10%       296       $28.8           0.09%
Products          Cookies-Brand
Fluid Milk        Specialty/Lactose        252        $6.7           0.10%       175       $48.4           0.15%
Products          Free Milk
Peanut Butter/    Preserves/Jam/           253        $6.7           0.10%       141       $56.2           0.18%
Jelly/Jams &      Marmalade
Honey
Margarines        Margarine Stick          254        $6.7           0.10%       376       $22.3           0.07%
Rts/Micro Soup/   Broth                    255        $6.7           0.10%       109       $65.6           0.21%
Broth
Rtd Tea/New Age   Juice (Under 10%         256        $6.7           0.10%       374       $22.4           0.07%
Juice             Juice)
Apples            Apples Gala (Bulk        257        $6.6           0.10%        98       $69.3           0.22%
& Bag)
Chicken Fresh     Chicken Legs/            258        $6.6           0.10%       536       $13.5           0.04%
Quarters
Frozen Breakfast  Frzn Breakfast           259        $6.5           0.10%       420       $19.0           0.06%
Foods             Pastry
Flour & Meals     Flour: White &           260        $6.4           0.10%       297       $28.8           0.09%
Self Rising
Seafood--Value-   Seafood Value-           261        $6.4           0.10%       459       $16.9           0.05%
Added             Added Breaded
Shrimp
Sugars &          Sweeteners               262        $6.4           0.10%       168       $49.8           0.16%
Sweeteners
Baking Mixes      Frosting                 263        $6.3           0.10%       318       $27.0           0.09%
Pies              Pies: Fruit/Nut          264        $6.3           0.10%       223       $39.6           0.13%
Molasses/Syrups/  Pancake Mixes            265        $6.3           0.10%       379       $21.9           0.07%
Pancake Mixes
Water--(Sparklin  Still Water Flvrd        266        $6.3           0.10%       230       $38.1           0.12%
g & Still)        Drnk/Mnrl Wtr
Bag Snacks        Pretzels                 267        $6.2           0.09%       144       $55.4           0.18%
Dry Cheese        Grated Cheese            268        $6.2           0.09%       256       $33.6           0.11%
Onions            Onions Sweet (Bulk       269        $6.2           0.09%       181       $47.4           0.15%
& Bag)
Shelf Stable      Cranapple/Cran           270        $6.1           0.09%       315       $27.3           0.09%
Juice             Grape Juice
Frzn Seafood      Frz Fishsticks/          271        $6.1           0.09%       506       $14.7           0.05%
Tenders/Nuggets
Seafood--Crab     Crab--Snow               272        $6.1           0.09%       598       $11.4           0.04%
Bread             Bread:Italian/           273        $6.1           0.09%       172       $49.0           0.16%
French
Bulk Service      Bulk Semi-Hard           274        $6.1           0.09%       196       $44.0           0.14%
Case Cheese       Cheese
Baking Mixes      Muffin & Corn            275        $6.0           0.09%       295       $28.9           0.09%
Bread Mix
Chicken &         Chix: Frd 8pc/Cut        276        $6.0           0.09%       558       $12.7           0.04%
Poultry           Up (Cold)
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           277        $6.0           0.09%       570       $12.4           0.04%
Toddler
Vegetables        Celery                   278        $5.9           0.09%       158       $51.2           0.16%
Cooking Bulk
Traditional       Mexican Seasoning        279        $5.9           0.09%       402       $20.6           0.07%
Mexican Foods     Mixes
Refrigerated      Fluid Milk               280        $5.9           0.09%        52      $113.3           0.36%
Dairy Case
Soft Drinks       Soft Drinks Can          281        $5.9           0.09%       592       $11.5           0.04%
Non-Carb
Condiments &      Hot Sauce                282        $5.8           0.09%       466       $16.4           0.05%
Sauces
Apples            Apples Red               283        $5.8           0.09%       248       $35.2           0.11%
Delicious (Bulk &
Bag)
Single Serve      Snack Cake--Single       284        $5.7           0.09%       470       $16.2           0.05%
Sweet Goods       Serve
Milk By-Products  Refrig Dips              285        $5.7           0.09%       350       $24.7           0.08%
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Vine Ripe       286        $5.7           0.09%       373       $22.5           0.07%
Bulk
Bag Snacks        Brand Snacks             287        $5.6           0.09%       176       $48.1           0.15%
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             288        $5.5           0.08%       312       $27.5           0.09%
Products          Specialty Rolls
Canned & Dry      Canned Milk              289        $5.5           0.08%       305       $27.9           0.09%
Milk
Coffee &          Ready To Drink           290        $5.5           0.08%       403       $20.5           0.06%
Creamers          Coffee
Salad Mix         Garden Plus [Salad       291        $5.5           0.08%       267       $31.8           0.10%
Mix]
Cookies           Cookies: Holiday/        292        $5.5           0.08%       320       $26.8           0.08%
Special Occas
Bag Snacks        Misc Bag Snacks          293        $5.5           0.08%       591       $11.5           0.04%
Refrgratd Juices/ 100% Pure Juice          294        $5.4           0.08%       261       $32.3           0.10%
Drinks Dairy      Other
Case
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             295        $5.4           0.08%       274       $31.2           0.10%
Products          Crescent Rolls
Teas              Tea Bags & Bulk          296        $5.4           0.08%       317       $27.2           0.09%
Tea
Aseptic Juice     Aseptic Pack Juice       297        $5.3           0.08%       449       $17.5           0.06%
And Drinks
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           298        $5.3           0.08%       497       $15.2           0.05%
Solutions Large
Vegetables        Cabbage                  299        $5.3           0.08%       340       $25.1           0.08%
Cooking Bulk
Melons            Cantaloupe Whole         300        $5.3           0.08%       194       $44.4           0.14%
Dry Sce/Gravy/    Stuffing Mixes           301        $5.3           0.08%       378       $22.1           0.07%
Potatoes/
Stuffng
Frozen Desserts   Frozen Fruit Pies        302        $5.3           0.08%       359       $23.7           0.08%
& Cobblers
Frozen Potatoes   Frzn Tater Tots/         303        $5.2           0.08%       424       $18.8           0.06%
Other Extruded
Traditional       Mexican Taco/            304        $5.2           0.08%       417       $19.1           0.06%
Mexican Foods     Tostado/Shells
Broccoli/         Broccoli Whole &         305        $5.2           0.08%       156       $52.0           0.16%
Cauliflower       Crowns
Tomato Products-  Tomato Sauce             306        $5.1           0.08%       353       $24.2           0.08%
Shelf Stable
Candy--Checklane  Candy Bars               307        $5.1           0.08%       476       $15.9           0.05%
(Singles)
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Chop/         308        $5.1           0.08%       583       $12.1           0.04%
Form Pltry
Vegetables Salad  Variety Lettuce          309        $5.1           0.08%       110       $65.2           0.21%
Berries           Blueberries              310        $5.1           0.08%        82       $79.4           0.25%
Shelf Stable      Cranberry Juice          311        $5.0           0.08%       371       $22.6           0.07%
Juice             (50% And Under)
Seafood--Salmon-  Salmon Fr--              312        $5.0           0.08%       173       $48.8           0.15%
Farm Raised       Atlantic
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Hot House       313        $5.0           0.08%       280       $30.3           0.10%
Bulk
Yogurt            Yogurt/Specialty         314        $5.0           0.08%        89       $77.4           0.25%
Greek
Frozen Whipped    Frzn Whipped             315        $5.0           0.08%       276       $30.9           0.10%
Topping           Topping
Can Fruit/Jar     Pineapple                316        $4.9           0.07%       357       $24.0           0.08%
Applesauce
Frozen Desserts   Frozen Cream Pies        317        $4.9           0.07%       423       $18.9           0.06%
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           318        $4.9           0.07%       954        $3.9           0.01%
Concentrate
Stone Fruit       Peaches Yellow           319        $4.8           0.07%       243       $35.6           0.11%
Flesh
Sweet Goods       Sw Gds: Sw Rolls/        320        $4.8           0.07%       319       $26.9           0.09%
Dan
Potatoes          Potatoes Sweet &         321        $4.8           0.07%       234       $37.1           0.12%
Yams
Seafood--Party    Party Tray--Shrimp       322        $4.8           0.07%       347       $24.8           0.08%
Trays
Shelf Stable      Blended Juice &          323        $4.8           0.07%       365       $22.9           0.07%
Juice             Combinations
Baking Mixes      Brownie Mix              324        $4.8           0.07%       313       $27.5           0.09%
Shelf Stable      Grape Juice (Over        325        $4.8           0.07%       455       $17.1           0.05%
Juice             50% Juice)
Frzn Prepared     Fz Meal Kits/            326        $4.8           0.07%       578       $12.2           0.04%
Chicken           Stuffed/Other
Peanut Butter/    Jelly                    327        $4.7           0.07%       439       $18.1           0.06%
Jelly/Jams &
Honey
Smoked Pork       Ham Steaks/Cubes/        328        $4.7           0.07%       324       $26.3           0.08%
Slices
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Grape           329        $4.7           0.07%       150       $54.6           0.17%
Traditional       Mexican Beans/           330        $4.7           0.07%       393       $21.0           0.07%
Mexican Foods     Refried
Citrus            Lemons                   331        $4.6           0.07%       257       $33.6           0.11%
Can Fruit/Jar     Peaches                  332        $4.6           0.07%       387       $21.3           0.07%
Applesauce
Frozen Potatoes   Frzn Hashbrown           333        $4.6           0.07%       348       $24.8           0.08%
Potatoes
Dry Noodles &     Noodles Dry              334        $4.5           0.07%       344       $24.9           0.08%
Pasta
Salad Bar         Salad Bar Other          335        $4.5           0.07%       438       $18.2           0.06%
Corn              Corn Bulk                336        $4.5           0.07%       260       $32.5           0.10%
Sweet Goods       Sw Gds: Muffins          337        $4.5           0.07%       266       $31.8           0.10%
Frozen Breakfast  Frzn Breakfast           338        $4.5           0.07%       473       $16.2           0.05%
Foods             Entrees
Eggs/Muffins/     Eggs--X-Large            339        $4.5           0.07%       232       $37.9           0.12%
Potatoes
Convenient Meals  Convenient Meals--       340        $4.5           0.07%       603       $11.2           0.04%
Adult Meal
Bacon             Bacon--Poultry           341        $4.5           0.07%       435       $18.4           0.06%
Smoked Hams       Hams--Whole              342        $4.5           0.07%       510       $14.6           0.05%
Boneless
Fluid Milk        Half & Half              343        $4.4           0.07%       149       $54.6           0.17%
Products
Deli Meat: Bulk   Meat Bulk:               344        $4.4           0.07%       302       $28.3           0.09%
Specialty Dry
Meats
Frozen Vegetable  Fz Box Vegetables--      345        $4.4           0.07%       349       $24.7           0.08%
& Veg Dish        Value-Added
Apples            Apples Granny            346        $4.4           0.07%       277       $30.9           0.10%
Smith (Bulk &
Bag)
Baking Needs      Bits & Morsels           347        $4.4           0.07%       162       $50.3           0.16%
[Baking Needs]
Meat--Shelf       Chunk Meats--Chix/       348        $4.4           0.07%       338       $25.3           0.08%
Stable            Ham/Etc.
Yogurt            Yogurt/Large Size        349        $4.4           0.07%       219       $40.4           0.13%
(16oz Or Larger)
Energy Drinks     Energy Drink--           350        $4.3           0.07%       421       $19.0           0.06%
Multi-Pack
Frozen Fruits     Frozen Fruit             351        $4.3           0.07%       174       $48.6           0.15%
Turkey Frozen     Whole Toms (Over         352        $4.3           0.06%       407       $20.0           0.06%
16lbs) [Turkey]
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Whole         353        $4.2           0.06%       413       $19.7           0.06%
Muscle Pltry
Dry Bean Veg &    Dry Beans/Peas/          354        $4.2           0.06%       425       $18.8           0.06%
Rice              Barley: Bag &
Bulk
Frozen            Adult Premium            355        $4.2           0.06%       151       $54.5           0.17%
Novelties--Wate   [Frozen
r Ice             Novelties]
Traditional       Mexican Dinners          356        $4.2           0.06%       597       $11.4           0.04%
Mexican Foods     And Foods
Salad Mix         Kits [Salad Mix]         357        $4.2           0.06%       258       $33.5           0.11%
Cookies           Premium Cookies          358        $4.2           0.06%       269       $31.5           0.10%
Peanut Butter/    Honey                    359        $4.1           0.06%       294       $28.9           0.09%
Jelly/Jams &
Honey
Pickle/Relish/    Ripe Olives              360        $4.1           0.06%       337       $25.3           0.08%
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Bacon             Bacon--Pre-Cooked        361        $4.1           0.06%       346       $24.8           0.08%
Rolls             Rolls: Sandwich          362        $4.1           0.06%       322       $26.7           0.08%
Potatoes          Potatoes Red (Bulk       363        $4.1           0.06%       264       $32.0           0.10%
& Bag)
Croutons/Bread    Salad Toppers            364        $4.1           0.06%       500       $15.1           0.05%
Stick & Salad
Top
Candy--Packaged   Gum (Packaged)           365        $4.1           0.06%       331       $25.9           0.08%
Baking Needs      Baking Nuts              366        $4.1           0.06%       201       $43.2           0.14%
Soft Drinks       Soft Drinks 6pk          367        $4.1           0.06%       308       $27.8           0.09%
Can Carb
Single Serve      Applesauce Cup           368        $4.1           0.06%       370       $22.6           0.07%
Fruit/
Applesauce
Dry Sce/Gravy/    Gravy Can/Glass          369        $4.0           0.06%       485       $15.7           0.05%
Potatoes/
Stuffng
Cookies           Graham Crackers          370        $4.0           0.06%       342       $24.9           0.08%
Candy--Packaged   Miscellaneous            371        $4.0           0.06%       418       $19.0           0.06%
Candy
Frozen Vegetable  Frzn Corn On The         372        $4.0           0.06%       708        $8.4           0.03%
& Veg Dish        Cob
Cookies           Chocolate Covered        373        $4.0           0.06%       432       $18.5           0.06%
Cookies
Value-Added       Vegetable Party          374        $4.0           0.06%       341       $25.1           0.08%
Vegetables        Tray
Value-Added       Cut Vegetables All       375        $4.0           0.06%       213       $42.2           0.13%
Vegetables        Other
Deli Meat: Bulk   Bologna/Loaves/          376        $4.0           0.06%       415       $19.2           0.06%
Franks
Condiments &      Marinades                377        $3.9           0.06%       434       $18.4           0.06%
Sauces
Nuts              Pistachios               378        $3.9           0.06%       293       $29.1           0.09%
Service Case      Seasoned Poultry         379        $3.9           0.06%       463       $16.5           0.05%
Meat
Salad & Dips      Protein Salads--         380        $3.9           0.06%       326       $26.3           0.08%
Bulk
Hot Cereal        Standard Oatmeal         381        $3.9           0.06%       284       $29.9           0.09%
Cheese            Miscellaneous            382        $3.8           0.06%       214       $42.1           0.13%
Cheese
Salad & Dips      Vegetable Salads--       383        $3.8           0.06%       275       $31.0           0.10%
Bulk
Shelf Stable      Veg Juice (Except        384        $3.8           0.06%       279       $30.4           0.10%
Juice             Tomato)
Juices Super      Juices Superfoods/       385        $3.8           0.06%       367       $22.8           0.07%
Premium           Enhanced
Breakfast         Bkfst Sausage--          386        $3.8           0.06%       651        $9.8           0.03%
Sausage           Fresh Patties
Vegetables        Asparagus                387        $3.8           0.06%       159       $50.7           0.16%
Cooking Bulk
Baby Foods        Baby Food Cereals        388        $3.8           0.06%       756        $7.1           0.02%
Baked Breads      English Muffins/         389        $3.8           0.06%       169       $49.5           0.16%
Waffles
Baked Breads      Main Meal Bread          390        $3.8           0.06%       252       $34.9           0.11%
Juice             Non-Carb Jce (Over       391        $3.8           0.06%       268       $31.7           0.10%
50% Juice)
Deli Meat: Bulk   Meat: Chicken Bulk       392        $3.7           0.06%       253       $34.6           0.11%
Breakfast         Bkfst Sausage--          393        $3.7           0.06%       385       $21.4           0.07%
Sausage           Precooked
Dietary Aid       Diet Cntrl Liqs          394        $3.7           0.06%       281       $30.3           0.10%
Prdct/Med Liq     Nutritional
Nutr
Refrgratd Juices/ Fruit Drinks             395        $3.7           0.06%     1,041        $2.8           0.01%
Drinks Dairy
Case
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Beef        396        $3.7           0.06%       577       $12.2           0.04%
Rope Ckd
Canned Pasta &    Microwavable Cups        397        $3.7           0.06%       690        $9.0           0.03%
Mwv Fd-Shlf
Stbl
Turkey Frozen     Whole Hens (Under        398        $3.6           0.06%       419       $19.0           0.06%
16lbs) [Turkey]
Cakes             Cakes: Cheesecake        399        $3.6           0.06%       507       $14.7           0.05%
Enhancements      Enhancements--Pick       400        $3.6           0.06%       410       $19.8           0.06%
(Pickles/         les/Kraut
Spreads)
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Vine Ripe       401        $3.6           0.06%       743        $7.3           0.02%
Pkg
Peppers           Peppers Red Bell         402        $3.6           0.05%       211       $42.5           0.13%
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Other       403        $3.6           0.05%       381       $21.6           0.07%
Forms
Pork Offal        External Fresh           404        $3.5           0.05%       937        $4.2           0.01%
Pasta & Pizza     Value [Pasta &           405        $3.5           0.05%       657        $9.7           0.03%
Sauce             Pizza Sauce]
Aseptic Juice     Aseptic Pack Juice       406        $3.5           0.05%       934        $4.2           0.01%
And Drinks
Berries           Raspberries              407        $3.5           0.05%       186       $45.8           0.15%
Beef: Thin Meats  Corned Beef              408        $3.5           0.05%       461       $16.9           0.05%
Party Tray        Deli Tray: Meat          409        $3.5           0.05%       383       $21.5           0.07%
And Cheese
Can Vegetables--  Peas/Green               410        $3.5           0.05%       504       $14.7           0.05%
Shelf Stable
Dry/Ramen         Dry Soup                 411        $3.5           0.05%       362       $23.3           0.07%
Bouillon
Can Vegetables--  Spinach & Greens         412        $3.5           0.05%       765        $7.0           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Frzn Multi Serve  Fz Meatballs             413        $3.5           0.05%       447       $17.7           0.06%
Milk By-Products  Aerosol Toppings         414        $3.5           0.05%       351       $24.5           0.08%
[Milk By-
Products]
Baked Breads      Dinner Rolls             415        $3.5           0.05%       513       $14.5           0.05%
Cocoa Mixes       Hot Chocolate/           416        $3.5           0.05%       445       $17.8           0.06%
Cocoa Mix
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           417        $3.5           0.05%       768        $6.9           0.02%
Ready To Use
Powder & Crystal  Sugar Free               418        $3.5           0.05%       391       $21.1           0.07%
Drink Mix         Canister [Powder
Drink Mix]
Cnv Breakfast &   Treats [Breakfast]       419        $3.5           0.05%       605       $11.2           0.04%
Wholesome Snks
Smoked Hams       Hams--Half/Port          420        $3.4           0.05%       392       $21.0           0.07%
Boneless
Fitness & Diet    Fitness & Diet--         421        $3.4           0.05%       124       $59.8           0.19%
Bars W/Flour
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             422        $3.4           0.05%       551       $12.9           0.04%
Products          Cookie Dough
Grapes            Grapes Black/Blue        423        $3.4           0.05%       380       $21.8           0.07%
Bulk Service      Bulk Processed           424        $3.4           0.05%       411       $19.8           0.06%
Case Cheese       [Cheese]
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal Candy           425        $3.4           0.05%       462       $16.6           0.05%
Box--Chocolate
Coffee &          Coffee Pods/             426        $3.4           0.05%       167       $49.8           0.16%
Creamers          Singles/Filter
Pack
Can Fruit/Jar     Fruit Cocktail/          427        $3.4           0.05%       569       $12.5           0.04%
Applesauce        Fruit Salad
Peppers           Peppers Other Bell       428        $3.4           0.05%       301       $28.4           0.09%
Mushrooms         Mushrooms White          429        $3.3           0.05%       306       $27.8           0.09%
Sliced Pkg
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Chip          430        $3.3           0.05%       653        $9.7           0.03%
Meat
Soft Drinks       Sft Drnk 1 Liter         431        $3.3           0.05%       716        $8.2           0.03%
Btl Carb
Cakes             Cakes: Fancy/            432        $3.3           0.05%       451       $17.4           0.06%
Service Case
Salad Mix         Shredded Lettuce         433        $3.3           0.05%       616       $10.9           0.03%
Powder & Crystal  Sugar Free Sticks        434        $3.3           0.05%       426       $18.8           0.06%
Drink Mix         [Powder Drink
Mix]
Dinner Mixes-Dry  Package Dinners/         435        $3.3           0.05%       664        $9.5           0.03%
Pasta Salads
Cakes             Cakes: Layers/           436        $3.3           0.05%       565       $12.5           0.04%
Sheets Novelties
Flour & Meals     Breadings/Coatings/      437        $3.2           0.05%       474       $16.0           0.05%
Crumbs
Pies              Pies: Pumpkin/           438        $3.2           0.05%       545       $13.1           0.04%
Custard
Refrigerated      Yogurt                   439        $3.2           0.05%       107       $67.0           0.21%
Dairy Case
Apples            Mixed Fruit Bags         440        $3.2           0.05%       829        $5.7           0.02%
Shelf Stable      Fruit Drinks:            441        $3.2           0.05%       870        $5.0           0.02%
Juice             Canned & Glass
Dry Mix Desserts  Puddings Dry             442        $3.2           0.05%       400       $20.8           0.07%
Can Seafood--     Salmon                   443        $3.2           0.05%       534       $13.6           0.04%
Shelf Stable
Shortening & Oil  Cooking Sprays           444        $3.2           0.05%       396       $21.0           0.07%
Meat--Shelf       Sandwich Sauce           445        $3.2           0.05%       733        $7.7           0.02%
Stable            (Manwich)
Bread             Bread: Specialty         446        $3.2           0.05%       366       $22.9           0.07%
Seafood--Tilapia  Tilapia--Fillet          447        $3.2           0.05%       465       $16.4           0.05%
Frzn Multi Serve  Frzn Burgers             448        $3.2           0.05%     1,010        $3.1           0.01%
Convenience/      Jarred Fruit             449        $3.1           0.05%       511       $14.6           0.05%
Snacking          Single Serve
Powder & Crystal  Soft Drink               450        $3.1           0.05%       723        $7.9           0.03%
Drink Mix         Canisters
Frozen Breakfast  Frzn Breakfast           451        $3.1           0.05%       647        $9.8           0.03%
Foods             Sausage
Ss/Vending--      Vendor Size/Single       452        $3.1           0.05%       770        $6.8           0.02%
Cookie/Cracker    Serve Cookie
Water--(Sparklin  Sparkling Water--        453        $3.1           0.05%       355       $24.1           0.08%
g & Still)        Flvrd Sweet
Service Case      Stuffed/Mixed Beef       454        $3.1           0.05%       416       $19.2           0.06%
Meat
Meat--Shelf       Vienna Sausage           455        $3.1           0.05%       867        $5.1           0.02%
Stable
Mushrooms         Mushrooms White          456        $3.1           0.05%       288       $29.6           0.09%
Whole Pkg
Teas              Tea Bags/Herbal          457        $3.1           0.05%       272       $31.2           0.10%
Meat Frozen       Frzn Meat--Offals        458        $3.0           0.05%     1,053        $2.6           0.01%
Bulk Service      Bulk Semi-Soft           459        $3.0           0.05%       363       $23.3           0.07%
Case Cheese
Bag Snacks        Bagged Popped            460        $3.0           0.05%       566       $12.5           0.04%
Popcorn
Condiments &      Yellow Mustard           461        $3.0           0.05%       571       $12.4           0.04%
Sauces
Vegetables Salad  Green Onions             462        $3.0           0.05%       361       $23.5           0.07%
Frozen Bread/     Frzn Dinner Rolls        463        $3.0           0.05%       398       $20.9           0.07%
Dough
Baking Needs      Marshmallows             464        $3.0           0.05%       467       $16.4           0.05%
Warehouse Snacks  Snack Mix                465        $3.0           0.05%       450       $17.5           0.06%
Fluid Milk        Whipping Cream           466        $3.0           0.04%       249       $35.2           0.11%
Products
Dried Fruit       Raisins                  467        $2.9           0.04%       330       $26.0           0.08%
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Links       468        $2.9           0.04%       722        $8.0           0.03%
Beef Ckd
Rolls             Rolls: Croissants/       469        $2.9           0.04%       464       $16.5           0.05%
Breadsticks
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Brauns/       470        $2.9           0.04%       632       $10.3           0.03%
Liver/Loave
Cookie/Cracker    Multi-Pack Cookies       471        $2.9           0.04%       596       $11.4           0.04%
Multi-Pks
Snack Meat        Snack Meat--Salami/      472        $2.9           0.04%       481       $15.8           0.05%
Smr Sausage
Shortening & Oil  Solid Shortening         473        $2.9           0.04%       525       $14.0           0.04%
Salad Mix         Salad Bowls              474        $2.9           0.04%       572       $12.3           0.04%
Hot Cereal        Grits                    475        $2.8           0.04%       774        $6.7           0.02%
Cereals           Cereal--Cold             476        $2.8           0.04%       178       $47.8           0.15%
Frozen Vegetable  Fz Bag Vegetables--      477        $2.8           0.04%       505       $14.7           0.05%
& Veg Dish        Value-Added
Traditional       Asian Other Sauces/      478        $2.8           0.04%       422       $18.9           0.06%
Asian Foods       Marinade
Frozen            Cups/Push Ups/           479        $2.8           0.04%       661        $9.6           0.03%
Novelties--Wate   Other [Frozen
r Ice             Novelties]
Refrigerated      Refrigerated             480        $2.8           0.04%       669        $9.4           0.03%
Hispanic          Tortillas
Grocery
Frzn Prepared     Whole Muscle             481        $2.8           0.04%       555       $12.8           0.04%
Chicken           Unbreaded Chicken
Meat--Shelf       Luncheon Meat            482        $2.8           0.04%       693        $8.9           0.03%
Stable            (Spam)
Frzn Prepared     Boneless Snack/          483        $2.8           0.04%       836        $5.5           0.02%
Chicken           Value/Small
Croutons/Bread    Croutons                 484        $2.8           0.04%       526       $14.0           0.04%
Stick & Salad
Top
Apples            Apples Other (Bulk       485        $2.8           0.04%       314       $27.4           0.09%
& Bag)
Apples            Apples Fuji (Bulk        486        $2.8           0.04%       242       $36.2           0.11%
& Bag)
Apples            Apples Gold              487        $2.8           0.04%       443       $17.9           0.06%
Delicious (Bulk &
Bag)
Salad & Dips      Sal: Hommus              488        $2.8           0.04%       189       $45.4           0.14%
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--            489        $2.7           0.04%       562       $12.7           0.04%
Cocktails
Can Vegetables--  Mushrooms Cnd &          490        $2.7           0.04%       521       $14.3           0.05%
Shelf Stable      Glass
Frozen Desserts   Frzn Pie Shells/         491        $2.7           0.04%       475       $16.0           0.05%
Pastry Shell
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Variety       492        $2.7           0.04%       677        $9.3           0.03%
Pack
Frozen Desserts   Frozen Cakes/            493        $2.7           0.04%       611       $11.0           0.03%
Desserts
Pickle/Relish/    Peppers                  494        $2.7           0.04%       537       $13.5           0.04%
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Cakes             Cakes: Angel Fds/        495        $2.7           0.04%       440       $18.1           0.06%
Cke Rolls
Berries           Blackberries             496        $2.7           0.04%       283       $29.9           0.09%
Frozen Bread/     Frzn Garlic Bread        497        $2.7           0.04%       608       $11.1           0.04%
Dough
Traditional       Mexican Enchilada        498        $2.7           0.04%       532       $13.7           0.04%
Mexican Foods     Sauce
Fluid Milk        Egg Nog/Boiled           499        $2.7           0.04%       539       $13.3           0.04%
Products          Custard
Hot Dogs          Hot Dogs--Base           500        $2.7           0.04%       667        $9.4           0.03%
Poultry
Beef: Thin Meats  Brisket [Beef]           501        $2.7           0.04%       446       $17.8           0.06%
Cookies           Wellness/Portion         502        $2.7           0.04%       358       $23.8           0.08%
Control [Cookies]
Baking Needs      Pie Filling/             503        $2.7           0.04%       345       $24.8           0.08%
Mincemeat/Glazes
Soft Drinks       Tea Can With             504        $2.7           0.04%       807        $6.1           0.02%
Sweetener/Sugar
Citrus            Limes                    505        $2.7           0.04%       369       $22.7           0.07%
Warehouse Snacks  Misc Snacks              506        $2.6           0.04%       541       $13.2           0.04%
Traditional       Mexican Taco Sauce       507        $2.6           0.04%       761        $7.0           0.02%
Mexican Foods
Soft Drinks       Soft Drink Bottle        508        $2.6           0.04%       887        $4.7           0.02%
Non-Carb
Seafood--Salmon-  Salmon Wc--Pink          509        $2.6           0.04%       612       $11.0           0.03%
Wild Caught
Frozen Bread/     Frzn Biscuits            510        $2.6           0.04%       550       $12.9           0.04%
Dough
Frzn Pasta        Frozen Pasta             511        $2.6           0.04%       458       $16.9           0.05%
Chicken Frozen    Frzn Chicken--Drk        512        $2.6           0.04%       818        $5.9           0.02%
Meat
Syrups Toppings   Ice Cream Toppings       513        $2.6           0.04%       524       $14.1           0.04%
& Cones
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal Candy           514        $2.6           0.04%       502       $14.9           0.05%
Bags Non-
Chocolate
Salad & Dips      Pasta/Grain              515        $2.6           0.04%       631       $10.3           0.03%
Salads--Prepack
Cakes             Cakes: Ice Cream         516        $2.6           0.04%       700        $8.6           0.03%
Nuts              Mixed Nuts               517        $2.6           0.04%       309       $27.6           0.09%
Sushi             Sushi--Prepackaged       518        $2.6           0.04%       414       $19.2           0.06%
Pickle/Relish/    Green Olives             519        $2.6           0.04%       483       $15.8           0.05%
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Candy--Packaged   Candy Bars Multi         520        $2.6           0.04%       695        $8.8           0.03%
Pack W/Flour
Stone Fruit       Nectarines Yellow        521        $2.5           0.04%       430       $18.6           0.06%
Flesh
Onions            Onions Red (Bulk &       522        $2.5           0.04%       397       $20.9           0.07%
Bag)
Flour & Meals     Cornmeal                 523        $2.5           0.04%       746        $7.3           0.02%
Tropical Fruit    Pineapple Whole &        524        $2.5           0.04%       377       $22.1           0.07%
Peel/Cored
Bagels & Cream    Refrigerated             525        $2.5           0.04%       731        $7.7           0.02%
Cheese            Bagels
Onions            Onions White (Bulk       526        $2.5           0.04%       482       $15.8           0.05%
& Bag)
Meat Frozen       Frzn Meat--Turkey        527        $2.5           0.04%       652        $9.7           0.03%
Pickle/Relish/    Relishes                 528        $2.5           0.04%       590       $11.6           0.04%
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Candy--Packaged   Candy Bags--             529        $2.5           0.04%       496       $15.2           0.05%
Chocolate W/Flour
Nuts              Cashews                  530        $2.5           0.04%       437       $18.3           0.06%
Cakes             Cakes:Birthday/          531        $2.5           0.04%       684        $9.1           0.03%
Celebration Lay
Smoked Pork       Smoked Offal             532        $2.4           0.04%       940        $4.1           0.01%
[Pork]
Apples            Apples Honeycrisp        533        $2.4           0.04%       235       $36.9           0.12%
Sweet Goods &     Sw Gds: Swt/Flvrd        534        $2.4           0.04%       528       $13.9           0.04%
Snacks            Loaves
Fluid Milk        Buttermilk               535        $2.4           0.04%       478       $15.9           0.05%
Products
Cakes             Cakes: Sheet             536        $2.4           0.04%       750        $7.2           0.02%
Cookies           Cookies: Gourmet         537        $2.4           0.04%       399       $20.8           0.07%
Citrus            Grapefruit               538        $2.4           0.04%       388       $21.2           0.07%
Coffee &          Flavored Bag             539        $2.4           0.04%       328       $26.2           0.08%
Creamers          Coffee
Stone Fruit       Plums                    540        $2.4           0.04%       543       $13.1           0.04%
Refrigerated      Refrigerated Pasta       541        $2.4           0.04%       290       $29.3           0.09%
Italian
Spices &          Gourmet Spices           542        $2.4           0.04%       259       $33.2           0.11%
Extracts
Baked Breads      Diet/Light Bread         543        $2.4           0.04%       356       $24.0           0.08%
Bacon             Bacon--Trad Center       544        $2.3           0.04%       395       $21.0           0.07%
Cut
Salad & Dips      Pasta/Grain              545        $2.3           0.04%       460       $16.9           0.05%
Salads--Bulk
Rice Cakes        Mini-Cakes               546        $2.3           0.04%       454       $17.2           0.05%
Authentic         Authentic Sauces/        547        $2.3           0.03%       678        $9.2           0.03%
Hispanic Fds &    Salsa/Picante
Product
Ice Cream Ice     Premium Pints [Ice       548        $2.3           0.03%       787        $6.5           0.02%
Milk & Sherbets   Cream & Sherbert]
Can Fruit/Jar     Mandarin Oranges/        549        $2.3           0.03%       564       $12.6           0.04%
Applesauce        Citrus Sect
Baby Foods        Baby Juices              550        $2.3           0.03%      1013        $3.1           0.01%
Salad Mix         Salad Mix Blends         551        $2.3           0.03%       239       $36.5           0.12%
Organic
Salad & Dips      Salad: Lettuce           552        $2.2           0.03%       576       $12.2           0.04%
Baked Breads      Fruit/Breakfast          553        $2.2           0.03%       427       $18.7           0.06%
Bread
Seafood--Salad/   Breading [Seafood]       554        $2.2           0.03%       966        $3.7           0.01%
Dip/Sce/Cond
Seafood--Finfish  Finfish--Other           555        $2.2           0.03%       826        $5.8           0.02%
Other
Frozen Bread/     Frzn Breadsticks         556        $2.2           0.03%       871        $5.0           0.02%
Dough
Bag Snacks        Pork Skins/              557        $2.2           0.03%       804        $6.2           0.02%
Cracklins
Frozen Juice And  Frzn Conc Allieds        558        $2.2           0.03%       638       $10.1           0.03%
Smoothies         Over 50% Juice
Broccoli/         Cauliflower Whole        559        $2.2           0.03%       352       $24.5           0.08%
Cauliflower
Mushrooms         Mushrooms                560        $2.2           0.03%       372       $22.6           0.07%
Portabella
Tropical Fruit    Mango                    561        $2.2           0.03%       522       $14.1           0.04%
Seafood--Lobster  Lobster--Tails           562        $2.2           0.03%       546       $13.0           0.04%
Can Fruit/Jar     Apple Sauce              563        $2.2           0.03%       530       $13.8           0.04%
Applesauce        (Excludes Cup)
Traditional       Mexican Peppers          564        $2.2           0.03%       487       $15.7           0.05%
Mexican Foods     Chilies
Candy--Checklane  Mints/Candy &            565        $2.1           0.03%       582       $12.1           0.04%
Breath
Citrus            Tangerines &             566        $2.1           0.03%       600       $11.3           0.04%
Tangelos
Juices Super      Juices Smoothies/        567        $2.1           0.03%       613       $11.0           0.03%
Premium           Blended
Can Vegetables--  Fried Onions             568        $2.1           0.03%       574       $12.3           0.04%
Shelf Stable
Carrots           Carrots Bagged           569        $2.0           0.03%       453       $17.2           0.05%
Eggs/Muffins/     Eggs--Jumbo              570        $2.0           0.03%       548       $13.0           0.04%
Potatoes
Potatoes          Potatoes Gourmet         571        $2.0           0.03%       405       $20.3           0.06%
Can Vegetables--  Sweet Potatoes           572        $2.0           0.03%       777        $6.7           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Seafood--Value-   Value-Added Shrimp       573        $2.0           0.03%       840        $5.4           0.02%
Added Seafood
Baked Breads      Rye Breads               574        $2.0           0.03%       375       $22.3           0.07%
Salad Dresing &   Dry Salad Dressing       575        $2.0           0.03%       498       $15.1           0.05%
Sandwich          & Dip Mixes
Spreads
Condiments &      Mustard--All Other       576        $2.0           0.03%       436       $18.3           0.06%
Sauces
Fluid Milk        Organic Milk             577        $2.0           0.03%       245       $35.4           0.11%
Products
Dry Mix Desserts  Gelatin                  578        $2.0           0.03%       517       $14.3           0.05%
Nuts              Sunflower/Other          579        $1.9           0.03%       656        $9.7           0.03%
Seeds
Vinegar &         Vinegar/White &          580        $1.9           0.03%       515       $14.4           0.05%
Cooking Wines     Cider
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--            581        $1.9           0.03%       618       $10.9           0.03%
Poultry Rope Ckd
Corn              Corn Is Packaged         582        $1.9           0.03%       556       $12.8           0.04%
Candy--Packaged   Miscellaneous            583        $1.9           0.03%       607       $11.2           0.04%
Candy
Milk By-Products  Ricotta Cheese           584        $1.9           0.03%       490       $15.6           0.05%
Hot Cereal        Other Hot Cereal         585        $1.9           0.03%       628       $10.3           0.03%
Frozen Juice And  Frzn Oj&Oj               586        $1.9           0.03%       472       $16.2           0.05%
Smoothies         Substitutes (Over
50%)
Sweet Goods &     Sw Gds: Brownie/         587        $1.9           0.03%       606       $11.2           0.04%
Snacks            Bar Cookie
Rolls             Rolls: Bagels            588        $1.9           0.03%       494       $15.4           0.05%
Melons            Watermelon               589        $1.9           0.03%       477       $15.9           0.05%
Personal
Nuts              Pecans Shelled           590        $1.9           0.03%       448       $17.6           0.06%
Infant Formula    Baby Isotonic            591        $1.9           0.03%       878        $4.9           0.02%
Drinks
Mixers            Cocktail Mixes-          592        $1.9           0.03%       468       $16.4           0.05%
Fluid: Add Liq
Bananas           Bananas Organic          593        $1.9           0.03%       428       $18.7           0.06%
Seafood--Crab     Crab--King               594        $1.9           0.03%       725        $7.9           0.02%
Bacon             Bacon--Other             595        $1.9           0.03%       655        $9.7           0.03%
Can Fruit/Jar     Pears                    596        $1.9           0.03%       646       $10.0           0.03%
Applesauce
Baking Mixes      Biscuit Flour &          597        $1.9           0.03%       529       $13.8           0.04%
Mixes
Chicken           Chicken Breast           598        $1.9           0.03%       343       $24.9           0.08%
Specialty/        Boneless
Natural
Sweet Goods       Sw Gds: Coffee           599        $1.8           0.03%       588       $11.9           0.04%
Cakes
Refrigerated      Eggs                     600        $1.8           0.03%       289       $29.5           0.09%
Dairy Case
Condiments &      Wing Sauce               601        $1.8           0.03%       872        $5.0           0.02%
Sauces
Seafood--Salmon-  Salmon Wc--Sockeye       602        $1.8           0.03%       335       $25.7           0.08%
Wild Caught
Baking Needs      Pie Crust Mixes &        603        $1.8           0.03%       676        $9.3           0.03%
Shells
Salad Mix         Salad Spinach            604        $1.8           0.03%       442       $17.9           0.06%
Eggs/Muffins/     Eggs Substitute          605        $1.8           0.03%       329       $26.2           0.08%
Potatoes
Crackers & Misc   Aerosol Cheese           606        $1.8           0.03%       857        $5.2           0.02%
Baked Food
Poultry Other     Cornish Hen              607        $1.8           0.03%       773        $6.7           0.02%
Tomato Products-  Tomato Paste             608        $1.8           0.03%       633       $10.2           0.03%
Shelf Stable
Turkey Frozen     Turkey Breast Bone       609        $1.8           0.03%       553       $12.8           0.04%
In
Sweet Goods &     Sw Gds: Puff             610        $1.8           0.03%       573       $12.3           0.04%
Snacks            Pastry
Seafood--Catfish  Catfish--Whole           611        $1.8           0.03%     1,055        $2.6           0.01%
Cake Decor        Cake Decors &            612        $1.8           0.03%       645       $10.0           0.03%
Icing
Convenience/      Convenience/             613        $1.8           0.03%       670        $9.4           0.03%
Snacking          Snacking Fruit
Salad & Dips      Sal: Salsa/Dips          614        $1.8           0.03%       730        $7.7           0.02%
Bulk
Pork Bone In      Dry [Pork Bone In        615        $1.8           0.03%       734        $7.6           0.02%
Loin/Rib          Loin/Rib]
Authentic         Authentic Pasta/         616        $1.7           0.03%       884        $4.8           0.02%
Hispanic Fds &    Rice/Beans
Product
Spices &          Pure Extracts            617        $1.7           0.03%       493       $15.4           0.05%
Extracts
Powder & Crystal  Enhanced Stick           618        $1.7           0.03%       621       $10.7           0.03%
Drink Mix         [Powder Drink
Mix]
Bread             Bread: Artisan           619        $1.7           0.03%       237       $36.7           0.12%
Infant Formula    Infant Formula Soy       620        $1.7           0.03%     1,270        $1.1           0.00%
Base
Juices Super      Juices Proteins          621        $1.7           0.03%       640       $10.1           0.03%
Premium
Salad & Dips      Sal: Dip Prepack         622        $1.7           0.03%       584       $12.1           0.04%
[Salad & Dips]
Dietary Aid       Diet Energy Drinks       623        $1.7           0.03%       554       $12.8           0.04%
Prdct/Med Liq
Nutr
Nuts              Peanuts All              624        $1.7           0.03%       594       $11.5           0.04%
Rts/Micro Soup/   Microwavable Soups       625        $1.7           0.03%       495       $15.3           0.05%
Broth
Service Case      Marinated Pork           626        $1.7           0.03%       519       $14.3           0.05%
Meat
Chicken &         Chix: Baked 8pc          627        $1.7           0.03%       837        $5.5           0.02%
Poultry           Cut Up (Cold)
Vegetables        Beans                    628        $1.7           0.03%       457       $16.9           0.05%
Cooking Bulk
Baby Foods        Baby Spring Waters       629        $1.7           0.03%     1,128        $2.0           0.01%
Shelf Stable      Tomato Juice (Over       630        $1.7           0.03%       662        $9.6           0.03%
Juice             50% Jce)
Authentic         Authentic                631        $1.7           0.03%       998        $3.2           0.01%
Hispanic Fds &    Vegetables And
Product           Foods
Meat Snacks       Meat Sticks/Bites        632        $1.7           0.03%       972        $3.6           0.01%
Refrigerated      Hispanic Cheese          633        $1.7           0.03%       769        $6.9           0.02%
Hispanic
Grocery
Can Fruit/Jar     Cranberry Sauce          634        $1.7           0.03%       642       $10.0           0.03%
Applesauce
Fitness & Diet    Fitness & Diet--         635        $1.7           0.03%       298       $28.7           0.09%
Bars W/O Flour
Pies              Pies: Cream/             636        $1.6           0.02%       728        $7.8           0.02%
Meringue
Berries           Strawberries             637        $1.6           0.02%       386       $21.4           0.07%
Organic
Candy--Packaged   Novelty Candy            638        $1.6           0.02%       827        $5.7           0.02%
Party Tray        Deli Tray:               639        $1.6           0.02%       636       $10.2           0.03%
Sandwiches
Value-Added       Cut Fruit All            640        $1.6           0.02%       704        $8.5           0.03%
Fruit             Other Prepack
Nuts              Walnuts Shelled          641        $1.6           0.02%       431       $18.5           0.06%
Turkey Offal      External [Turkey]        642        $1.6           0.02%     1,133        $2.0           0.01%
Flour & Meals     Flour: Misc/             643        $1.6           0.02%       533       $13.6           0.04%
Specialty/Blend
Frozen Ethnic     Frozen                   644        $1.6           0.02%       771        $6.7           0.02%
Internaional
[Ethnic Foods]
Deli Meat:        Deli Meat:               645        $1.6           0.02%       336       $25.5           0.08%
Presliced         Specialty Dry
Meats
Dressings/Dips    Dressing Creamy          646        $1.6           0.02%       512       $14.5           0.05%
Spices &          Table Salt/Popcorn       647        $1.6           0.02%       698        $8.6           0.03%
Extracts          Salt
Meat--Shelf       Hash: Canned             648        $1.6           0.02%       863        $5.1           0.02%
Stable            [Meat]
Water--(Sparklin  Distilled Water          649        $1.6           0.02%       579       $12.2           0.04%
g & Still)
Frozen Desserts   Frzn Pastry &            650        $1.6           0.02%       694        $8.8           0.03%
Cookies
Potatoes          Potatoes Gold            651        $1.6           0.02%       503       $14.8           0.05%
(Bulk & Bag)
Herbs/Garlic      Garlic Whole             652        $1.6           0.02%       557       $12.7           0.04%
Cloves
Salad Mix         Coleslaw                 653        $1.6           0.02%       589       $11.9           0.04%
Apples            Caramel/Candy            654        $1.6           0.02%       985        $3.4           0.01%
Apples
Nuts              Almonds Shelled          655        $1.5           0.02%       412       $19.8           0.06%
Service Case      Marinated Poultry        656        $1.5           0.02%       702        $8.5           0.03%
Meat
Carrots           Carrots Bagged           657        $1.5           0.02%       429       $18.6           0.06%
Organic
Frozen Desserts   Single Serv/             658        $1.5           0.02%       898        $4.6           0.01%
Portion Control
Seasonal          Pumpkins                 659        $1.5           0.02%       626       $10.3           0.03%
Chicken Offal     Internal [Chicken        660        $1.5           0.02%       929        $4.3           0.01%
Offal]
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            661        $1.5           0.02%       299       $28.7           0.09%
Pre Pack          Cheese Hard/
Grated
Pears             Pears Bartlett           662        $1.5           0.02%       486       $15.7           0.05%
Meat--Shelf       Beef Stew                663        $1.5           0.02%       897        $4.6           0.01%
Stable
Bread             Bread: Pita/Pocket/      664        $1.5           0.02%       523       $14.1           0.04%
Flatbrd
Chicken &         Chix: Rotisserie         665        $1.5           0.02%       848        $5.4           0.02%
Poultry           Cold
Dry/Ramen         Bouillon                 666        $1.5           0.02%       663        $9.6           0.03%
Bouillon
Nuts              Trail Mix                667        $1.5           0.02%       610       $11.0           0.03%
Enhancements      Enhancements--Sala       668        $1.5           0.02%       858        $5.2           0.02%
(Pickles/         ds/Spreads
Spreads)
Smoked Pork       Bacon--Belly/Jowl        669        $1.5           0.02%       783        $6.6           0.02%
Seafood--Cod      Cod--Fillet              670        $1.5           0.02%       587       $12.0           0.04%
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             671        $1.5           0.02%       834        $5.5           0.02%
Products          Cookies--Seasonal
Traditional       Asian Soy Sauce          672        $1.5           0.02%       630       $10.3           0.03%
Asian Foods
Salad Dresing &   Sand/Horseradish &       673        $1.4           0.02%       749        $7.2           0.02%
Sandwich          Tartar Sauce
Spreads
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated Pie         674        $1.4           0.02%       538       $13.5           0.04%
Products          Crust
Frozen Juice And  Frzn Fruit Drinks        675        $1.4           0.02%       685        $9.1           0.03%
Smoothies         (Under 10% Juice)
Sweet Goods &     Sw Gds: Specialty        676        $1.4           0.02%       784        $6.6           0.02%
Snacks            Desserts
Dinner Mixes-Dry  Pizza Mix Dry            677        $1.4           0.02%       845        $5.4           0.02%
Authentic         Central American         678        $1.4           0.02%       838        $5.5           0.02%
Central           Foods
American Fds
Cereal Bars       Breakfast Bars/          679        $1.4           0.02%       360       $23.6           0.07%
Tarts/Scones
Service Case      Seasoned Beef            680        $1.4           0.02%       724        $7.9           0.03%
Meat
Herbs/Garlic      Herbs Cilanto            681        $1.4           0.02%       637       $10.1           0.03%
Value-Added       Fruit Party Tray         682        $1.4           0.02%       785        $6.5           0.02%
Fruit             Prepack
Dried Fruit       Dried Fruit--Other       683        $1.4           0.02%       491       $15.6           0.05%
Non-Dairy/Dairy   Aseptic Milk             684        $1.4           0.02%       535       $13.6           0.04%
Aseptic
Eggs/Muffins/     Misc Dairy               685        $1.4           0.02%       686        $9.1           0.03%
Potatoes          Refigerated
Shelf Stable      Pineapple Juice          686        $1.4           0.02%       788        $6.4           0.02%
Juice             (Over 50% Juice)
Frozen Entrees    Meatless/                687        $1.4           0.02%       382       $21.5           0.07%
Vegetarian
Powder & Crystal  Sugar Sweetened          688        $1.4           0.02%     1,071        $2.5           0.01%
Drink Mix         Sticks
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Other         689        $1.4           0.02%       951        $3.9           0.01%
Dietary Aid       Diet Cntrl Bars          690        $1.4           0.02%       409       $19.9           0.06%
Prdct/Med Liq     Nutritional
Nutr
Popcorn           Popcorn--Other           691        $1.4           0.02%       641       $10.0           0.03%
Salad & Dips      Sal: Desserts-           692        $1.4           0.02%       906        $4.5           0.01%
Prepack
Dry Cheese        Misc Dry Cheese          693        $1.4           0.02%       739        $7.3           0.02%
Shelf Stable      Cranberry Juice          694        $1.4           0.02%       706        $8.4           0.03%
Juice             (Over 50% Juice)
Baking Mixes      Cookies Mix              695        $1.4           0.02%       699        $8.6           0.03%
Frozen Potatoes   Frzn Baked/Stuffed/      696        $1.3           0.02%       689        $9.0           0.03%
Mashed
Turkey Fresh      Whole Hen (Under         697        $1.3           0.02%       658        $9.7           0.03%
16lbs) [Turkey]
Vegetables        Broccoli/                698        $1.3           0.02%       567       $12.5           0.04%
Cooking           Cauliflower
Packaged          Processed
Dressings/Dips    Dips Caramel/Fruit       699        $1.3           0.02%       819        $5.9           0.02%
Glazes
Dressings/Dips    Dips Guacamole/          700        $1.3           0.02%       563       $12.6           0.04%
Salsa/Queso
Meat--Shelf       Hot Dog Chili            701        $1.3           0.02%     1,063        $2.6           0.01%
Stable            Sauce
Breakfast         Bkfst Sausage--          702        $1.3           0.02%       986        $3.4           0.01%
Sausage           Bkfast Side
Traditional       Asian Noodles/Rice       703        $1.3           0.02%       623       $10.5           0.03%
Asian Foods
Deli Meat:        Deli Meat: Semi-         704        $1.3           0.02%       674        $9.3           0.03%
Presliced         Dry Sausage
Breakfast         Bkfst Sausage--          705        $1.3           0.02%       916        $4.4           0.01%
Sausage           Other Forms
Shortening & Oil  Corn Oil                 706        $1.3           0.02%       943        $4.1           0.01%
Nuts              Almonds                  707        $1.3           0.02%       404       $20.5           0.06%
Hot Cereal        Instant Breakfast        708        $1.3           0.02%       718        $8.1           0.03%
Traditional       Asian Foods And          709        $1.3           0.02%       793        $6.3           0.02%
Asian Foods       Meals
Can Vegetables--  Mixed Vegetables         710        $1.3           0.02%       905        $4.5           0.01%
Shelf Stable
Authentic         Authentic Peppers        711        $1.3           0.02%       910        $4.5           0.01%
Hispanic Fds &
Product
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Links       712        $1.3           0.02%       766        $7.0           0.02%
Poultry Ck
Snack             Tortilla Chips           713        $1.3           0.02%       408       $19.9           0.06%
Salad & Dips      Sal: Salsa Prepack       714        $1.3           0.02%       531       $13.7           0.04%
Fluid Milk        Soy Milk                 715        $1.3           0.02%       753        $7.1           0.02%
Products
Bread             Bread: Sweet/            716        $1.3           0.02%       707        $8.4           0.03%
Breakfast
Bulk Food         Trail Mix/Nuts           717        $1.3           0.02%       441       $18.0           0.06%
Bulk
Service Case      Seasoned Pork            718        $1.3           0.02%       744        $7.3           0.02%
Meat
Refrigerated      Vegetarian Meats         719        $1.3           0.02%       625       $10.4           0.03%
Vegetarian
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal                 720        $1.2           0.02%       754        $7.1           0.02%
Miscellaneous W/
Flour [Candy]
Teas              Tea Bags/Green           721        $1.2           0.02%       604       $11.2           0.04%
Chicken           Chicken Wings            722        $1.2           0.02%     1,111        $2.1           0.01%
Specialty/
Natural
Refrgrated Dough  Refrigerated             723        $1.2           0.02%       634       $10.2           0.03%
Products          Breads
Shelf Stable      Lemon Juice & Lime       724        $1.2           0.02%       727        $7.8           0.02%
Juice             Juice
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            725        $1.2           0.02%       469       $16.2           0.05%
Pre Pack          Cheese Spreads
Baking            Flours/Grains/           726        $1.2           0.02%       509       $14.6           0.05%
Sugar
Smoked Hams       Hams--Dry Cured/         727        $1.2           0.02%       917        $4.4           0.01%
Country
Coffee &          Specialty Instant        728        $1.2           0.02%       732        $7.7           0.02%
Creamers          Coffee W/Swe
Cookies           Fruit Filled             729        $1.2           0.02%       601       $11.3           0.04%
Cookies
Traditional       Mexican Con Queso        730        $1.2           0.02%     1,009        $3.1           0.01%
Mexican Foods
Nuts              Dry Roast Peanuts        731        $1.2           0.02%       479       $15.9           0.05%
Can Seafood--     Sardines                 732        $1.2           0.02%       822        $5.8           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Service Case      Stuffed/Mixed            733        $1.2           0.02%       717        $8.2           0.03%
Meat              Poultry
Citrus            Oranges Non Navel        734        $1.2           0.02%       868        $5.0           0.02%
All
Seafood--Catfish  Catfish--Nuggets         735        $1.2           0.02%     1,151        $1.8           0.01%
Snack             Soy/Rice Snacks          736        $1.2           0.02%       488       $15.7           0.05%
Bread             Bread: Sourdough         737        $1.2           0.02%       456       $17.1           0.05%
Refrigerated      Misc Hispanic            738        $1.2           0.02%       635       $10.2           0.03%
Hispanic          Grocery
Grocery
Prepared/Pdgd     Boxed Prepared/          739        $1.2           0.02%       489       $15.6           0.05%
Foods             Entree/Dry Prep
Shelf Stable      Prune Juice (Over        740        $1.2           0.02%       711        $8.3           0.03%
Juice             50% Juice)
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            741        $1.2           0.02%       433       $18.5           0.06%
Pre Pack          Cheese Feta
Teas              Instant Tea & Tea        742        $1.1           0.02%       914        $4.4           0.01%
Mix (W/Sugar)
Pre-Slice         Pre-Sliced Semi-         743        $1.1           0.02%       514       $14.4           0.05%
Service Case      Soft Cheese
Cheese
Shortening & Oil  Cooking Oil:             744        $1.1           0.02%       775        $6.7           0.02%
Peanut/Safflower
Authentic         Hispanic Cookies         745        $1.1           0.02%     1,152        $1.8           0.01%
Hispanic Fds &    Crackers
Product
Can Vegetables--  Carrots                  746        $1.1           0.02%       900        $4.5           0.01%
Shelf Stable
Juice Drinks--    Juice (Over 50%          747        $1.1           0.02%       659        $9.7           0.03%
Carb              juice)
Juices Super      Juice Single Blend       748        $1.1           0.02%       673        $9.4           0.03%
Premium
Nuts              Oil Roast Peanuts        749        $1.1           0.02%       615       $10.9           0.03%
Beef: Thin Meats  Skirt [Beef]             750        $1.1           0.02%       798        $6.3           0.02%
Nuts              Nuts Other               751        $1.1           0.02%       593       $11.5           0.04%
Peppers           Peppers Yellow           752        $1.1           0.02%       599       $11.4           0.04%
Bell
Baking Needs      Baking Powder &          753        $1.1           0.02%       715        $8.2           0.03%
Soda
Frzn Meatless     Meatless Burgers         754        $1.1           0.02%       639       $10.1           0.03%
Candy--Checklane  Misc Checklane           755        $1.1           0.02%     1,052        $2.6           0.01%
Candy
Pears             Pears Anjou              756        $1.1           0.02%       649        $9.8           0.03%
Powder & Crystal  Fluid Pouch              757        $1.1           0.02%       781        $6.6           0.02%
Drink Mix         [Powder Drink
Mix]
Pasta & Pizza     Pizza Sauce              758        $1.1           0.02%       810        $6.1           0.02%
Sauce
Spices/Jarred     Garlic Jar               759        $1.1           0.02%       729        $7.7           0.02%
Garlic
Sweet Goods &     Sweet Goods: Candy       760        $1.1           0.02%       920        $4.4           0.01%
Snacks
Soft Drinks       Tea Bottles With         761        $1.1           0.02%     1,148        $1.9           0.01%
Sweetener/Sugar
Random Weight     Lunch Meats              762        $1.1           0.02%       947        $4.0           0.01%
Meat Products
Authentic         Hispanic                 763        $1.1           0.02%       979        $3.5           0.01%
Hispanic Fds &    Carbonated
Product           Beverages
Isotonic Drinks   Isotonic Drinks          764        $1.1           0.02%       889        $4.7           0.01%
Multi-Serve
Juices Super      Juices Antioxidant/      765        $1.0           0.02%       719        $8.1           0.03%
Premium           Wellness
Spices/Jarred     Spices &                 766        $1.0           0.02%       892        $4.6           0.01%
Garlic            Seasonings
Trail Mix &       Trail Mixes/Snack        767        $1.0           0.02%       650        $9.8           0.03%
Snacks
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Natural/      768        $1.0           0.02%       559       $12.7           0.04%
Organic
Lunchmeat         Lunchmeat--Peggabl       769        $1.0           0.02%       877        $4.9           0.02%
e Deli Fresh
Bread             Bread: Tortillas/        770        $1.0           0.02%       648        $9.8           0.03%
Wraps
Ice Cream Ice     Quarts [Ice Cream        771        $1.0           0.02%       924        $4.3           0.01%
Milk & Sherbets   & Sherbert]
Infant Formula    Infant Formula Up        772        $1.0           0.02%     1,015        $3.0           0.01%
Age
Tropical Fruit    Kiwi Fruit               773        $1.0           0.02%       764        $7.0           0.02%
Peppers           Peppers Jalapeno         774        $1.0           0.02%       911        $4.4           0.01%
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Cherry          775        $1.0           0.02%       580       $12.1           0.04%
Trail Mix &       Candy W/O Flour          776        $1.0           0.02%       844        $5.4           0.02%
Snacks
Condiments        Oils/Vinegar             777        $1.0           0.02%       643       $10.0           0.03%
Value-Added       Instore Cut              778        $1.0           0.02%       654        $9.7           0.03%
Vegetables        Vegetables
Candy--Packaged   Candy Boxed              779        $1.0           0.02%       852        $5.3           0.02%
Chocolates W/
Flour
Dried Fruit       Dried Plums              780        $1.0           0.02%       609       $11.0           0.03%
Shelf Stable      Apple Juice &            781        $1.0           0.02%     1,024        $3.0           0.01%
Juice             Cider (50% And
Under)
Pre-Slice         Pre-Sliced Semi-         782        $1.0           0.02%       520       $14.3           0.05%
Service Case      Hard [Cheese]
Cheese
Tomato Products-  Tomato Stewed            783        $1.0           0.02%       790        $6.4           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Nuts              Misc Snack Nuts          784        $1.0           0.02%       726        $7.8           0.02%
Beef: Thin Meats  Flank [Beef]             785        $1.0           0.02%       547       $13.0           0.04%
Cookies           Cookies: Message         786        $1.0           0.02%       876        $4.9           0.02%
Baking Mixes      Miscellaneous            787        $1.0           0.02%       752        $7.2           0.02%
Package Mixes
Mediterranean     Sal: Olives/             788        $1.0           0.02%       492       $15.5           0.05%
Bar               Pickles--Bulk
Dry Sce/Gravy/    Cooking Bags With        789        $1.0           0.01%     1,078        $2.4           0.01%
Potatoes/         Spices/Season
Stuffng
Stone Fruit       Cherries Ranier          790        $1.0           0.01%       691        $9.0           0.03%
Energy Drinks     Energy Drink--           791        $1.0           0.01%       671        $9.4           0.03%
Multi-Pack
Meat--Shelf       Beef/Pork--Dried         792        $1.0           0.01%       990        $3.3           0.01%
Stable            Sliced
Cookies           Cookies/Sweet            793        $1.0           0.01%       542       $13.1           0.04%
Goods
Turkey Fresh      Whole Tom (Over          794        $1.0           0.01%       747        $7.3           0.02%
16lbs) [Turkey]
Ss/Vending--      Vending Size/Sngl        795        $1.0           0.01%     1,090        $2.3           0.01%
Cookie/Cracker    Serve Cracker
Can Vegetables--  White Potatoes           796        $1.0           0.01%       927        $4.3           0.01%
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--     Oysters                  797        $0.9           0.01%     1,025        $3.0           0.01%
Shelf Stable
Dressings/Dips    Dips Veggie              798        $0.9           0.01%       740        $7.3           0.02%
Snacks            Snacks: Pita Chips       799        $0.9           0.01%       484       $15.7           0.05%
Candy--Packaged   Candy Boxed              800        $0.9           0.01%       772        $6.7           0.02%
Chocolates
Chicken Grinds    Ground Chicken           801        $0.9           0.01%       767        $6.9           0.02%
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal Candy Box       802        $0.9           0.01%       949        $4.0           0.01%
Non-Chocola
Frozen Meat       Alternatives Soy/        803        $0.9           0.01%       688        $9.0           0.03%
Tofu
Can Vegetables--  Kraut & Cabbage          804        $0.9           0.01%       814        $6.0           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Cereals           Granola                  805        $0.9           0.01%       501       $15.1           0.05%
Baking Needs      Cooking Chocolate        806        $0.9           0.01%       627       $10.3           0.03%
(Ex Smi-Swt)
Candy--Packaged   Candy Box Non-           807        $0.9           0.01%       953        $3.9           0.01%
Chocolate
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--            808        $0.9           0.01%       585       $12.1           0.04%
Natural/Organic
Dressings/Dips    Dressing Blue            809        $0.9           0.01%       666        $9.5           0.03%
Cheese
Herbs/Garlic      Herbs Fresh Other        810        $0.9           0.01%       518       $14.3           0.05%
Organic
Shelf Stable      Tomato Juice (50%        811        $0.9           0.01%       975        $3.5           0.01%
Juice             And Under)
Popcorn           Caramel Coated           812        $0.9           0.01%     1,006        $3.1           0.01%
Snacks
Deli Meat:        Deli Meat: Turkey        813        $0.9           0.01%       516       $14.3           0.05%
Presliced
Cake Decor        Cake Decors--            814        $0.9           0.01%       841        $5.4           0.02%
Candies
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            815        $0.9           0.01%       471       $16.2           0.05%
Pre Pack          Cheese Mozzarell
Shelf Stable      Cranapple/Cran           816        $0.9           0.01%       797        $6.3           0.02%
Juice             Grape Juice
Rtd Tea/New Age   Juice (Over 50%          817        $0.9           0.01%     1,047        $2.7           0.01%
Juice             Juice)
Crackers & Misc   Specialty Crackers       818        $0.9           0.01%       444       $17.8           0.06%
Baked Food
Salad & Dips      Salad Bar                819        $0.9           0.01%       644       $10.0           0.03%
Service Case      Marinated Beef           820        $0.9           0.01%       782        $6.6           0.02%
Meat
Juice             Non-Carb Jce             821        $0.9           0.01%       880        $4.8           0.02%
(Under 50% Juice)
Organics Fruit &  Organic Salad Mix        822        $0.9           0.01%       499       $15.1           0.05%
Vegetables
Chilled Ready     Store Brand              823        $0.9           0.01%       932        $4.2           0.01%
Meals
Frzn Meatless     Meatless Breakfast       824        $0.9           0.01%       697        $8.6           0.03%
Dry Tea/Coffee/   Tea Bags                 825        $0.9           0.01%       681        $9.2           0.03%
Coco Mixes        (Supplement)
Melons            Watermelon W/Seeds       826        $0.9           0.01%     1,019        $3.0           0.01%
Whole
Dry Mix Desserts  Misc: Cheesecake/        827        $0.9           0.01%     1,087        $2.3           0.01%
Mousse Mixes
Value-Added       Parfait Cups             828        $0.8           0.01%     1,032        $2.9           0.01%
Fruit             Instore
Vinegar &         Specialty Vinegar        829        $0.8           0.01%       552       $12.9           0.04%
Cooking Wines
Pork Shoulder     Fresh Hams               830        $0.8           0.01%     1,030        $2.9           0.01%
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            831        $0.8           0.01%       815        $6.0           0.02%
Pre Pack          Cheese Processed
Turkey Smoked     Turkey Wings             832        $0.8           0.01%     1,228        $1.3           0.00%
Frzn Seafood      Frz Non-Coated           833        $0.8           0.01%       860        $5.2           0.02%
Fish Fillets
Vegetables Salad  Radish                   834        $0.8           0.01%       713        $8.3           0.03%
Cookies           Specialty Cookies        835        $0.8           0.01%       622       $10.7           0.03%
Traditional       Traditional Thai         836        $0.8           0.01%       710        $8.3           0.03%
Asian Foods       Foods
Yogurt            Yogurt/Adult             837        $0.8           0.01%       958        $3.8           0.01%
Drinks
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            838        $0.8           0.01%       527       $13.9           0.04%
Pre Pack          Cheese Cheddar
Peppers           Peppers All Other        839        $0.8           0.01%       864        $5.1           0.02%
Pickle/Relish/    Pickld Veg/Peppers/      840        $0.8           0.01%       820        $5.9           0.02%
Pckld Veg &       Etc.
Olives
Candy--Packaged   Candy Bags-Non           841        $0.8           0.01%       965        $3.7           0.01%
Chocolate W/Flour
Frozen Juice And  Frzn Conc Under          842        $0.8           0.01%       983        $3.4           0.01%
Smoothies         50% Juice
Pickle/Relish/    Specialty Olives         843        $0.8           0.01%       614       $11.0           0.03%
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Salad & Dips      Sal: Desserts--          844        $0.8           0.01%       890        $4.7           0.01%
Bulk
Authentic Asian   Authentic Japanese       845        $0.8           0.01%       755        $7.1           0.02%
Foods             Foods
Crackers          Crackers                 846        $0.8           0.01%       508       $14.6           0.05%
Smoked Pork       Smoked Picnics           847        $0.8           0.01%     1,105        $2.2           0.01%
[Pork]
Condiments        Nut Butters/Peanut       848        $0.8           0.01%       549       $12.9           0.04%
Butter
Tomato Products-  Tomatoes/Whole           849        $0.8           0.01%       865        $5.1           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Party Tray Deli   Tray: Appetizers &       850        $0.8           0.01%       957        $3.9           0.01%
Hors D'oe
Soup              Cans Soup/Chili          851        $0.8           0.01%       561       $12.7           0.04%
Service Case      Kabobs Beef              852        $0.8           0.01%       843        $5.4           0.02%
Meat
Vegetables Salad  Variety Lettuce          853        $0.8           0.01%       568       $12.5           0.04%
Organic
Melons            Honeydew Whole           854        $0.8           0.01%       817        $5.9           0.02%
Grapes            Grapes Red Globe         855        $0.8           0.01%       980        $3.5           0.01%
Condiments &      Chili Sauce/             856        $0.7           0.01%       813        $6.0           0.02%
Sauces            Cocktail Sauce
Tropical Fruit    Pomegranates             857        $0.7           0.01%       926        $4.3           0.01%
Organics Fruit &  Organic Value-           858        $0.7           0.01%       762        $7.0           0.02%
Vegetables        Added Vegetables
Grapes            Grapes Other             859        $0.7           0.01%       960        $3.8           0.01%
Chicken Fresh     Mixed Packs              860        $0.7           0.01%       923        $4.3           0.01%
[Chicken]
Nuts              Nuts Inshell             861        $0.7           0.01%       894        $4.6           0.01%
Authentic         Hispanic Juice           862        $0.7           0.01%     1,123        $2.0           0.01%
Hispanic Fds &    Under 50% Juice
Product
Coffee &          Flavored Can             863        $0.7           0.01%       823        $5.8           0.02%
Creamers          Coffee
Prepared/Pdgd     Vegetables/Dry           864        $0.7           0.01%       575       $12.2           0.04%
Foods             Beans
Bread             Bread: Rye/              865        $0.7           0.01%       720        $8.1           0.03%
Cocktail
Baking Needs      Maraschino               866        $0.7           0.01%       944        $4.1           0.01%
Cherries
Seafood--Crab     Crab--Dungy              867        $0.7           0.01%       952        $3.9           0.01%
Bread             Whole Grain Bread        868        $0.7           0.01%       680        $9.2           0.03%
Smoked Hams       Hams--Whole Bone-        869        $0.7           0.01%     1,092        $2.3           0.01%
In
Apples            Apples Braeburn          870        $0.7           0.01%       668        $9.4           0.03%
(Bulk & Bag)
Shelf Stable      Grapefruit Juice         871        $0.7           0.01%       939        $4.1           0.01%
Juice             (Over 50% Juice)
Water             Fortified/Water          872        $0.7           0.01%       913        $4.4           0.01%
Meat--Shelf       Potted Meats And         873        $0.7           0.01%     1,103        $2.2           0.01%
Stable            Spreads
Water--(Sparklin  Sparkling Water--        874        $0.7           0.01%       581       $12.1           0.04%
g & Still)        Unflavored
Seafood--Trout    Steelhead Fr             875        $0.7           0.01%       812        $6.0           0.02%
[Trout]
Can Vegetables--  Beets                    876        $0.7           0.01%       825        $5.8           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Frozen Juice And  Smoothies-Frozen         877        $0.7           0.01%       950        $4.0           0.01%
Smoothies
Frozen Breakfast  Frzn Bagels              878        $0.7           0.01%     1,035        $2.9           0.01%
Foods
Party Tray Deli   Tray: Fruit And          879        $0.7           0.01%       758        $7.1           0.02%
Vegetable
Chicken           Whole Chicken            880        $0.7           0.01%       902        $4.5           0.01%
Specialty/        (Roasters/Fryer)
Natural
Bread             Bread: Wheat/Whl         881        $0.7           0.01%       629       $10.3           0.03%
Grain
Non-Dairy/Dairy   Soy Beverage             882        $0.7           0.01%       849        $5.3           0.02%
Aseptic
Fitness & Diet    Fitness & Diet-          883        $0.7           0.01%       741        $7.3           0.02%
Powder Ntrtnl
Frzn Meatless     Meatless Poultry         884        $0.7           0.01%       799        $6.2           0.02%
Pies              Pies: Sugar Free         885        $0.7           0.01%       904        $4.5           0.01%
Dinner Sausage    Dnr Sausage--Fresh       886        $0.7           0.01%       918        $4.4           0.01%
Poultry
Spices &          Imitation Extracts       887        $0.7           0.01%       973        $3.5           0.01%
Extracts
Beverages         Can/Btl Carb Beve        888        $0.7           0.01%       736        $7.6           0.02%
50% And Under
Vegetables        Vegetables Cooking       889        $0.7           0.01%       821        $5.9           0.02%
Cooking           Packaged
Packaged
Frozen Vegetable  Fz Box Vegetables--      890        $0.7           0.01%       824        $5.8           0.02%
& Veg Dish        Plain
Soup              Broths                   891        $0.7           0.01%       560       $12.7           0.04%
Bread             Bread: Brand             892        $0.7           0.01%       679        $9.2           0.03%
Can Vegetables--  Peas Fresh Pack/         893        $0.7           0.01%       978        $3.5           0.01%
Shelf Stable      Crowder
Snacks            Snacks: Salty            894        $0.7           0.01%       703        $8.5           0.03%
Salad & Dips      Protein Salads--         895        $0.6           0.01%       946        $4.0           0.01%
Prepack
Turkey Smoked     Turkey Drums             896        $0.6           0.01%     1,250        $1.2           0.00%
Apples            Apples Gala (Bulk        897        $0.6           0.01%       672        $9.4           0.03%
& Bag) Organic
Stone Fruit       Peaches White            898        $0.6           0.01%       833        $5.5           0.02%
Flesh
Tomatoes          Tomatoes--Other          899        $0.6           0.01%     1,003        $3.2           0.01%
Service Case      Kabobs Poultry           900        $0.6           0.01%       879        $4.9           0.02%
Meat
Frzn Meatless     Meatless                 901        $0.6           0.01%       869        $5.0           0.02%
Miscellaneous
Seafood--Scallop  Scallops--Sea            902        $0.6           0.01%       791        $6.4           0.02%
s
Convenience/      Jarred Fruit Multi       903        $0.6           0.01%       901        $4.5           0.01%
Snacking          Serve
Traditional       Asian Vegetables         904        $0.6           0.01%       847        $5.4           0.02%
Asian Foods
Shelf Stable      Cranapple/Cran           905        $0.6           0.01%       760        $7.0           0.02%
Juice             Grape Juice
Frozen Juice And  Cocktail Mixes-Frz       906        $0.6           0.01%     1,107        $2.2           0.01%
Smoothies
Shelf Stable      Grapefruit Juice         907        $0.6           0.01%     1,007        $3.1           0.01%
Juice             (50% And Under)
Tomato Products-  Tomato Crushed           908        $0.6           0.01%       780        $6.6           0.02%
Shelf Stable
Condiments &      Misc Meat Sauces         909        $0.6           0.01%       962        $3.7           0.01%
Sauces
Shelf Stable      Blended Juice &          910        $0.6           0.01%     1,022        $3.0           0.01%
Juice             Combinations
Coffee &          Bulk Coffee              911        $0.6           0.01%       701        $8.6           0.03%
Creamers
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            912        $0.6           0.01%       595       $11.4           0.04%
Pre Pack          Cheese Semi Soft
Non-Dairy/Dairy   Nut Milk                 913        $0.6           0.01%       763        $7.0           0.02%
Aseptic
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            914        $0.6           0.01%       620       $10.8           0.03%
Pre Pack          Cheese Soft &
Ripe
Authentic         Authentic Soups/         915        $0.6           0.01%     1,200        $1.5           0.00%
Hispanic Fds &    Bouillons
Product
Authentic Asian   Authentic Chinese        916        $0.6           0.01%       931        $4.2           0.01%
Foods             Foods
Baby Food         Baby Food                917        $0.6           0.01%       835        $5.5           0.02%
Deli Meat:        Deli Meat: Ham           918        $0.6           0.01%       665        $9.5           0.03%
Presliced
Bacon             Bacon--Natural/          919        $0.6           0.01%       759        $7.1           0.02%
Organic
Frozen Potatoes   Frzn Onion Rings         920        $0.6           0.01%     1,177        $1.6           0.01%
Margarines        Margarine: Squeeze       921        $0.6           0.01%       930        $4.2           0.01%
Deli Specialties  Dl Spec: Dry/            922        $0.6           0.01%       850        $5.3           0.02%
(Retail Pk)       Refrig Pastas
Seafood--Crab     Crab--Other              923        $0.6           0.01%     1,213        $1.4           0.00%
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            924        $0.6           0.01%       619       $10.8           0.03%
Pre Pack          Cheese Blue/Gorg
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Others          925        $0.6           0.01%       808        $6.1           0.02%
Organic
Teas              Instant Tea & Tea        926        $0.6           0.01%     1,038        $2.9           0.01%
Mix
Refrigerated      Vegetarian Misc          927        $0.6           0.01%       963        $3.7           0.01%
Vegetarian
Canned & Dry      Non Fat Dry Milk         928        $0.6           0.01%       859        $5.2           0.02%
Milk
Refrigerated      Kefir                    929        $0.6           0.01%       751        $7.2           0.02%
Dairy Case
Coffee &          Specialty Instant        930        $0.6           0.01%     1,043        $2.8           0.01%
Creamers          Coffee
Can Vegetables--  Artichokes               931        $0.6           0.01%       682        $9.1           0.03%
Shelf Stable
Soft Drinks       Mixers (Tonic            932        $0.5           0.01%       540       $13.2           0.04%
Water/Gngr Ale)
Refrigerated      Refrigerated Pasta       933        $0.5           0.01%       742        $7.3           0.02%
Italian           Sauce
Baking Needs      Baking Cocoa             934        $0.5           0.01%       851        $5.3           0.02%
Vegetables Salad  Spinach Bulk             935        $0.5           0.01%       883        $4.8           0.02%
Infant Formula    Infant Formula           936        $0.5           0.01%     1,455        $0.3           0.00%
Milk Base
Seafood--Salad/   Dips/Spreads             937        $0.5           0.01%     1,069        $2.5           0.01%
Dip/Sce/Cond
Authentic         Hispanic Baking          938        $0.5           0.01%     1,233        $1.3           0.00%
Hispanic Fds &    Needs
Product
Baking Needs      Marshmallow Creme        939        $0.5           0.01%       977        $3.5           0.01%
Buffalo           Grinds [Buffalo]         940        $0.5           0.01%       712        $8.3           0.03%
Baking Needs      Yeast: Dry               941        $0.5           0.01%       816        $5.9           0.02%
Lamb              Round/Leg [Lamb]         942        $0.5           0.01%       936        $4.2           0.01%
Seafood--Smoked   Seafood Smoked           943        $0.5           0.01%       709        $8.4           0.03%
Salmon
Processed         Packaged Dry Mixes       944        $0.5           0.01%     1,039        $2.9           0.01%
Frozen Meat       Micro Protein            945        $0.5           0.01%       899        $4.6           0.01%
Alternatives      [Meats]
Refrgrated Dough  Misc Refrig Dough        946        $0.5           0.01%     1,162        $1.7           0.01%
Products          Products
Deli Meat:        Deli Meat: Beef          947        $0.5           0.01%       862        $5.2           0.02%
Presliced
Vegetables        Celery Organic           948        $0.5           0.01%       779        $6.6           0.02%
Cooking Bulk
Cakes             Cakes: Creme/            949        $0.5           0.01%     1,171        $1.7           0.01%
Pudding Novelties
Lamb              Loin [Lamb]              950        $0.5           0.01%       882        $4.8           0.02%
Refrgratd Juices/ Dairy Case Tea No        951        $0.5           0.01%     1,002        $3.2           0.01%
Drinks            Sugar Or Sweetner
Baking Needs      Coconut [Baking          952        $0.5           0.01%       873        $4.9           0.02%
Needs]
Salad Mix         Salad Spinach            953        $0.5           0.01%       696        $8.7           0.03%
Organic
Pork Grinds       Ground Pork              954        $0.5           0.01%       928        $4.3           0.01%
Processed         Squeeze Lemons/          955        $0.5           0.01%       988        $3.3           0.01%
Limes
Lamb              Chuck/Shoulder           956        $0.5           0.01%     1,083        $2.4           0.01%
[Lamb]
Berries           Raspberries              957        $0.5           0.01%       683        $9.1           0.03%
Organic
Rolls             Rolls: Biscuits/         958        $0.5           0.01%       886        $4.7           0.02%
Eng Muffins
Snacks            Snacks: Tortilla         959        $0.5           0.01%       874        $4.9           0.02%
Chips
Condiments        Honey/Syrup              960        $0.5           0.01%       921        $4.3           0.01%
Rice Cakes        Large Cakes              961        $0.5           0.01%       855        $5.2           0.02%
Authentic         Italian Vegetables       962        $0.5           0.01%       738        $7.4           0.02%
Italian Foods
Dressings/Dips    Dips Fruit And           963        $0.5           0.01%     1,149        $1.9           0.01%
Chocolate
Potatoes          Potatoes Other           964        $0.5           0.01%       789        $6.4           0.02%
Organic
Juices Super      Juices (50% And          965        $0.5           0.01%     1,141        $1.9           0.01%
Premium           Under Juice)
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            966        $0.5           0.01%     1,192        $1.5           0.00%
Pre Pack          Cheese Hispanic
Seafood--Value-   Seafood Value-           967        $0.5           0.01%       997        $3.2           0.01%
Added             Added Crab
Service Case      Stuffed/Mixed Pork       968        $0.5           0.01%     1,051        $2.7           0.01%
Meat
Herbs/Garlic      Sprouts                  969        $0.5           0.01%       955        $3.9           0.01%
Pears             Pears Bosc               970        $0.5           0.01%       922        $4.3           0.01%
Meat--Shelf       Corn Beef                971        $0.5           0.01%     1,169        $1.7           0.01%
Stable
Refrigerated      Non-Dairy Cheese         972        $0.5           0.01%       893        $4.6           0.01%
Vegetarian
Isotonic Drinks   Sports Drink N/          973        $0.5           0.01%     1,017        $3.0           0.01%
Supplmnt Milk
Soft Drinks       Seltzer Unflavored       974        $0.5           0.01%       757        $7.1           0.02%
Refrigerated      Tofu                     975        $0.5           0.01%       809        $6.1           0.02%
Vegetarian
Berries           Blueberries              976        $0.5           0.01%       660        $9.6           0.03%
Organic
Trail Mix &       Candy W/Flour            977        $0.5           0.01%     1,027        $2.9           0.01%
Snacks
Cakes             Cakes: Cheesecake        978        $0.5           0.01%     1,115        $2.1           0.01%
Novelties
Water--(Sparklin  Sparkling Water--        979        $0.5           0.01%       675        $9.3           0.03%
g & Still)        Flvrd Unsweetened
Powder & Crystal  Breakfast Crystals       980        $0.5           0.01%     1,209        $1.4           0.00%
Drink Mix
Non-Dairy/Dairy   Rice Beverage            981        $0.5           0.01%       891        $4.6           0.01%
Aseptic
Pies              Pies: Tarts/Minis/       982        $0.5           0.01%     1,045        $2.7           0.01%
Crstdas
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            983        $0.5           0.01%       721        $8.0           0.03%
Pre Pack          Cheese Gouda &
Eda
Enhancements      Enhancements--Spic       984        $0.5           0.01%     1,082        $2.4           0.01%
(Pickles/         es/Sauces
Spreads)
Snacks            Snacks: Crackers/        985        $0.5           0.01%       705        $8.4           0.03%
Cookies
Baking Needs      Corn Starch              986        $0.5           0.01%     1,062        $2.6           0.01%
Candy--Packaged   Bulk Candy               987        $0.5           0.01%     1,031        $2.9           0.01%
Prepared/Pdgd     Pasta/Ramen              988        $0.5           0.01%       801        $6.2           0.02%
Foods
Specialty Cheese  Specialty Ppk            989        $0.5           0.01%       624       $10.4           0.03%
Pre Pack          Cheese Goat Milk
Herbs/Garlic      Herbs Basil              990        $0.4           0.01%       692        $9.0           0.03%
Organic
Bakery Party      Party Trays: Cakes       991        $0.4           0.01%     1,147        $1.9           0.01%
Trays
Mushrooms         Mushrooms White          992        $0.4           0.01%       830        $5.7           0.02%
Bulk
Candy             Candy/Chocolate          993        $0.4           0.01%       786        $6.5           0.02%
Candy--Packaged   Seasonal Candy           994        $0.4           0.01%       999        $3.2           0.01%
Bags-Chocolate
Tomatoes          Tomatoes Cocktail        995        $0.4           0.01%       714        $8.3           0.03%
Pears             Pears Asian              996        $0.4           0.01%       961        $3.8           0.01%
Authentic         Caribbean Foods          997        $0.4           0.01%     1,273        $1.1           0.00%
Caribbean Foods
Dry Bean Veg &    Misc Grain Mixes         998        $0.4           0.01%       735        $7.6           0.02%
Rice
Can Vegetables--  Peas & Onions/Peas       999        $0.4           0.01%     1,136        $1.9           0.01%
Shelf Stable      & Carrot
Seafood--Shellfi  Other Shellfish--      1,000        $0.4           0.01%     1,225        $1.3           0.00%
sh                Other
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Top 1,000                                       $6,580.5            100%             $31,513.8            100%
Totals
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.

EAppendix B. Crosswalk of Top 1,000 Subcommodities to Summary Categories
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commodity               Subcommodity           Summary Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Baby Food               Baby Food                  Baby food
Baby Foods              Baby Food--Beginner        Baby food
Baby Foods              Baby Food                  Junior/All Brands
Baby food
Baby Foods              Baby Food                  Cereals Baby food
Baby Foods              Baby Juices                Baby food
Baby Foods              Baby Spring Waters         Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Starter/Solutio Baby
food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Specialty Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Starter Large P Baby
food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Toddler Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Solutions Large Baby
food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Concentrate Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula             Ready To Use Baby
food
Infant Formula          Baby Isotonic Drinks       Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula Soy Base    Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula Up Age      Baby food
Infant Formula          Infant Formula Milk Base   Baby food
Can Beans               Prepared Beans--Baked W/   Beans
Pork
Can Beans               Variety Beans--Kidney/     Beans
Pinto/E
Dry Bean Veg & Rice     Dry Beans/Peas/Barley:     Beans
Bag & B
Frozen Meat             Soy/Tofu                   Beans
Alternatives
Salad & Dips            Sal: Hommus                Beans
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Beans/Refried      Beans
Foods
Vegetables Cooking      Beans                      Beans
Bulk
Frozen Ice              Ice--Crushed/Cubed         Bottled water
Water                   Fortified/Water            Bottled water
Water--(Sparkling &     Still Water Drnking/Mnrl   Bottled water
Still)                  Water
Water--(Sparkling &     Spring Water               Bottled water
Still)
Water--(Sparkling &     Distilled Water            Bottled water
Still)
Water--(Sparkling &     Sparkling Water--          Bottled water
Still)                  Unflavored
Water--(Sparkling &     Sparkling Water--Flvrd     Bottled water
Still)                  Unswee
Bagels & Cream Cheese   Refrigerated Bagels        Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Mainstream White Bread     Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Mainstream Variety Breads  Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Hamburger Buns             Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Hot Dog Buns               Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Premium Bread              Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Bagels                     Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Sandwich Buns              Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            English Muffins/Waffles    Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Main Meal Bread            Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Dinner Rolls               Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Diet/Light Bread           Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Fruit/Breakfast Bread      Bread and Crackers
Baked Breads            Rye Breads                 Bread and Crackers
Baking Mixes            Biscuit Flour & Mixes      Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Italian/French      Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Specialty           Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Artisan             Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Pita/Pocket/        Bread and Crackers
Flatbrd
Bread                   Bread: Sweet/Breakfast     Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Sourdough           Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Tortillas/Wraps     Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Rye/Cocktail        Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Whole Grain Bread          Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Wheat/Whl Grain     Bread and Crackers
Bread                   Bread: Brand               Bread and Crackers
Cookie/Cracker Multi-   Multi-Pack Crackers        Bread and Crackers
Pks
Crackers                Crackers                   Bread and Crackers
Crackers & Misc Baked   Cheese Crackers            Bread and Crackers
Food
Crackers & Misc Baked   Butter Spray Cracker       Bread and Crackers
Food
Crackers & Misc Baked   Snack Crackers             Bread and Crackers
Food
Crackers & Misc Baked   Saltine/Oyster             Bread and Crackers
Food
Crackers & Misc Baked   Specialty Crackers         Bread and Crackers
Food
Croutons/Bread          Croutons                   Bread and Crackers
Stick&Salad Top
Dry Sce/Gravy/Potatoes/ Stuffing Mixes             Bread and Crackers
Stuffng
Frozen Bread/Dough      Frzn Garlic Toast          Bread and Crackers
Frozen Bread/Dough      Frzn Dinner Rolls          Bread and Crackers
Frozen Bread/Dough      Frzn Garlic Bread          Bread and Crackers
Frozen Bread/Dough      Frzn Biscuits              Bread and Crackers
Frozen Bread/Dough      Frzn Breadsticks           Bread and Crackers
Frozen Breakfast Foods  Frzn Bagels                Bread and Crackers
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Biscuits      Bread and Crackers
Products
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Specialty     Bread and Crackers
Products                Rolls
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Crescent      Bread and Crackers
Products                Rolls
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Breads        Bread and Crackers
Products
Refrgrated Dough        Misc Refrig Dough          Bread and Crackers
Products                Products
Refrigerated Hispanic   Refrigerated Tortillas     Bread and Crackers
Grocery
Rice Cakes              Mini-Cakes                 Bread and Crackers
Rice Cakes              Large Cakes                Bread and Crackers
Rolls                   Rolls: Dinner              Bread and Crackers
Rolls                   Rolls: Sandwich            Bread and Crackers
Rolls                   Rolls: Croissants/         Bread and Crackers
Breadsticks
Rolls                   Rolls: Bagels              Bread and Crackers
Rolls                   Rolls: Biscuits/Eng        Bread and Crackers
Muffins
Ss/Vending--Cookie/     Vending Size/Sngl Serve    Bread and Crackers
Cracker                 Cracke
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Soft Tortillas     Bread and Crackers
Foods                   And Wra
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Taco/Tostado/      Bread and Crackers
Foods                   Shells
Apples                  Caramel/Candy Apples       Candy
Candy                   Candy/Chocolate            Candy
Candy--Checklane        Candy Bars (Singles)       Candy
(Including)
Candy--Checklane        Chewing Gum                Candy
Candy--Checklane        Candy Bars (Singles)       Candy
(Including)
Candy--Checklane        Mints/Candy & Breath (Not  Candy
Life)
Candy--Checklane        Misc Checklane Candy       Candy
Candy--Checklane        Mints/Candy & Breath (Not  Candy
Life)
Candy--Packaged         Candy Bags-Chocolate       Candy
Candy--Packaged         Candy Bars (Multi Pack)    Candy
Candy--Packaged         Candy Bags-Non Chocolate   Candy
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Miscellaneous     Candy
[Candy]
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Bags-       Candy
Chocolate
Candy--Packaged         Gum (Packaged)             Candy
Candy--Packaged         Miscellaneous Candy        Candy
(Including)
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Box-        Candy
Chocolate
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Bags Non-   Candy
Chocol
Candy--Packaged         Candy Bars Multi Pack W/   Candy
Flour
Candy--Packaged         Candy Bags-Chocolate W/    Candy
Flour
Candy--Packaged         Miscellaneous Candy        Candy
(Including)
Candy--Packaged         Novelty Candy              Candy
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Miscellaneous W/  Candy
Flour
Candy--Packaged         Candy Boxed Chocolates W/  Candy
Flour
Candy--Packaged         Candy Boxed Chocolates     Candy
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Box Non-    Candy
Chocola
Candy--Packaged         Candy Box Non-Chocolate    Candy
Candy--Packaged         Candy Bags-Non Chocolate   Candy
W/Flo
Candy--Packaged         Bulk Candy                 Candy
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Bags-       Candy
Chocolate
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Bags Non-   Candy
Chocol
Candy--Packaged         Seasonal Candy Box Non-    Candy
Chocola
Sweet Goods & Snacks    Sweet Goods: Candy         Candy
Trail Mix & Snacks      Candy W/O Flour            Candy
Trail Mix & Snacks      Candy W/Flour              Candy
Cereal Bars             Breakfast Bars/Tarts/      Cereal
Scones
Cereals                 Cereal--Cold               Cereal
Cereals                 Granola                    Cereal
Cnv Breakfast &         Granola Bars               Cereal
Wholesome Snks
Cnv Breakfast &         Cereal Bars                Cereal
Wholesome Snks
Cold Cereal             Kids Cereal                Cereal
Cold Cereal             All Family Cereal          Cereal
Cold Cereal             Adult Cereal               Cereal
Hot Cereal              Instant Oatmeal            Cereal
Hot Cereal              Standard Oatmeal           Cereal
Hot Cereal              Grits                      Cereal
Hot Cereal              Other Hot Cereal           Cereal
Hot Cereal              Instant Breakfast          Cereal
Coffee & Creamers       Unflavored Can Coffee      Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Unflavored Bag Coffee      Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Unflavored Instant Coffee  Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Ready To Drink Coffee      Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Coffee Pods/Singles/       Coffee and tea
Filter Pac
Coffee & Creamers       Flavored Bag Coffee        Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Specialty Instant Coffee   Coffee and tea
W/Swe
Coffee & Creamers       Flavored Can Coffee        Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Bulk Coffee                Coffee and tea
Coffee & Creamers       Specialty Instant Coffee   Coffee and tea
W/O S
Dry Tea/Coffee/Coco     Tea Bags (Supplement)      Coffee and tea
Mixes
Refrgratd Juices/       Tea No Sugar Or Swe        Coffee and tea
Drinks Dairy Case
Teas                    Tea Bags & Bulk Tea        Coffee and tea
Teas                    Tea Bags/Herbal            Coffee and tea
Teas                    Tea Bags/Green             Coffee and tea
Teas                    Instant Tea & Tea Mix      Coffee and tea
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Authentic Sauces/Salsa/    Condiments and
& Product               Picante                    seasoning
Bag Snacks              Salsa & Dips               Condiments and
seasoning
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Fried Onions               Condiments and
Stable                                             seasoning
Condiments              Oils/Vinegar               Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Bbq Sauce                  Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Catsup                     Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Steak & Worchester Sauce   Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Hot Sauce                  Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Marinades                  Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Yellow Mustard             Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Mustard--All Other         Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Wing Sauce                 Condiments and
seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Chili Sauce/Cocktail       Condiments and
Sauce                      seasoning
Condiments & Sauces     Misc Meat Sauces           Condiments and
seasoning
Croutons/Bread Stick &  Salad Toppers              Condiments and
Salad Top                                          seasoning
Dressings/Dips          Dips Guacamole/Salsa/      Condiments and
Queso                      seasoning
Dressings/Dips          Dips Veggie                Condiments and
seasoning
Dressings/Dips          Dips Fruit And Chocolate   Condiments and
seasoning
Dry Sce/Gravy/Potatoes/ Sauce Mixes/Gravy Mixes    Condiments and
Stuffng                 Dry                        seasoning
Dry Sce/Gravy/Potatoes/ Gravy Can/Glass            Condiments and
Stuffng                                            seasoning
Dry Sce/Gravy/Potatoes/ Cooking Bags With Spices/  Condiments and
Stuffng                 Seaso                      seasoning
Enhancements            Enhancements--Pickles/     Condiments and
Kraut                      seasoning
Enhancements            Enhancements--Salads/      Condiments and
Spreads                    seasoning
Enhancements            Enhancements--Spices/      Condiments and
Sauces                     seasoning
Herbs/Garlic            Herbs Cilanto              Condiments and
seasoning
Herbs/Garlic            Herbs Fresh Other Organic  Condiments and
seasoning
Herbs/Garlic            Herbs Basil Organic        Condiments and
seasoning
Mediterranean Bar       Sal: Olives/Pickles--Bulk  Condiments and
seasoning
Mediterranean Bar       Sal: Olives/Pickles--Bulk  Condiments and
seasoning
Pickle/Relish/Pckld     Ripe Olives                Condiments and
Veg & Olives                                       seasoning
Pickle/Relish/Pckld     Peppers                    Condiments and
Veg & Olives                                       seasoning
Pickle/Relish/Pckld     Green Olives               Condiments and
Veg & Olives                                       seasoning
Pickle/Relish/Pckld     Relishes                   Condiments and
Veg & Olives                                       seasoning
Pickle/Relish/Pckld     Pickld Veg/Peppers/Etc.    Condiments and
Veg & Olives                                       seasoning
Pickle/Relish/Pckld     Specialty Olives           Condiments and
Veg & Olives                                       seasoning
Refrigerated Italian    Refrigerated Pasta Sauce   Condiments and
seasoning
Salad & Dips            Sal: Salsa/Dips Bulk       Condiments and
seasoning
Salad & Dips            Sal: Dip Prepack           Condiments and
seasoning
Salad & Dips            Sal: Salsa Prepack         Condiments and
seasoning
Salad Dresing &         Dry Salad Dressing & Dip   Condiments and
Sandwich Spreads        Mixes                      seasoning
Seafood--Salad/Dip/Sce/ Dips/Spreads               Condiments and
Cond                                               seasoning
Spices & Extracts       Traditional Spices         Condiments and
seasoning
Spices & Extracts       Gourmet Spices             Condiments and
seasoning
Spices & Extracts       Pure Extracts              Condiments and
seasoning
Spices & Extracts       Table Salt/Popcorn Salt/   Condiments and
Ice Cr                     seasoning
Spices & Extracts       Imitation Extracts         Condiments and
seasoning
Spices/Jarred Garlic    Spices & Seasonings        Condiments and
seasoning
Traditional Asian       Asian Other Sauces/        Condiments and
Foods                   Marinad                    seasoning
Traditional Asian       Asian Soy Sauce            Condiments and
Foods                                              seasoning
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Sauces And         Condiments and
Foods                   Picante Sau                seasoning
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Seasoning Mixes    Condiments and
Foods                                              seasoning
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Taco Sauce         Condiments and
Foods                                              seasoning
Vinegar & Cooking       Vinegar/White & Cider      Condiments and
Wines                                              seasoning
Vinegar & Cooking       Specialty Vinegar          Condiments and
Wines                                              seasoning
Eggs/Muffins/Potatoes   Eggs--Large                Eggs
Eggs/Muffins/Potatoes   Eggs--Medium               Eggs
Eggs/Muffins/Potatoes   Eggs--X-Large              Eggs
Eggs/Muffins/Potatoes   Eggs--Jumbo                Eggs
Eggs/Muffins/Potatoes   Eggs Substitute            Eggs
Eggs/Muffins/Potatoes   Misc Dairy Refigerated     Eggs
Refrigerated Dairy      Eggs                       Eggs
Case
Dressings/Dips          Creamy                     Fats and oils
Dressing
Dressings/Dips          Blue Cheese                Fats and oils
Dressing
Margarines              Margarine: Tubs And Bowls  Fats and oils
Margarines              Butter                     Fats and oils
Margarines              Margarine Stick            Fats and oils
Margarines              Margarine: Squeeze         Fats and oils
Salad Dresing &         Pourable Salad Dressings   Fats and oils
Sandwich Spreads
Salad Dresing &         Mayonnaise & Whipped       Fats and oils
Sandwich Spreads        Dressing
Salad Dresing &         Sand/Horseradish & Tartar  Fats and oils
Sandwich Spreads        Sauce
Shortening & Oil        Vegetable Oil              Fats and oils
Shortening & Oil        Canola Oils                Fats and oils
Shortening & Oil        Olive Oil                  Fats and oils
Shortening & Oil        Cooking Sprays             Fats and oils
Shortening & Oil        Solid Shortening           Fats and oils
Shortening & Oil        Corn Oil                   Fats and oils
Shortening & Oil        Cooking Oil: Peanut/       Fats and oils
Safflower/
Baking                  Flours/Grains/Sugar        Flour and prepared
flour mixes
Flour & Meals           Flour: White & Self        Flour and prepared
Rising                     flour mixes
Flour & Meals           Breadings/Coatings/Crumbs  Flour and prepared
flour mixes
Flour & Meals           Flour: Misc/Specialty/     Flour and prepared
Blend Et                   flour mixes
Molasses/Syrups/        Pancake Mixes              Flour and prepared
Pancake Mixes                                      flour mixes
Frozen Breakfast Foods  Frzn Breakfast Sandwiches  Frozen prepared foods
Frozen Breakfast Foods  Waffles/Pancakes/French    Frozen prepared foods
Toast
Frozen Breakfast Foods  Frzn Breakfast Entrees     Frozen prepared foods
Frozen Entrees          Meatless/Vegetarian        Frozen prepared foods
Frozen Ethnic           Frozen International       Frozen prepared foods
[Ethnic Food]
Frozen Handhelds &      Snacks/Appetizers          Frozen prepared foods
Snacks
Frozen Handhelds &      Sandwiches & Handhelds     Frozen prepared foods
Snacks
Frozen Handhelds &      Corn Dogs                  Frozen prepared foods
Snacks
Frozen Handhelds &      Burritos                   Frozen prepared foods
Snacks
Frozen Meat             Micro Protein [Meat]       Frozen prepared foods
Alternatives
Frozen Pizza            Pizza/Premium              Frozen prepared foods
Frozen Pizza            Pizza/Economy              Frozen prepared foods
Frozen Pizza            Pizza/Traditional          Frozen prepared foods
Frozen Pizza            Pizza/Single Serve/        Frozen prepared foods
Microwave
Frzn Meatless           Meatless Burgers           Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Meatless           Meatless Breakfast         Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Meatless           Meatless Poultry           Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Meatless           Meatless Miscellaneous     Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Multi Serve        Fz Family Style Entrees    Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Multi Serve        Fz Skillet Meals           Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Multi Serve        Fz Meatballs               Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Pasta              Frozen Pasta               Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Whole Muscle Breaded/18oz  Frozen prepared foods
And
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Boneless Snack/18oz And    Frozen prepared foods
Larger
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Bone-In Wings              Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Fz Meal Kits/Stuffed/      Frozen prepared foods
Other
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Whole Muscle Unbreaded     Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Boneless Snack/Value/      Frozen prepared foods
Small
Frzn Seafood            Frz Coated Fish Fillets    Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Seafood            Frz Fishsticks/Tenders/    Frozen prepared foods
Nuggets
Frzn Seafood            Frz Non-Coated Fish        Frozen prepared foods
Fillets
Frzn Ss Economy Meals   Fz Ss Economy Meals All    Frozen prepared foods
Frzn Ss Premium Meals   Fz Ss Prem Traditional     Frozen prepared foods
Meals
Frzn Ss Premium Meals   Fz Ss Prem Nutritional     Frozen prepared foods
Meals
Apples                  Apples Gala (Bulk & Bag)   Fruits
Apples                  Apples Red Delicious       Fruits
(Bulk & Bag)
Apples                  Apples Granny Smith (Bulk  Fruits
& Bag)
Apples                  Mixed Fruit Bags           Fruits
Apples                  Apples Other (Bulk & Bag)  Fruits
Apples                  Apples Fuji (Bulk & Bag)   Fruits
Apples                  Apples Gold Delicious      Fruits
(Bulk & Bag)
Apples                  Apples Honeycrisp          Fruits
Apples                  Apples Braeburn (Bulk &    Fruits
Bag)
Apples                  Apples Gala (Bulk & Bag)   Fruits
Organic
Apples                  Apples Red Delicious       Fruits
(Bulk & Bag)
Apples                  Apples Granny Smith (Bulk  Fruits
& Bag)
Apples                  Apples Gold Delicious      Fruits
(Bulk & Bag)
Bananas                 Bananas                    Fruits
Bananas                 Bananas Organic            Fruits
Berries                 Strawberries               Fruits
Berries                 Blueberries                Fruits
Berries                 Raspberries                Fruits
Berries                 Blackberries               Fruits
Berries                 Strawberries Organic       Fruits
Berries                 Raspberries Organic        Fruits
Berries                 Blueberries Organic        Fruits
Can Fruit/Jar           Pineapple                  Fruits
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar           Peaches                    Fruits
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar           Fruit Cocktail/Fruit       Fruits
Applesauce              Salad
Can Fruit/Jar           Mandarin Oranges/Citrus    Fruits
Applesauce              Sect
Can Fruit/Jar           Apple Sauce (Excludes      Fruits
Applesauce              Cup)
Can Fruit/Jar           Pears                      Fruits
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar           Cranberry Sauce            Fruits
Applesauce
Citrus                  Oranges Navels All         Fruits
Citrus                  Clementines                Fruits
Citrus                  Lemons                     Fruits
Citrus                  Limes                      Fruits
Citrus                  Grapefruit                 Fruits
Citrus                  Tangerines & Tangelos      Fruits
Citrus                  Oranges Non Navel All      Fruits
Convenience/Snacking    Jarred Fruit Single Serve  Fruits
Convenience/Snacking    Convenience/Snacking       Fruits
Fruit Pro
Convenience/Snacking    Jarred Fruit Multi Serve   Fruits
Dried Fruit             Raisins                    Fruits
Dried Fruit             Dried Fruit--Other         Fruits
Dried Fruit             Dried Plums                Fruits
Frozen Fruits           Frozen Fruit               Fruits
Grapes                  Grapes Red                 Fruits
Grapes                  Grapes White               Fruits
Grapes                  Grapes Black/Blue          Fruits
Grapes                  Grapes Red Globe           Fruits
Grapes                  Grapes Other               Fruits
Melons                  Watermelon Seedless Whole  Fruits
Melons                  Cantaloupe Whole           Fruits
Melons                  Watermelon Personal        Fruits
Melons                  Watermelon W/Seeds Whole   Fruits
Melons                  Honeydew Whole             Fruits
Pears                   Pears Bartlett             Fruits
Pears                   Pears Anjou                Fruits
Pears                   Pears Bosc                 Fruits
Single Serve Fruit/     Fruit Cup                  Fruits
Applesauce
Single Serve Fruit/     Applesauce Cup             Fruits
Applesauce
Stone Fruit             Cherries Red               Fruits
Stone Fruit             Peaches Yellow Flesh       Fruits
Stone Fruit             Nectarines Yellow Flesh    Fruits
Stone Fruit             Plums                      Fruits
Stone Fruit             Cherries Ranier            Fruits
Stone Fruit             Peaches White Flesh        Fruits
Tropical Fruit          Avocado                    Fruits
Tropical Fruit          Pineapple Whole&Peel/      Fruits
Cored
Tropical Fruit          Mango                      Fruits
Tropical Fruit          Kiwi Fruit                 Fruits
Tropical Fruit          Pomegranates               Fruits
Value-Added Fruit       Instore Cut Fruit          Fruits
Value-Added Fruit       Melons Instore Cut         Fruits
Value-Added Fruit       Cut Fruit All Other        Fruits
Prepack
Value-Added Fruit       Fruit Party Tray Prepack   Fruits
Bagels & Cream Cheese   Cream Cheese               High fat dairy/cheese
Bulk Service Case       Bulk Semi-Hard [Cheese]    High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese
Bulk Service Case       Bulk Processed [Cheese]    High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese
Bulk Service Case       Bulk Semi-Soft [Cheese]    High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese
Cheese                  Shredded Cheese            High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  American Single Cheese     High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  Natural Cheese Chunks      High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  String Cheese              High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  Natural Cheese Slices      High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  Miscellaneous Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Coffee & Creamers       Non Dairy Creamer          High fat dairy/cheese
Crackers & Misc Baked   Aerosol Cheese             High fat dairy/cheese
Food
Dry Cheese              Loaf Cheese                High fat dairy/cheese
Dry Cheese              Grated Cheese              High fat dairy/cheese
Dry Cheese              Misc Dry Cheese            High fat dairy/cheese
Fluid Milk Products     Refrigerated Coffee        High fat dairy/cheese
Creamers
Fluid Milk              Products Half & Half       High fat dairy/cheese
Fluid Milk Products     Whipping Cream             High fat dairy/cheese
Fluid Milk Products     Egg Nog/Boiled Custard     High fat dairy/cheese
Fluid Milk Products     Buttermilk                 High fat dairy/cheese
Ice Cream Ice Milk &    Premium [Ice Cream &       High fat dairy/cheese
Sherbets                Sherbert]
Ice Cream Ice Milk &    Traditional [Ice Cream &   High fat dairy/cheese
Sherbets                Sherbert]
Ice Cream Ice Milk &    Pails [Ice Cream &         High fat dairy/cheese
Sherbets                Sherbert]
Ice Cream Ice Milk &    Super Premium Pints [Ice   High fat dairy/cheese
Sherbets                Cream & Sherbert]
Ice Cream Ice Milk &    Premium Pints [Ice Cream   High fat dairy/cheese
Sherbets                & Sherbert]
Ice Cream Ice Milk &    Quarts [Ice Cream &        High fat dairy/cheese
Sherbets                Sherbert]
Milk By-Products        Sour Creams                High fat dairy/cheese
Milk By-Products        Cottage Cheese             High fat dairy/cheese
Milk By-Products        Refrig Dips                High fat dairy/cheese
Milk By-Products        Aerosol Toppings [Milk By- High fat dairy/cheese
Products]
Milk By-Products        Ricotta Cheese             High fat dairy/cheese
Pre-Slice Service Case  Pre-Sliced Semi-Soft       High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  [Cheese]
Pre-Slice Service Case  Pre-Sliced Semi-Hard       High fat dairy/cheese
Cheese                  [Cheese]
Refrigerated Hispanic   Hispanic Cheese            High fat dairy/cheese
Grocery
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese Hard/ High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Grat
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Spreads
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese Feta  High fat dairy/cheese
Pack
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Mozzarell
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Processed
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Cheddar & C
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese Semi  High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Soft
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese Soft  High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    & Ripe
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese Blue/ High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Gorg
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Hispanic
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese       High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Gouda & Eda
Specialty Cheese Pre    Specialty Ppk Cheese Goat  High fat dairy/cheese
Pack                    Milk
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Con Queso          High fat dairy/cheese
Foods
Fruit Snacks            Fruit Snacks               Jams, jellies,
preserves and other
sweets
Peanut Butter/Jelly/    Preserves/Jam/Marmalade    Jams, jellies,
Jams & Honey                                       preserves and other
sweets
Peanut Butter/Jelly/    Jelly                      Jams, jellies,
Jams & Honey                                       preserves and other
sweets
Aseptic Juice           Aseptic Pack Juice And     Juices
Drinks
Frozen Juice And        Frzn Conc Allieds Over     Juices
Smoothies               50% Jui
Frozen Juice And        Frzn Oj & Oj Substitutes   Juices
Smoothies               (Over 5
Juice                   Non-Carb Jce(Over 50%      Juices
Jce)
Juice                   Drinks--Carb Juice (Over   Juices
50%)
Juices Super Premium    Juices Superfoods/         Juices
Enhanced
Juices Super Premium    Juices Proteins            Juices
Juices Super Premium    Juice Single Blend         Juices
Processed               Squeeze Lemons/Limes       Juices
Refrgratd Juices/       Dairy Case 100% Pure       Juices
Drinks                  Juice--O
Refrgratd Juices/       Dairy Case 100% Pure       Juices
Drinks                  Juice Oth
Rtd Tea/New Age Juice   Juice (Over 50% Juice)     Juices
Shelf Stable Juice      Apple Juice & Cider (Over  Juices
50%)
Shelf Stable Juice      Blended Juice &            Juices
Combinations (Ov)
Shelf Stable Juice      Grape Juice (Over 50%      Juices
Juice)
Shelf Stable Juice      Veg Juice (Except Tomato)  Juices
(Ove)
Shelf Stable Juice      Tomato Juice (Over 50%     Juices
Jce)
Shelf Stable Juice      Pineapple Juice (Over 50%  Juices
Juic)
Shelf Stable Juice      Cranberry Juice (Over 50%  Juices
Jce)
Shelf Stable Juice      Lemon Juice & Lime Juice   Juices
(Over)
Shelf Stable Juice      Prune Juice (Over 50%      Juices
Juice)
Shelf Stable Juice      Cranapple/Cran Grape       Juices
Juice (Ov)
Shelf Stable Juice      Grapefruit Juice (Over     Juices
50% Jui)
Shelf Stable Juice      Cranapple/Cran Grape       Juices
Juice (Un)
Shelf Stable Juice      Grapefruit Juice (50% And  Juices
Unde)
Bacon                   Bacon--Trad 16oz Or Less   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Bacon                   Bacon--Trad Greater Than   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
16oz
Bacon                   Bacon--Poultry             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Bacon                   Bacon--Pre-Cooked          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Bacon                   Bacon--Trad Center Cut     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Bacon                   Bacon--Other               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Bacon                   Bacon--Natural/Organic     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Grinds            Lean [Beef]                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Grinds            Primal [Beef]              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Grinds            Angus [Beef]               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Grinds            Patties [Beef]             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Loins             Choice Beef                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Loins Select      Beef                       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Rib               Angus [Beef]               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Round             Choice Beef                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Round             Angus Beef                 Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Round             Select Beef                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Thin Meats        Soup/Stew                  Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Thin Meats        Cubed Meats [Beef]         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Thin Meats        Corned Beef                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Thin Meats        Brisket [Beef]             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Thin Meats        Skirt [Beef]               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Beef: Thin Meats        Flank [Beef]               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Breakfast Sausage       Bkfst Sausage--Fresh       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Rolls
Breakfast Sausage       Bkfst Sausage--Fresh       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Links
Breakfast Sausage       Bkfst Sausage--Fresh       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Patties
Breakfast Sausage       Bkfst Sausage--Precooked   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Breakfast Sausage       Bkfst Sausage--Bkfast      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Side Di
Breakfast Sausage       Bkfst Sausage--Other       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Forms
Buffalo                 Grinds [Buffalo]           Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Can Seafood--Shelf      Tuna                       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Stable
Can Seafood--Shelf      Salmon                     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Stable
Can Seafood--Shelf      Sardines                   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Stable
Can Seafood--Shelf      Oysters                    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Stable
Chicken & Poultry       Chix: Value-Added (Cold)   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken & Poultry       Chix: Frd 8pc/Cut Up       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
(Cold)
Chicken & Poultry       Chix: Baked 8pc Cut Up     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
(Cold)
Chicken & Poultry       Chix: Rotisserie Cold      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Fresh           Chicken Breast Boneless    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Fresh           Chicken Wings              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Fresh           Chicken Drums              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Fresh           Whole Chicken (Roasters/   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Fryer)
Chicken Fresh           Chicken Thighs             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Fresh           Chicken Legs/Quarters      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Fresh           Mixed Packs [Chicken]      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Frozen          Frzn Chicken--Wht Meat     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Frozen          Frzn Chicken--Wings        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Frozen          Frzn Chicken--Drk Meat     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Grinds          Ground Chicken             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Offal           Internal Chicken Offal     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Chicken Specialty/      Chicken Breast Boneless    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Natural
Chicken Specialty/      Chicken Wings              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Natural
Chicken Specialty/      Whole Chicken (Roasters/   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Natural                 Fryer)
Deli Meat: Bulk         Meat: Turkey Bulk          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Bulk         Meat: Ham Bulk             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Bulk         Meat: Beef Bulk            Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Bulk         Meat Bulk: Specialty Dry   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Meats
Deli Meat: Bulk         Bologna/Loaves/Franks      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Bulk         Meat: Chicken Bulk         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Presliced    Deli Meat: Specialty Dry   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Meats
Deli Meat: Presliced    Deli Meat: Semi-Dry        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Sausage
Deli Meat: Presliced    Deli Meat: Turkey          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Presliced    Deli Meat: Ham             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Deli Meat: Presliced    Deli Meat: Beef            Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Links Pork    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Ckd/S
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Links Fresh   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Pork Rope     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Ckd/Sm
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Beef Rope     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Ckd/Sm
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Other Forms   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Links Beef    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Ckd/S
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Poultry Rope  Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Ckd
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Links         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Poultry Ck
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Natural/      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Organic
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Fresh         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Poultry
Frozen Breakfast Foods  Frzn Breakfast Sausage     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Frzn Multi Serve        Frzn Burgers               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Frzn Prepared Chicken   Value Forms/18oz And       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Larger [Chicken]
Hot Dogs                Hot Dogs--Base Meat        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Hot Dogs                Hot Dogs--Base Beef        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Hot Dogs                Hot Dogs--Premium          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Hot Dogs                Hot Dogs--Base Poultry     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lamb                    Round/Leg [Lamb]           Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lamb                    Loin [Lamb]                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lamb                    Chuck/Shoulder [Lamb]      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lunchmeat               Lunchment--Deli Fresh      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lunchmeat               Lunchment--Bologna/        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Sausage
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Chop/Form       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Pltry & Ha
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Whole Muscle    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Pltry
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Chip Meat       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Brauns/Liver/   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Loave
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Variety Pack    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Other           Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Lunchmeat               Lunchment--Natural/        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Organic
Lunchmeat               Lunchmeat--Peggable Deli   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Fres
Meat Frozen             Frzn Meat--Beef            Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Meat Frozen             Frzn Meat--Breakfast       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Sausage
Meat Frozen             Frzn Meat--Offals          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Meat Frozen             Frzn Meat--Turkey          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Meat Snacks             Jerky/Nuggets/Tenders      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Meat Snacks             Meat Sticks/Bites          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Party Tray Deli         Tray: Meat And Cheese      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Pork Bone In Loin/Rib   Dry [Pork Bone In Loin/    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Rib]
Pork Boneless Loin/Rib  Enhanced [Pork Boneless    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Loin/Rib]
Pork Grinds             Ground Pork                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Pork Offal              External Fresh [Pork       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Offal]
Pork Shoulder           Butts [Pork Shoulder]      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Pork Shoulder           Fresh Hams                 Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Pork Thin Meats         Ribs [Pork]                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Poultry                 Other Cornish Hen          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Random Weight Meat      Lunch Meats                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Products
Seafood--Catfish        Catfish--Fillet            Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Catfish        Catfish--Whole             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Catfish        Catfish--Nuggets           Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Cod            Cod--Fillet                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Crab           Crab--Snow                 Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Crab           Crab--King                 Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Crab           Crab--Dungy                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Crab           Crab--Other                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Finfish        Other Finfish--Other       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Finfish        Other Finfish--Other       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Lobster        Lobster--Tails             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Party Trays    Party Tray--Shrimp         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Salmon-Farm    Salmon Fr--Altantic        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Raised
Seafood--Salmon-Wild    Salmon Wc--Pink            Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Caught
Seafood--Salmon-Wild    Salmon Wc--Sockeye         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Caught
Seafood--Scallops       Scallops--Sea              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Shrimp         Shrimp--Raw                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Shrimp         Shrimp--Cooked             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Smoked         Smoked Salmon              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood
Seafood--Tilapia        Tilapia--Fillet            Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Trout          Steelhead Fr [Trout]       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood--Value-Added    Value-Added Breaded        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood                 Shrimp
Seafood--Value-Added    Value-Added Shrimp         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood
Seafood--Value-Added    Value-Added Crab           Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Seafood
Service Case Meat       Seasoned Poultry           Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Stuffed/Mixed Beef         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Marinated Pork             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Marinated Poultry          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Seasoned Beef              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Seasoned Pork              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Stuffed/Mixed Poultry      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Marinated Beef             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Kabobs Beef                Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Kabobs Poultry             Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Service Case Meat       Stuffed/Mixed Pork         Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Hams             Hams--Half/Port Bone-In    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Hams             Hams--Spiral               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Hams             Hams--Whole Boneless       Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Hams             Hams--Half/Port Boneless   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Hams             Hams--Dry Cured/Country    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Hams             Hams--Whole Bone-In        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Pork             Ham Steaks/Cubes/Slices    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Pork             Smoked Offal [Pork]        Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Pork             Bacon--Belly/Jowl          Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Smoked Pork             Smoked Picnics [Pork]      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Snack Meat              Snack Meat--Pepperoni      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Snack Meat              Snack Meat--Salami/Smr     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Sausag
Turkey Fresh            Whole Hen (Under 16lbs)    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
[Turkey]
Turkey Fresh            Whole Tom (Over 16lbs)     Meat/Poultry/Seafood
[Turkey]
Turkey Frozen           Whole Toms (Over 16lbs)    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
[Turkey]
Turkey Frozen           Whole Hens (Under 16lbs)   Meat/Poultry/Seafood
[Turkey]
Turkey Frozen           Turkey Breast Bone In      Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Turkey Grinds           Ground Turkey              Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Turkey Offal            External [Turkey Offal]    Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Turkey Smoked           Turkey Wings               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Turkey Smoked           Turkey Drums               Meat/Poultry/Seafood
Fluid Milk Products     Fluid Milk/White Only      Milk
Fluid Milk Products     Flavored Milk              Milk
Fluid Milk Products     Specialty/Lactose Free     Milk
Milk
Fluid Milk Products     Organic Milk               Milk
Fluid Milk Products     Soy Milk                   Milk
Non-Dairy/Dairy         Aseptic Milk               Milk
Aseptic
Non-Dairy/Dairy         Soy Beverage               Milk
Aseptic
Non-Dairy/Dairy         Nut Milk                   Milk
Aseptic
Non-Dairy/Dairy         Rice Beverage              Milk
Aseptic
Refrigerated Dairy      Non-Dairy Milks            Milk
Case
Refrigerated Dairy      Fluid Milk                 Milk
Case
Authentic Asian Foods   Authentic Japanese Foods   Miscellaneous
Authentic Asian Foods   Authentic Chinese Foods    Miscellaneous
Authentic Central       Central American Foods     Miscellaneous
American Fds
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Hispanic Baking Needs      Miscellaneous
& Product
Baking Needs            Baking Powder & Soda       Miscellaneous
Baking Needs            Yeast: Dry                 Miscellaneous
Baking Needs            Corn Starch                Miscellaneous
Dietary Aid Prdct/Med   Diet Cntrl Liqs            Miscellaneous
Liq Nutr                Nutritional
Dietary Aid Prdct/Med   Diet Energy Drinks         Miscellaneous
Liq Nutr
Dietary Aid Prdct/Med   Diet Cntrl Bars            Miscellaneous
Liq Nutr                Nutritional
Fitness & Diet          Fitness & Diet--Bars W/    Miscellaneous
Flour
Fitness & Diet          Fitness & Diet--Bars W/O   Miscellaneous
Flour
Fitness & Diet          Fitness & Diet--Powder     Miscellaneous
Ntrtnl
Refrigerated Hispanic   Misc Hispanic Grocery      Miscellaneous
Grocery
Baking Needs            Baking Nuts                Nuts and seeds
Bulk Food               Trail Mix/Nuts Bulk        Nuts and seeds
Condiments              Nut Butters/Peanut Butter  Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Pistachios                 Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Mixed Nuts                 Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Cashews                    Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Sunflower/Other Seeds      Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Pecans Shelled             Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Peanuts All                Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Walnuts Shelled            Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Almonds Shelled            Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Trail Mix                  Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Almonds                    Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Dry Roast Peanuts          Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Oil Roast Peanuts          Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Nuts Other                 Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Misc Snack Nuts            Nuts and seeds
Nuts                    Nuts Inshell               Nuts and seeds
Peanut Butter/Jelly/    Peanut Butter              Nuts and seeds
Jams & Honey
Trail Mix & Snacks      Trail Mixes/Snack          Nuts and seeds
Canned & Dry Milk       Canned Milk                Other dairy products
Canned & Dry Milk       Non Fat Dry Milk           Other dairy products
Refrigerated Dairy      Yogurt                     Other dairy products
Case
Refrigerated Dairy      Kefir                      Other dairy products
Case
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Kids                Other dairy products
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Ss Regular          Other dairy products
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Ss Light            Other dairy products
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Pro Active Health   Other dairy products
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Adult Multi-Packs   Other dairy products
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Specialty Greek     Other dairy products
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Large Size (16oz    Other dairy products
Or Lar)
Yogurt                  Yogurt/Adult Drinks        Other dairy products
Deli Specialties        Dl Spec: Dry/Refrig        Pasta, cornmeal,
(Retail Pk)             Pastas                     other cereal
products
Dry Bean Veg & Rice     Noodle Side Dish Mixes     Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Dry Noodles & Pasta     Long Cut Pasta             Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Dry Noodles & Pasta     Short Cut Pasta            Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Dry Noodles & Pasta     Noodles Dry                Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Dry/Ramen Bouillon      Ramen Noodles/Ramen Cups   Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Flour & Meals           Cornmeal                   Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Prepared/Pdgd Foods     Pasta/Ramen                Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Refrigerated Italian    Refrigerated Pasta         Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Salad & Dips            Pasta/Grain Salads--       Pasta, cornmeal,
Prepack                    other cereal
products
Salad & Dips            Pasta/Grain Salads--Bulk   Pasta, cornmeal,
other cereal
products
Seafood--Salad/Dip/Sce/ Breading                   Pasta, cornmeal,
Cond                                               other cereal
products
Traditional Asian       Asian Noodles/Rice         Pasta, cornmeal,
Foods                                              other cereal
products
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Hispanic Cookies/Crackers  Prepared Desserts
& Product
Baked Sweet Goods       Snack Cake--Multi Pack     Prepared Desserts
Baked Sweet Goods       Sweet Goods--Full Size     Prepared Desserts
Bakery Party Trays      Party Trays: Cakes         Prepared Desserts
Baking Mixes            Layer Cake Mix             Prepared Desserts
Baking Mixes            Frosting                   Prepared Desserts
Baking Mixes            Muffin & Corn Bread Mix    Prepared Desserts
Baking Mixes            Brownie Mix                Prepared Desserts
Baking Mixes            Cookies Mix                Prepared Desserts
Baking Mixes            Miscellaneous Package      Prepared Desserts
Mixes
Baking Needs            Bits & Morsels [Baking     Prepared Desserts
Needs]
Baking Needs            Marshmallows               Prepared Desserts
Baking Needs            Pie Filling/Mincemeat/     Prepared Desserts
Glazes
Baking Needs            Pie Crust Mixes & Shells   Prepared Desserts
Baking Needs            Cooking Chocolate (Ex:     Prepared Desserts
Smi-Swt)
Baking Needs            Maraschino Cherries        Prepared Desserts
Baking Needs            Baking Cocoa               Prepared Desserts
Baking Needs            Marshmallow Creme          Prepared Desserts
Baking Needs            Coconut [Baking Needs]     Prepared Desserts
Cake Decor              Cake Decors & Icing        Prepared Desserts
Cake Decor              Cake Decors--Candies       Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Birthday/           Prepared Desserts
Celebration Sh
Cakes                   Cakes: Cupcakes            Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Layers              Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Creme/Pudding       Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Cheesecake          Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Fancy/Service Case  Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Layers/Sheets       Prepared Desserts
Novelties
Cakes                   Cakes: Angel Fds/Cke       Prepared Desserts
Rolls
Cakes                   Cakes: Ice Cream           Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Birthday/           Prepared Desserts
Celebration Lay
Cakes                   Cakes: Sheet               Prepared Desserts
Cakes                   Cakes: Creme/Pudding       Prepared Desserts
Novelties
Cakes                   Cakes: Cheesecake          Prepared Desserts
Novelties
Cnv Breakfast &         Toaster Pastries           Prepared Desserts
Wholesome Snks
Cnv Breakfast &         Treats                     Prepared Desserts
Wholesome Snks
Cookie/Cracker Multi-   Multi-Pack Cookies         Prepared Desserts
Pks
Cookies                 Sandwich Cookies           Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Tray Pack/Choc Chip        Prepared Desserts
Cookies
Cookies                 Cookies: Regular           Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Vanilla Wafer/Kids         Prepared Desserts
Cookies
Cookies                 Cookies: Holiday/Special   Prepared Desserts
Occas
Cookies                 Premium Cookies (Ex:       Prepared Desserts
Pepperidg)
Cookies                 Graham Crackers            Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Chocolate Covered Cookies  Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Wellness/Portion Control   Prepared Desserts
[Cookies]
Cookies                 Cookies: Gourmet           Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Fruit Filled Cookies       Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Cookies: Message           Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Cookies/Sweet Goods        Prepared Desserts
Cookies                 Specialty Cookies          Prepared Desserts
Dry Mix Desserts        Pudding & Gelatin Cups/    Prepared Desserts
Cans
Dry Mix Desserts        Puddings Dry               Prepared Desserts
Dry Mix Desserts        Gelatin                    Prepared Desserts
Dry Mix Desserts        Misc: Cheesecake/Mousse    Prepared Desserts
Mixes
Frozen Breakfast Foods  Frzn Breakfast Pastry      Prepared Desserts
Frozen Desserts         Frozen Fruit Pies &        Prepared Desserts
Cobblers
Frozen Desserts         Frozen Cream Pies          Prepared Desserts
Frozen Desserts         Frzn Pie Shells/Pastry     Prepared Desserts
Shell/F
Frozen Desserts         Frozen Cakes/Desserts      Prepared Desserts
Frozen Desserts         Frzn Pastry & Cookies      Prepared Desserts
Frozen Desserts         Single Serv/Portion        Prepared Desserts
Control
Frozen Novelties--      Sticks/Enrobed [Frozen     Prepared Desserts
Water Ice               Novelties]
Frozen Novelties--      Water Ice [Frozen          Prepared Desserts
Water Ice               Novelties]
Frozen Novelties--      Cones [Frozen Novelties]   Prepared Desserts
Water Ice
Frozen Novelties--      Ice Cream Sandwiches       Prepared Desserts
Water Ice
Frozen Novelties--      Adult Premium [Frozen      Prepared Desserts
Water Ice               Novelties]
Frozen Novelties--      Cups/Push Ups/Other        Prepared Desserts
Water Ice               [Frozen Novelties]
Frozen Whipped Topping  Frzn Whipped Topping       Prepared Desserts
Pies                    Pies: Fruit/Nut            Prepared Desserts
Pies                    Pies: Pumpkin/Custard      Prepared Desserts
Pies                    Pies: Cream/Meringue       Prepared Desserts
Pies                    Pies: Sugar Free           Prepared Desserts
Pies                    Pies: Tarts/Minis/Crstdas  Prepared Desserts
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Cookies--     Prepared Desserts
Products                Break N B
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Cookie Dough  Prepared Desserts
Products
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Cookies--     Prepared Desserts
Products                Seasonal
Refrgrated Dough        Refrigerated Pie Crust     Prepared Desserts
Products
Refrigerated Desserts   Refrigerated Pudding       Prepared Desserts
Salad & Dips            Sal: Desserts--Prepack     Prepared Desserts
Salad & Dips            Sal: Desserts--Bulk        Prepared Desserts
Single Serve Sweet      Snack Cake--Single Serve   Prepared Desserts
Goods
Ss/Vending--Cookie/     Vendor Size/Single Serve   Prepared Desserts
Cracker                 Cooki
Sweet Goods             Sw Gds: Donuts             Prepared Desserts
Sweet Goods             Sw Gds: Sw Rolls/Dan       Prepared Desserts
Sweet Goods             Sw Gds: Muffins            Prepared Desserts
Sweet Goods             Sw Gds: Coffee Cakes       Prepared Desserts
Sweet Goods & Snacks    Sw Gds: Swt/Flvrd Loaves   Prepared Desserts
Sweet Goods & Snacks    Sw Gds: Brownie/Bar        Prepared Desserts
Cookie
Sweet Goods & Snacks    Sw Gds: Puff Pastry        Prepared Desserts
Sweet Goods & Snacks    Sw Gds: Specialty          Prepared Desserts
Desserts
Syrups Toppings &       Ice Cream Toppings         Prepared Desserts
Cones
Value-Added Fruit       Parfait Cups Instore       Prepared Desserts
Canned Pasta & Mwv Fd-  Can Pasta                  Prepared Foods
Shlf Stbl
Canned Pasta & Mwv Fd-  Microwavable Cups [Pasta]  Prepared Foods
Shlf Stbl
Chilled Ready Meals     Store Brand                Prepared Foods
Convenient Meals        Convenient Meals--Kids     Prepared Foods
Meal C
Convenient Meals        Convenient Meals--Adult    Prepared Foods
Meal
Dinner Mixes--Dry       Macaroni & Cheese Dnrs     Prepared Foods
Dinner Mixes--Dry       Skillet Dinners            Prepared Foods
Dinner Mixes--Dry       Microwave Dinners          Prepared Foods
Dinner Mixes--Dry       Package Dinners/Pasta      Prepared Foods
Salads
Dinner Mixes--Dry       Pizza Mix Dry              Prepared Foods
Dinner Sausage          Dnr Sausage--Cocktails     Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Chili: Canned              Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Chunk Meats--Chix/Ham/     Prepared Foods
Etc.
Meat--Shelf Stable      Sandwich Sauce (Manwich)   Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Vienna Sausage             Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Luncheon Meat (Spam)       Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Hash: Canned               Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Beef Stew                  Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Hot Dog Chili Sauce        Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Beef/Pork--Dried Sliced W/ Prepared Foods
Gra
Meat--Shelf Stable      Potted Meats And Spreads   Prepared Foods
Meat--Shelf Stable      Corn Beef                  Prepared Foods
Party Tray              Deli Tray: Sandwiches      Prepared Foods
Party Tray              Deli Tray:                 Prepared Foods
Appetizers&Hors D'oe
Prepared/Pdgd Foods     Boxed Prepared/Entree/Dry  Prepared Foods
Prep
Prepared/Pdgd Foods     Vegetables/Dry Beans       Prepared Foods
Refrigerated            Vegetarian Meats           Prepared Foods
Vegetarian
Refrigerated            Vegetarian Misc            Prepared Foods
Vegetarian
Refrigerated            Non-Dairy Cheese           Prepared Foods
Vegetarian
Refrigerated            Tofu                       Prepared Foods
Vegetarian
Salad & Dips            Protein Salads--Bulk       Prepared Foods
Salad & Dips            Protein Salads--Prepack    Prepared Foods
Sandwiches              Sandwiches--(Cold)         Prepared Foods
Sushi                   Sushi--In Store Prepared   Prepared Foods
Sushi                   Sushi--Prepackaged         Prepared Foods
Traditional Asian       Asian Foods And Meals      Prepared Foods
Foods
Traditional Asian       Traditional Thai Foods     Prepared Foods
Foods
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Dinners And Foods  Prepared Foods
Foods
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Enchilada Sauce    Prepared Foods
Foods
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Authentic Pasta/Rice/      Rice
& Product               Beans
Dry Bean Veg & Rice     Rice Side Dish Mixes Dry   Rice
Dry Bean Veg & Rice     Rice--Dry Bag And Box      Rice
Dry Bean Veg & Rice     Rice--Instant & Microwave  Rice
Bag Snacks              Potato Chips               Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Tortilla/Nacho Chips       Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Mult Pk Bag Snacks         Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Bagged Cheese Snacks       Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Corn Chips                 Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Pretzels                   Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Store Brand                Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Misc Bag Snacks            Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Bagged Popped Popcorn      Salty snacks
Bag Snacks              Pork Skins/Cracklins       Salty snacks
Popcorn                 Popcorn--Microwave         Salty snacks
Popcorn                 Popcorn--Other             Salty snacks
Popcorn                 Caramel Coated Snacks      Salty snacks
Snack                   Tortilla Chips             Salty snacks
Snack                   Soy/Rice Snacks            Salty snacks
Snacks                  Snacks: Pita Chips         Salty snacks
Snacks                  Snacks: Salty              Salty snacks
Snacks                  Snacks: Tortilla Chips     Salty snacks
Snacks                  Snacks: Crackers/Cookies   Salty snacks
Ss/Vending--Salty       Salty Snacks Vending       Salty snacks
Snacks
Warehouse Snacks        Canister Snacks            Salty snacks
Warehouse Snacks        Snack Mix                  Salty snacks
Warehouse Snacks        Misc Snacks                Salty snacks
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Authentic Soups/Bouillons  Soup
& Product
Canned Soups            Condensed Soup             Soup
Dry/Ramen Bouillon      Dry Soup                   Soup
Dry/Ramen Bouillon      Bouillon                   Soup
Rts/Micro Soup/Broth    Rts Soup: Chunky/          Soup
Homestyle/Et
Rts/Micro Soup/Broth    Broth                      Soup
Rts/Micro Soup/Broth    Microwavable Soups         Soup
Soup                    Cans Soup/Chili            Soup
Soup                    Broths                     Soup
Condiments              Honey/Syrup                Sugars
Dressings/Dips          Dips Caramel/Fruit Glazes  Sugars
Molasses/Syrups/        Molasses & Syrups          Sugars
Pancake Mixes
Peanut Butter/Jelly/    Honey                      Sugars
Jams & Honey
Sugars & Sweeteners     Sugar                      Sugars
Sugars & Sweeteners     Sweeteners                 Sugars
Aseptic Juice           Aseptic Pack Juice And     Sweetened Beverages
Drinks
Aseptic Juice           Aseptic Pack Juice And     Sweetened Beverages
Drinks
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Hispanic Carbonated        Sweetened Beverages
& Product               Beverages
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Hispanic Juice Under 50%   Sweetened Beverages
& Product               Juice
Beverages               Can/Btl Carb Beve 50% And  Sweetened Beverages
Unde
Cocoa Mixes             Malted Mlk/Syrup/Pwdrs     Sweetened Beverages
(Eggnog)
Cocoa Mixes             Hot Chocolate/Cocoa Mix    Sweetened Beverages
Energy Drinks           Energy Drink--Single       Sweetened Beverages
Serve
Energy Drinks           Energy Drink--Single       Sweetened Beverages
Serve (N)
Energy Drinks           Energy Drink--Multi-Pack   Sweetened Beverages
Energy Drinks           Energy Drink--Multi-Pack   Sweetened Beverages
(Non)
Frozen Juice And        Frzn Fruit Drinks (Under   Sweetened Beverages
Smoothies               10% J)
Frozen Juice And        Frzn Conc Under 50% Juice  Sweetened Beverages
Smoothies
Frozen Juice And        Smoothies-Frz              Sweetened Beverages
Smoothies
Frozen Juice And        Cocktail Mixes-Frz         Sweetened Beverages
Smoothies
Isotonic Drinks         Isotonic Drinks Single     Sweetened Beverages
Serve
Isotonic Drinks         Isotonic Drinks Multi-     Sweetened Beverages
Pack
Isotonic Drinks         Isotonic Drinks Multi-     Sweetened Beverages
Serve
Isotonic Drinks         Sports Drink N/Supplmnt    Sweetened Beverages
Milk/M
Juice                   Non-Carb Jce (Under 50%    Sweetened Beverages
Jce)
Juices Super Premium    Juices Smoothies/Blended   Sweetened Beverages
Juices Super Premium    Juices Antioxidant/        Sweetened Beverages
Wellness
Juices Super Premium    Juices (50% And Under      Sweetened Beverages
Juice)
Mixers Cocktail         Mixes--Fluid: Add Liq      Sweetened Beverages
Powder & Crystal Drink  Unsweetened Envelope       Sweetened Beverages
Mix                     [Powder Drink Mix]
Powder & Crystal Drink  Sugar Free Canister        Sweetened Beverages
Mix                     [Powder Drink Mix]
Powder & Crystal Drink  Sugar Free Sticks [Powder  Sweetened Beverages
Mix                     Drink Mix]
Powder & Crystal Drink  Soft Drink Canisters       Sweetened Beverages
Mix
Powder & Crystal Drink  Enhanced Stick [Powder     Sweetened Beverages
Mix                     Drink Mix]
Powder & Crystal Drink  Sugar Sweetened Sticks     Sweetened Beverages
Mix
Powder & Crystal Drink  Fluid Pouch [Powder Drink  Sweetened Beverages
Mix                     Mix]
Powder & Crystal Drink  Breakfast Crystals         Sweetened Beverages
Mix
Processed               Packaged Dry Mixes         Sweetened Beverages
Refrgratd Juices/       Dairy Case Juice Drnk      Sweetened Beverages
Drinks                  Under 10
Refrgratd Juices/       Dairy Case Citrus Pnch/Oj  Sweetened Beverages
Drinks                  Subs
Refrgratd Juices/       Dairy Case Tea With Sugar  Sweetened Beverages
Drinks                  Or S
Refrgratd Juices/       Dairy Case Fruit Drinks    Sweetened Beverages
Drinks                  (No Ju)
Rtd Tea/New Age Juice   Tea Sweetened              Sweetened Beverages
Rtd Tea/New Age Juice   Juice (Under 10% Juice)    Sweetened Beverages
Shelf Stable Juice      Fruit Drinks: Canned &     Sweetened Beverages
Glass
Shelf Stable Juice      Cranapple/Cran Grape       Sweetened Beverages
Juice (50)
Shelf Stable Juice      Cranberry Juice (50% And   Sweetened Beverages
Under)
Shelf Stable Juice      Blended Juice &            Sweetened Beverages
Combinations (50)
Shelf Stable Juice      Fruit Drinks: Canned &     Sweetened Beverages
Glass
Shelf Stable Juice      Apple Juice & Cider (50%   Sweetened Beverages
And U)
Shelf Stable Juice      Tomato Juice (50% And      Sweetened Beverages
Under)
Shelf Stable Juice      Blended Juice &            Sweetened Beverages
Combinations (Un)
Shelf Stable Juice      Fruit Drinks: Canned &     Sweetened Beverages
Glass
Soft Drinks             Soft Drinks 12/18 & 15pk   Sweetened Beverages
Can Car
Soft Drinks             Sft Drnk 2 Liter Btl Carb  Sweetened Beverages
Incl
Soft Drinks             Soft Drinks 20pk & 24pk    Sweetened Beverages
Can Carb
Soft Drinks             Sft Drnk Mlt-Pk Btl Carb   Sweetened Beverages
(Excp)
Soft Drinks             Sft Drnk Sngl Srv Btl      Sweetened Beverages
Carb (Ex)
Soft Drinks             Soft Drinks Can Non-Carb   Sweetened Beverages
(Exce)
Soft Drinks             Soft Drinks 6pk Can Carb   Sweetened Beverages
(Exp)
Soft Drinks             Sft Drnk 1 Liter Btl Carb  Sweetened Beverages
(Exc)
Soft Drinks             Tea Can With Sweetener/    Sweetened Beverages
Sugar
Soft Drinks             Soft Drink Bottle Non-     Sweetened Beverages
Carb (Ex)
Soft Drinks             Tea Bottles With           Sweetened Beverages
Sweetener/Sug
Soft Drinks             Mixers (Tonic Water/Gngr   Sweetened Beverages
Ale)
Soft Drinks             Seltzer Unflavored         Sweetened Beverages
Teas                    Instant Tea & Tea Mix (W/  Sweetened Beverages
Sugar)
Water                   Non-Carb Water Flvr--Drnk/ Sweetened Beverages
Mnr
Water--(Sparkling &     Still Water Flvrd Drnk/    Sweetened Beverages
Still)                  Mnrl Wt
Water--(Sparkling &     Sparkling Water--Flvrd     Sweetened Beverages
Still)                  Sweet
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Authentic Vegetables And   Vegetables
& Product               Foods
Authentic Hispanic Fds  Authentic Peppers          Vegetables
& Product
Authentic Italian       Italian Vegetables         Vegetables
Foods
Broccoli/Cauliflower    Broccoli Whole & Crowns    Vegetables
Broccoli/Cauliflower    Cauliflower Whole          Vegetables
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Green Beans: Fs/Whl/Cut    Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Corn                       Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Peas/Green                 Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Spinach & Greens           Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Mushrooms Cnd & Glass      Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Sweet Potatoes             Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Mixed Vegetables           Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Carrots                    Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   White Potatoes             Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Kraut & Cabbage            Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Beets                      Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Peas Fresh Pack/Crowder    Vegetables
Stable
Can Vegetables--Shelf   Artichokes                 Vegetables
Stable
Carrots                 Carrots Mini Peeled        Vegetables
Carrots                 Carrots Bagged             Vegetables
Carrots                 Carrots Bagged Organic     Vegetables
Corn                    Corn Bulk                  Vegetables
Corn                    Corn Is Packaged           Vegetables
Dry Sce/Gravy/Potatoes/ Potatoes: Dry              Vegetables
Stuffng
Frozen Potatoes         Frzn French Fries          Vegetables
Frozen Potatoes         Frzn Tater Tots/Other      Vegetables
Extruded
Frozen Potatoes         Frzn Hashbrown Potatoes    Vegetables
Frozen Potatoes         Frzn Baked/Stuffed/Mashed  Vegetables
& Spec
Frozen Potatoes         Frzn Onion Rings           Vegetables
Frozen Vegetable & Veg  Fz Bag Vegetables--Plain   Vegetables
Dish
Frozen Vegetable & Veg  Frzn Steamable Vegetables  Vegetables
Dish
Frozen Vegetable & Veg  Fz Box Vegetables--Value-  Vegetables
Dish                    Added
Frozen Vegetable & Veg  Frzn Corn On The Cob       Vegetables
Dish
Frozen Vegetable & Veg  Fz Bag Vegetables--Value-  Vegetables
Dish                    Added
Frozen Vegetable & Veg  Fz Box Vegetables--Plain   Vegetables
Dish
Herbs/Garlic            Garlic Whole Cloves        Vegetables
Herbs/Garlic            Sprouts                    Vegetables
Mushrooms               Mushrooms White Sliced     Vegetables
Pkg
Mushrooms               Mushrooms White Whole Pkg  Vegetables
Mushrooms               Mushrooms Portabella       Vegetables
Mushrooms               Mushrooms White Bulk       Vegetables
Onions                  Onions Yellow (Bulk &      Vegetables
Bag)
Onions                  Onions Sweet (Bulk & Bag)  Vegetables
Onions                  Onions Red (Bulk & Bag)    Vegetables
Onions                  Onions White (Bulk & Bag)  Vegetables
Organics Fruit &        Organic Salad Mix          Vegetables
Vegetables
Organics Fruit &        Organic Value-Added        Vegetables
Vegetables              Vegetables
Party Tray              Deli Tray: Fruit And       Vegetables
Vegetable
Pasta & Pizza Sauce     Mainstream [Pasta & Pizza  Vegetables
Sauce]
Pasta & Pizza Sauce     Value [Pasta & Pizza       Vegetables
Sauce]
Pasta & Pizza Sauce     Pizza Sauce                Vegetables
Peppers                 Peppers Green Bell         Vegetables
Peppers                 Peppers Red Bell           Vegetables
Peppers                 Peppers Other Bell         Vegetables
Peppers                 Peppers Yellow Bell        Vegetables
Peppers                 Peppers Jalapeno           Vegetables
Peppers                 Peppers All Other          Vegetables
Potatoes                Potatoes Russet (Bulk &    Vegetables
Bag)
Potatoes                Potatoes Sweet & Yams      Vegetables
Potatoes                Potatoes Red (Bulk & Bag)  Vegetables
Potatoes                Potatoes Gourmet           Vegetables
Potatoes                Potatoes Gold (Bulk &      Vegetables
Bag)
Potatoes                Potatoes Other Organic     Vegetables
Salad & Dips            Vegetable Salads--Prepack  Vegetables
Salad & Dips            Vegetable Salads--Bulk     Vegetables
Salad & Dips            Salad: Lettuce             Vegetables
Salad & Dips            Salad Bar                  Vegetables
Salad Bar               Salad Bar Other            Vegetables
Salad Mix               Blends [Salad Mix]         Vegetables
Salad Mix               Regular Garden             Vegetables
Salad Mix               Garden Plus [Salad Mix]    Vegetables
Salad Mix               Kits [Salad Mix]           Vegetables
Salad Mix               Shredded Lettuce           Vegetables
Salad Mix               Salad Bowls                Vegetables
Salad Mix               Salad Mix Blends Organic   Vegetables
Salad Mix               Salad Spinach              Vegetables
Salad Mix               Coleslaw                   Vegetables
Salad Mix               Salad Spinach Organic      Vegetables
Seasonal                Pumpkins                   Vegetables
Spices/Jarred Garlic    Garlic Jar                 Vegetables
Tomato Products--Shelf  Tomatoes Diced             Vegetables
Stable
Tomato Products--Shelf  Tomato Sauce               Vegetables
Stable
Tomato Products--Shelf  Tomato Paste               Vegetables
Stable
Tomato Products--Shelf  Tomato Stewed              Vegetables
Stable
Tomato Products--Shelf  Tomatoes/Whole             Vegetables
Stable
Tomato Products--Shelf  Tomato Crushed             Vegetables
Stable
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Hothouse On The   Vegetables
Vine
Tomatoes                Roma Tomatoes (Bulk/Pkg)   Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Vine Ripe Bulk    Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Hot House Bulk    Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Grape             Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Vine Ripe Pkg     Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Cherry            Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes--Other            Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Others Organic    Vegetables
Tomatoes                Tomatoes Cocktail          Vegetables
Traditional Asian       Asian Vegetables           Vegetables
Foods
Traditional Mexican     Mexican Peppers Chilies    Vegetables
Foods
Value-Added Vegetables  Vegetable Party Tray       Vegetables
Value-Added Vegetables  Cut Vegetables All Other   Vegetables
Value-Added Vegetables  Instore Cut Vegetables     Vegetables
Vegetables Cooking      Celery                     Vegetables
Bulk
Vegetables Cooking      Cabbage                    Vegetables
Bulk
Vegetables Cooking      Asparagus                  Vegetables
Bulk
Vegetables Cooking      Celery Organic             Vegetables
Bulk
Vegetables Cooking      Broccoli/Cauliflower       Vegetables
Packaged                Processed
Vegetables Cooking      Vegetables Cooking         Vegetables
Packaged                Packaged
Vegetables Salad        Head Lettuce               Vegetables
Vegetables Salad        Cucumbers                  Vegetables
Vegetables Salad        Variety Lettuce            Vegetables
Vegetables Salad        Green Onions               Vegetables
Vegetables Salad        Radish                     Vegetables
Vegetables Salad        Variety Lettuce Organic    Vegetables
Vegetables Salad        Spinach Bulk               Vegetables
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ
International, LLC, 2016.

Appendix C. Crosswalk of Subcommodities to USDA Food Pattern Categories
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
USDA Food           SoFAS              Composite              Other
Commodity        Subcommodity        Pattern        Subcategories        Subcategories        Subcategories
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aseptic Juice    Kids Milk Drinks--  Dairy
Aseptic
Bag Snacks       Bagged Cheese       Dairy
Snacks
Bulk Service     Bulk Processed      Dairy
Case Cheese      [Cheese]
Bulk Service     Bulk Semi-Hard      Dairy
Case Cheese      [Cheese]
Bulk Service     Bulk Semi-Soft      Dairy
Case Cheese      [Cheese]
Bulk Service     Cheese:             Dairy
Case Cheese      Cheeseballs/
Spreads
Bulk Service     Cheese: Specialty   Dairy
Case Cheese      Bulk
Bulk Service     Cheese: Specialty   Dairy
Case Cheese      Prepack
Bulk Service     Service Case        Dairy
Case Cheese      Natural [Cheese]
Bulk Service     Service Case        Dairy
Case Cheese      Natural
Prepackage
[Cheese]
Bulk Service     Service Case        Dairy
Case Cheese      Processed Prepack
[Cheese]
Canned & Dry     Aseptic Milk &      Dairy
Milk             Milk Drinks
Canned & Dry     Canned Milk         Dairy
Milk
Canned & Dry     Non Fat Dry Milk    Dairy
Milk
Cheese           American Single     Dairy
Cheese
Cheese           Miscellaneous       Dairy
Cheese
Cheese           Natural Cheese      Dairy
Chunks
Cheese           Natural Cheese      Dairy
Random Wt
Cheese           Natural Cheese      Dairy
Slices
Cheese           Shredded Cheese     Dairy
Cheese           String Cheese       Dairy
Crackers & Misc  Aerosol Cheese      Dairy
Baked Food
Cubes/           Cubes Cheese        Dairy
Prepackage
Cheese
Cubes/           Prepackage Cheese   Dairy
Prepackage
Cheese
Dry Cheese       Grated Cheese       Dairy
Dry Cheese       Loaf Cheese         Dairy
Dry Cheese       Misc Dry Cheese     Dairy
Fluid Milk       Buttermilk          Dairy
Products
Fluid Milk       Egg Nog/Boiled      Dairy
Products         Custard
Fluid Milk       Flavored Milk       Dairy
Products
Fluid Milk       Fluid Milk/White    Dairy
Products         Only
Fluid Milk       Half & Half         Dairy
Products
Fluid Milk       Organic Milk        Dairy
Products
Fluid Milk       Soy Milk            Dairy
Products
Fluid Milk       Specialty/Lactose   Dairy
Products         Free Milk
Milk By-         Cottage Cheese      Dairy
Products
Milk By-         Ricotta Cheese      Dairy
Products
Non-Dairy/Dairy  Aseptic Milk        Dairy
Aseptic
Non-Dairy/Dairy  Soy Beverage        Dairy
Aseptic
Pre-Slice        Pre-Sliced          Dairy
Service Case     Processed
Cheese           [Cheese]
Pre-Slice        Pre-Sliced Semi-    Dairy
Service Case     Hard [Cheese]
Cheese
Pre-Slice        Pre-Sliced Semi-    Dairy
Service Case     Soft [Cheese]
Cheese
Refrigerated     Cheese Spreads      Dairy
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Dairy Cheese        Dairy
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Fluid Milk          Dairy
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Kefir               Dairy
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Yogurt              Dairy
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Hispanic Cheese     Dairy
Hispanic
Grocery
Service          Sv Bev: Milk/Milk   Dairy
Beverage         Products
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Blue
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Cheddar
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Cheeseba
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Feta
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Fresh
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Gift Pac
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Goat
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Gouda &
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Hard
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Hispanic
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Mozzarel
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Semi-Sof
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Smallwar
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Soft Rip
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Spreads
Specialty Bulk   Specialty Bulk      Dairy
Cheese           Cheese Swiss
Specialty        Ppk Cheese Shoppe   Dairy
Cheese Pre
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Blue/Gorg
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Cheddar &
Pack             C
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Feta
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Fresh
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Gift Pack
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Goat Milk
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Gouda &
Pack             Eda
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Hard/Grat
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Hispanic
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Mozzarell
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Processed
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Semi Soft
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Soft &
Pack             Ripe
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Spreads
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese Swiss
Pack
Specialty        Specialty Ppk       Dairy
Cheese Pre       Cheese: Smallwar
Pack
Traditional      Mexican Con Queso   Dairy
Mexican Foods
Yogurt           Yogurt/Adult        Dairy
Drinks
Yogurt           Yogurt/Adult Multi- Dairy
Packs
Yogurt           Yogurt/Kids         Dairy
Yogurt           Yogurt/Large Size   Dairy
(16oz Or Lar)
Yogurt           Yogurt/Pro Active   Dairy
Health
Yogurt           Yogurt/Specialty    Dairy
Greek
Yogurt           Yogurt/Ss Light     Dairy
Yogurt           Yogurt/Ss Regular   Dairy
Apples           Apples Braeburn     Fruit
(Bulk & Bag)
Apples           Apples Braeburn     Fruit
(Bulk & Bag) Org
Apples           Apples Fuji (Bulk   Fruit
& Bag)
Apples           Apples Fuji (Bulk   Fruit
& Bag) Organic
Apples           Apples Gala (Bulk   Fruit
& Bag)
Apples           Apples Gala (Bulk   Fruit
& Bag) Organic
Apples           Apples Gold         Fruit
Delicious (Bulk &
Bag)
Apples           Apples Gold         Fruit
Delicious (Bulk &
Bag)
Apples           Apples Granny       Fruit
Smith (Bulk &
Bag)
Apples           Apples Granny       Fruit
Smith (Bulk &
Bag)
Apples           Apples Honeycrisp   Fruit
Apples           Apples Honeycrisp   Fruit
Organic
Apples           Apples Other (Bulk  Fruit
& Bag)
Apples           Apples Other (Bulk  Fruit
& Bag) Organic
Apples           Apples Red          Fruit
Delicious (Bulk &
Bag)
Apples           Apples Red          Fruit
Delicious (Bulk &
Bag)
Apples           Caramel/Candy       Fruit
Apples
Apples           Mixed Fruit Bags    Fruit
Authentic        Hispanic Juices     Fruit
Hispanic Foods   Over 50% Juice
& Products
Baking Needs     Maraschino          Fruit
Cherries
Bananas          Bananas             Fruit
Bananas          Bananas Organic     Fruit
Bananas          Bananas: Variety    Fruit
Berries          Berries Other       Fruit
Berries          Berries Other       Fruit
Organic
Berries          Blackberries        Fruit
Berries          Blackberries        Fruit
Organic
Berries          Blueberries         Fruit
Berries          Blueberries         Fruit
Organic
Berries          Cranberries         Fruit
Berries          Cranberries         Fruit
Organic
Berries          Raspberries         Fruit
Berries          Raspberries         Fruit
Organic
Berries          Strawberries        Fruit
Berries          Strawberries        Fruit
Organic
Beverages        Can/Btl Beverage    Fruit
Over 50% Juice
Bulk Food        Fruit Bulk          Fruit
Bulk Food        Fruit W/Sweetener   Fruit
Can Fruit/Jar    Apple Sauce         Fruit
Applesauce       (Excludes Cup)
Can Fruit/Jar    Apples/Crabapples   Fruit
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar    Berries/Cnd (Blu/   Fruit
Applesauce       Blk/Rasp)
Can Fruit/Jar    Cherries (Except    Fruit
Applesauce       Maraschino)
Can Fruit/Jar    Cranberry Sauce     Fruit
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar    Fruit Cocktail/     Fruit
Applesauce       Fruit Salad
Can Fruit/Jar    Mandarin Oranges/   Fruit
Applesauce       Citrus Sect
Can Fruit/Jar    Misc. Cnd Fruit     Fruit
Applesauce       (Grapes/Figs)
Can Fruit/Jar    Peaches             Fruit
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar    Pears               Fruit
Applesauce
Can Fruit/Jar    Pineapple           Fruit
Applesauce
Citrus           Citrus--Other       Fruit
Citrus           Citrus Other        Fruit
Organic
Citrus           Clementines         Fruit
Citrus           Clementines         Fruit
Organic
Citrus           Grapefruit          Fruit
Citrus           Grapefruit Organic  Fruit
Citrus           Lemons              Fruit
Citrus           Lemons Organic      Fruit
Citrus           Limes               Fruit
Citrus           Limes Organic       Fruit
Citrus           Oranges Navels All  Fruit
Citrus           Oranges Navels All  Fruit
Organic
Citrus           Oranges Non Navel   Fruit
All
Citrus           Oranges Non Navel   Fruit
All Organic
Citrus           Tangerines &        Fruit
Tangelos
Citrus           Tangerines &        Fruit
Tangelos Organic
Coffee Shop      Sv Bev: Bev/Juice   Fruit
50-100% Jce
Coffee Shop      Sv Bev: Bev/Juice   Fruit
50-100% Jce
Convenience/     Convenience/        Fruit
Snacking         Snacking Fruit
Pro
Convenience/     Jarred Fruit Multi  Fruit
Snacking         Serve
Convenience/     Jarred Fruit        Fruit
Snacking         Single Serve
Convenience/     Squeeze Fruits      Fruit
Snacking
Dried Fruit      Dates Fruit
Dried Fruit      Dried Fruit--Other  Fruit
Dried Fruit      Dried Fruit         Fruit
Cranberries
Dried Fruit      Dried Fruit Other   Fruit
Organic
Dried Fruit      Dried Fruit W/      Fruit
Sweetener
Dried Fruit      Dried Plums         Fruit
Dried Fruit      Glace Fruit         Fruit
Dried Fruit      Raisins             Fruit
Frozen           Juice Over 50%      Fruit
Breakfast        Juice
Frozen Fruits    Frozen Fruit        Fruit
Frozen Juice     Frzn Conc Allieds   Fruit
And Smoothies    Over 50% Juice
Frozen Juice     Frozen Oj & Oj      Fruit
And Smoothies    Substitutes
Fruit Snacks     Fruit Snacks        Fruit
Gift & Fruit     Fruit Baskets       Fruit
Baskets
Gift & Fruit     In Store Made       Fruit
Baskets          Fruit Baskets
Gift & Fruit     Ready To Sell       Fruit
Baskets          Fruit Baskets
Grapes           Grapes Black/Blue   Fruit
Grapes           Grapes Black/Blue   Fruit
Organic
Grapes           Grapes Other        Fruit
Grapes           Grapes Other        Fruit
Organic
Grapes           Grapes Red          Fruit
Grapes           Grapes Red Globe    Fruit
Grapes           Grapes Red Globe    Fruit
Organic
Grapes           Grapes Red Organic  Fruit
Grapes           Grapes White        Fruit
Grapes           Grapes White        Fruit
Organic
Grapes           Grapes Wine         Fruit
Juice            Drinks--Carb Juice  Fruit
(Over 50% Juice)
Juice            Non-Carb Jce(Over   Fruit
50% Juice)
Juices Super     Cider               Fruit
Premium
Juices Super     Juice Single Blend  Fruit
Premium
Juices Super     Juices Organic      Fruit
Premium          (Over 50% Juice)
Melons           Cantaloupe Whole    Fruit
Melons           Cantaloupe Whole    Fruit
Organic
Melons           Honeydew Whole      Fruit
Melons           Honeydew Whole      Fruit
Organic
Melons           Melons Whole Other  Fruit
Melons           Melons Whole Other  Fruit
Organic
Melons           Watermelon          Fruit
Personal
Melons           Watermelon          Fruit
Personal Organic
Melons           Watermelon          Fruit
Seedless Whole
Melons           Watermelon          Fruit
Seedless Whole
Organic
Melons           Watermelon W/Seeds  Fruit
Whole
Packaged         Dried Fruit         Fruit
Natural Snacks
Packaged         Dried Fruit W/      Fruit
Natural Snacks   Sweetener
Peanut Butter/   Apple Butter/Fruit  Fruit
Jelly/Jams &     Butter
Honey
Pears            Pears Anjou         Fruit
Pears            Pears Anjou         Fruit
Organic
Pears            Pears Asian         Fruit
Pears            Pears Asian         Fruit
Organic
Pears            Pears Bartlett      Fruit
Pears            Pears Bartlett      Fruit
Organic
Pears            Pears Bosc          Fruit
Pears            Pears Bosc Organic  Fruit
Pears            Pears Other         Fruit
Pears            Pears Other         Fruit
Organic
Pears            Pears Red           Fruit
Prepared/Pdgd    Apple Sauce/        Fruit
Foods            Pudding
Prepared/Pdgd    Canned Fruit        Fruit
Foods
Processed        Jarred Fruit        Fruit
Processed        Juice               Fruit
Processed        Squeeze Lemons/     Fruit
Limes
Refrgratd        Dairy Case 100%     Fruit
Juices/Drinks    Pure Juice--
Orange
Refrgratd        Dairy Case 100%     Fruit
Juices/Drinks    Pure Juice Other
Refrigerated     Nut Refrig Juice    Fruit
Dairy Case       Over 50%
Rtd Tea/New Age  Juice (100% Juice)  Fruit
Juice
Rtd Tea/New Age  Juice (Over 50%     Fruit
Juice            Juice)
Salad Bar        Salad Bar Fresh     Fruit
Fruit
Seasonal Fruit   Baskets             Fruit
Service          Sv Bev: Bev/Juice   Fruit
Beverage         50-100% Juice
Shelf Stable     Apple Juice &       Fruit
Juice            Cider (Over 50%
Juice)
Shelf Stable     Blended Juice &     Fruit
Juice            Combinations
Shelf Stable     Cranapple/Cran      Fruit
Juice            Grape Juice
Shelf Stable     Cranapple/Cran      Fruit
Juice            Grape Juice
Shelf Stable     Cranberry Juice     Fruit
Juice            (Over 50% Juice)
Shelf Stable     Grape Juice (Over   Fruit
Juice            50% Juice)
Shelf Stable     Grapefruit Juice    Fruit
Juice            (Over 50% Juice)
Shelf Stable     Lemon Juice & Lime  Fruit
Juice            Juice (Over 50%
Juice)
Shelf Stable     Nectars (Over 50%   Fruit
Juice            Juice)
Shelf Stable     Orange Juice (Over  Fruit
Juice            50% Juice)
Shelf Stable     Other Citrus        Fruit
Juice            Juices (50% And
Under Juice)
Shelf Stable     Other Citrus        Fruit
Juice            Juices (Over 50%
Juice)
Shelf Stable     Pineapple Juice     Fruit
Juice            (Over 50% Juice)
Shelf Stable     Prune Juice (Over   Fruit
Juice            50% Juice)
Single Serve     Applesauce Cup      Fruit
Fruit/
Applesauce
Single Serve     Applesauce Pouch    Fruit
Fruit/
Applesauce
Single Serve     Fruit Cup           Fruit
Fruit/
Applesauce
Stone Fruit      Apricots            Fruit
Stone Fruit      Cherries Ranier     Fruit
Stone Fruit      Cherries Red        Fruit
Stone Fruit      Cherries Red        Fruit
Organic
Stone Fruit      Nectarines White    Fruit
Flesh
Stone Fruit      Nectarines Yellow   Fruit
Flesh
Stone Fruit      Nectarines Yellow   Fruit
Flesh Organic
Stone Fruit      Peaches White       Fruit
Flesh
Stone Fruit      Peaches White       Fruit
Flesh Organic
Stone Fruit      Peaches Yellow      Fruit
Flesh
Stone Fruit      Peaches Yellow      Fruit
Flesh Organic
Stone Fruit      Plums               Fruit
Stone Fruit      Plums Organic       Fruit
Stone Fruit      Pluots              Fruit
Stone Fruit      Stone Fruit Other   Fruit
Organic
Tropical Fruit   Kiwi Fruit          Fruit
Tropical Fruit   Kiwi Fruit Organic  Fruit
Tropical Fruit   Mango               Fruit
Tropical Fruit   Mango Organic       Fruit
Tropical Fruit   Papaya              Fruit
Tropical Fruit   Pineapple Whole &   Fruit
Peel/Cored
Tropical Fruit   Pineapple Whole &   Fruit
Peel/Cored
Organic
Tropical Fruit   Pomegranates        Fruit
Tropical Fruit   Pomegranates        Fruit
Organic
Tropical Fruit   Tropical Fruit--    Fruit
Other
Tropical Fruit   Tropical Fruit      Fruit
Other Organic
Unknown          Frozen Fruit        Fruit
Value-Added      Cut Fruit All       Fruit
Fruit            Other Prepack
Value-Added      Fruit Party Tray    Fruit
Fruit            Prepack
Value-Added      Instore Cut Fruit   Fruit
Fruit
Value-Added      Melon Halves/       Fruit
Fruit            Quarters Prepack
Value-Added      Melons Instore Cut  Fruit
Fruit
Value-Added      Pineapple Wedge/    Fruit
Fruit            Sliced/Chunks
Value-Added      Value-Added Fruit   Fruit
Fruit            Organic
Authentic        Hispanic Tostados   Grains
Hispanic Fds &   & Tortillas
Product
Bag Snacks       Bagged Popped       Grains
Popcorn
Bag Snacks       Bagged Popped       Grains
Popcorn W/
Sweetener
Bag Snacks       Corn Chips          Grains
Bag Snacks       Pretzel W/Sweetner  Grains
Bag Snacks       Pretzels            Grains
Bag Snacks       Tortilla/Nacho      Grains
Chips
Bagels & Cream   Refrigerated        Grains
Cheese           Bagels
Baked Breads     Bagels              Grains
Baked Breads     Diet/Light Bread    Grains
Baked Breads     Dinner Rolls        Grains
Baked Breads     English Muffins/    Grains
Waffles
Baked Breads     Fruit/Breakfast     Grains
Bread
Baked Breads     Hamburger Buns      Grains
Baked Breads     Hot Dog Buns        Grains
Baked Breads     Main Meal Bread     Grains
Baked Breads     Mainstream Variety  Grains
Breads
Baked Breads     Mainstream White    Grains
Bread
Baked Breads     Pita/Tortillas      Grains
Baked Breads     Premium Bread       Grains
Baked Breads     Rye Breads          Grains
Baked Breads     Sandwich Buns       Grains
Bakery Party     Trays Party Trays:  Grains
Rolls
Baking Mixes     Biscuit Flour &     Grains
Mixes
Baking Mixes     Muffin & Corn       Grains
Bread Mix
Baking Needs     Corn Starch         Grains
Bread            All Other Bread     Grains
Bread            Bread--Ingredients  Grains
Bread            Bread Snacks        Grains
Bread            Bread: Diet/        Grains
Organic
Bread            Bread: Kosher       Grains
Bread            Bread: Artisan      Grains
Bread            Bread: Italian/     Grains
French
Bread            Bread: Pita/Pocket/ Grains
Flatbrd
Bread            Bread: Retail       Grains
Seasonings
Bread            Bread: Rye/         Grains
Cocktail
Bread            Bread: Sourdough    Grains
Bread            Bread: Specialty    Grains
Bread            Bread: Sweet/       Grains
Breakfast
Bread            Bread: Brand        Grains
Bread            Bread: Tortillas/   Grains
Wraps
Bread            Bread: Wheat/Whl    Grains
Grain
Bread            Bread: White Loaf   Grains
Bread            Gluten Free         Grains
Bread            Whole Grain Bread   Grains
Bulk Food        Cereal Bulk         Grains
Cereal Bars      Breakfast Bars/     Grains
Tarts/Scones
Cereals          Cereal--Cold        Grains
Cereals          Cereal--Hot         Grains
Cereals          Grains              Grains
Cereals          Granola             Grains
Cnv Breakfast &  Cereal Bars         Grains
Wholesome Snks
Cnv Breakfast &  Granola Bars        Grains
Wholesome Snks
Cnv Breakfast &  Toaster Pastries    Grains
Wholesome Snks
Coffee Shop      Coffee Shop:        Grains
Sweet Goods &    Bagged Snacks
Rtl
Cold Cereal      Adult Cereal        Grains
Cold Cereal      All Family Cereal   Grains
Cold Cereal      Kids Cereal         Grains
Cold Cereal      Misc. Cereal        Grains
Cookie/Cracker   Multi-Pack          Grains
Multi-Pks        Crackers
Cookies          Graham Crackers     Grains
Crackers         Crackers            Grains
Crackers & Misc  Butter Spray        Grains
Baked Food       Cracker
Crackers & Misc  Cheese Crackers     Grains
Baked Food
Crackers & Misc  Saltine/Oyster      Grains
Baked Food
Crackers & Misc  Snack Crackers      Grains
Baked Food
Crackers & Misc  Specialty Crackers  Grains
Baked Food
Croutons/Bread   Bread Sticks        Grains
Stick & Salad
Toppings
Croutons/Bread   Croutons            Grains
Stick & Salad
Toppings
Croutons/Bread   Salad Toppers       Grains
Stick & Salad
Toppings
Deli             Dl Spec: Dry/       Grains
Specialties      Refrig Pastas
(Retail Pk)
Dietary Aid      Diabetic Dry        Grains
Prdct/Med Liq    Cereal
Nutr
Dinner Mixes--   Pizza Mix Dry       Grains
Dry
Dry Bean Veg &   Misc Grain Mixes    Grains
Rice
Dry Bean Veg &   Noodle Side Dish    Grains
Rice             Mixes
Dry Bean Veg &   Rice--Dry Bag And   Grains
Rice             Box
Dry Bean Veg &   Rice--Instant &     Grains
Rice             Microwave
Dry Bean Veg &   Rice Side Dish      Grains
Rice             Mixes Dry
Dry Noodles &    Long Cut Pasta      Grains
Pasta
Dry Noodles &    Noodles Dry         Grains
Pasta
Dry Noodles &    Short Cut Pasta     Grains
Pasta
Dry Noodles &    Specialty Pasta     Grains
Pasta
Dry Sauce/Gravy/ Stuffing Mixes      Grains
Potatoes/
Stuffing
Dry/Ramen        Ramen Noodles/      Grains
Bouillon         Ramen Cups
Eggs/Muffins/    Refrigerated        Grains
Potatoes         English Muffins
Flour & Meals    Breadings/Coatings/ Grains
Crumbs
Flour & Meals    Cornmeal            Grains
Flour & Meals    Flour: Misc/        Grains
Specialty/Blend
Et
Flour & Meals    Flour: White &      Grains
Self Rising
Frozen Bread     Allergen Free       Grains
And Desserts     [Frozen Bread]
Frozen Bread     Breads              Grains
And Desserts
Frozen Bread     Muffins/Bagels      Grains
And Desserts
Frozen Bread     Rolls               Grains
And Desserts
Frozen Bread     Sprouted Breads     Grains
And Desserts
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Biscuits       Grains
Dough
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Bread Dough    Grains
Dough
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Breadsticks    Grains
Dough
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Dinner Rolls   Grains
Dough
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Garlic Bread   Grains
Dough
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Garlic Toast   Grains
Dough
Frozen Bread/    Frzn Sweet Rolls &  Grains
Dough            Muffins
Frozen           Pancakes/French     Grains
Breakfast        Toast
Frozen           Waffles             Grains
Breakfast
Frozen           Frzn Bagels         Grains
Breakfast
Foods
Frozen           Frzn Breakfast      Grains
Breakfast        Pastry
Foods
Frozen           Waffles/Pancakes/   Grains
Breakfast        French Toast
Foods
Frzn Pasta       Frozen Pasta        Grains
Hot Cereal       Grits               Grains
Hot Cereal       Instant Breakfast   Grains
Hot Cereal       Instant Oatmeal     Grains
Hot Cereal       Other Hot Cereal    Grains
Hot Cereal       Standard Oatmeal    Grains
Kosher Foods     Kosher Matzas       Grains
And Products
Kosher Foods     Kosher Noodles And  Grains
And Products     Rice
Meat--Shelf      Tamales             Grains
Stable
Molasses/Syrups/ Pancake Mixes       Grains
Pancake Mixes
Multicultural    Rice Bulk/Bag       Grains
Products
Non-Dairy/Dairy  Rice Beverage       Grains
Aseptic
Pies             Pies: Sugar Free    Grains
Popcorn          Caramel Coated      Grains
Snacks
Popcorn          Popcorn--Microwave  Grains
Popcorn          Popcorn--Other      Grains
Prepared/Pdgd    Grains              Grains
Foods
Prepared/Pdgd    Pasta/Ramen         Grains
Foods
Refrgrated       Misc Refrig Dough   Grains
Dough Products   Products
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Grains
Dough Products   Biscuits
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Grains
Dough Products   Breads
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Grains
Dough Products   Crescent Rolls
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Grains
Dough Products   Specialty Rolls
Refrigerated     Refrigerated        Grains
Hispanic         Tortillas
Grocery
Refrigerated     Refrigerated Pasta  Grains
Italian
Rice Cakes       Large--Rice Cakes   Grains
Rice Cakes       Large Cakes         Grains
Rice Cakes       Mini--Rice Cakes    Grains
Rice Cakes       Mini-Cakes          Grains
Rice Cakes       Other--Rice Cakes   Grains
Rolls            Rolls: Bagels       Grains
Rolls            Rolls: Bagels--     Grains
Less Than 6
Rolls            Rolls: Biscuits/    Grains
Eng Muffins
Rolls            Rolls: Croissants/  Grains
Breadsticks
Rolls            Rolls: Diet/        Grains
Organic
Rolls            Rolls: Dinner       Grains
Rolls            Rolls: Kosher       Grains
Rolls            Rolls: Sandwich     Grains
Salad & Dips     Salads--Bulk        Grains
Pasta/Grain
Salad & Dips     Salads--Prepack     Grains
Pasta/Grain
Salad Toppings   Croutons Organic    Grains
Seafood--Salad/  Breading            Grains
Dip/Sce/Cond
Snack            Popcorn             Grains
Snack            Popcorn W/          Grains
Sweetener
Snack            Tortilla Chips      Grains
Snacks           Snacks: Crackers/   Grains
Cookies
Snacks           Snacks: Bagel       Grains
Chips
Snacks           Snacks: Pita Chips  Grains
Snacks           Snacks: Tortilla    Grains
Chips
Specialty        Gourmet Crackers    Grains
Cheese Pre
Pack
Ss/Vending--     Vending Size/Sngl   Grains
Cookie/Cracker   Serve Cracke
Syrups Toppings  Cones [Frozen       Grains
& Cones          Novelties]
Traditional      Asian Noodles/Rice  Grains
Asian Foods
Traditional      Mexican Soft        Grains
Mexican Foods    Tortillas And Wra
Traditional      Mexican Taco/       Grains
Mexican Foods    Tostado/Shells
Unknown          Frozen Bread        Grains
Unknown          Frozen Convenience/ Grains
Pockets
Bacon            Bacon--Natural/     Protein Foods
Organic
Bacon            Bacon--Other        Protein Foods
Bacon            Bacon--Poultry      Protein Foods
Bacon            Bacon--Pre-Cooked   Protein Foods
Bacon            Bacon--Trad 16oz    Protein Foods
Or Less
Bacon            Bacon--Trad Center  Protein Foods
Cut
Bacon            Bacon--Trad         Protein Foods
Greater Than 16oz
Baking Needs     Baking Nuts         Protein Foods
Beef: Chuck/     Choice Beef         Protein Foods
Shoulder
Beef: Chuck/     Natural Beef        Protein Foods
Shoulder
Beef: Chuck/     Organic Beef        Protein Foods
Shoulder
Beef: Grinds     Angus [Beef]        Protein Foods
Beef: Grinds     Lean [Beef]         Protein Foods
Beef: Grinds     Natural [Beef]      Protein Foods
Beef: Grinds     Organic [Beef]      Protein Foods
Beef: Grinds     Patties [Beef]      Protein Foods
Beef: Grinds     Primal [Beef]       Protein Foods
Beef: Grinds     Sausage [Beef]      Protein Foods
Beef: Loins      Choice Beef         Protein Foods
Beef: Loins      Select Beef         Protein Foods
Beef: Offal      External [Beef      Protein Foods
Offal]
Beef: Rib        Angus Beef          Protein Foods
Beef: Rib        Prime Beef          Protein Foods
Beef: Round      Angus Beef          Protein Foods
Beef: Round      Choice Beef         Protein Foods
Beef: Round      Natural Beef        Protein Foods
Beef: Round      Organic Beef        Protein Foods
Beef: Round      Prime Beef          Protein Foods
Beef: Round      Select Beef         Protein Foods
Beef: Thin       Brisket             Protein Foods
Meats
Beef: Thin       Corned Beef         Protein Foods
Meats
Beef: Thin       Cubed Meats [Beef]  Protein Foods
Meats
Beef: Thin       Flank [Beef]        Protein Foods
Meats
Beef: Thin       Lifter Meat [Beef]  Protein Foods
Meats
Beef: Thin       Skirt [Beef]        Protein Foods
Meats
Beef: Thin       Soup/Stew           Protein Foods
Meats
Breakfast        Bkfst Sausage--     Protein Foods
Sausage          Bkfast Side Di
Breakfast        Bkfst Sausage--     Protein Foods
Sausage          Fresh Links
Breakfast        Bkfst Sausage--     Protein Foods
Sausage          Fresh Patties
Breakfast        Bkfst Sausage--     Protein Foods
Sausage          Fresh Rolls
Breakfast        Bkfst Sausage--     Protein Foods
Sausage          Other Forms
Breakfast        Bkfst Sausage--     Protein Foods
Sausage          Precooked
Buffalo          Chuck/Shoulder      Protein Foods
[Buffalo]
Buffalo          Grinds [Buffalo]    Protein Foods
Buffalo          Loin [Buffalo]      Protein Foods
Buffalo          Natural [Buffalo]   Protein Foods
Buffalo          Rib [Buffalo]       Protein Foods
Buffalo          Round/Leg           Protein Foods
[Buffalo]
Buffalo          Thin Meats          Protein Foods
[Buffalo]
Bulk Food        Nuts Bulk W/        Protein Foods
Sweetener
Bulk Food        Trail Mix/Nuts      Protein Foods
Bulk
Can Beans        Prepared Beans--    Protein Foods
Baked W/Pork
Can Beans        Variety Beans--     Protein Foods
Kidney/Pinto/E
Can Seafood--    Anchovies           Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Caviar              Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Clam Juice          Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Clams               Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Crabmeat            Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Kipper Snack        Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Mackerel            Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Misc. Cnd Seafoods  Protein Foods
Shelf Stable     (Crab/Etc.)
Can Seafood--    Oysters             Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Salmon              Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Sardines            Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Shrimp              Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Can Seafood--    Tuna                Protein Foods
Shelf Stable
Chicken &        Chix/Poultry        Protein Foods
Poultry          Ingredients
Chicken &        Chix: Baked 8pc     Protein Foods
Poultry          Cut Up (Cold)
Chicken &        Chix: Chicken       Protein Foods
Poultry          Dinners/Snacks C
Chicken &        Chix: Chicken       Protein Foods
Poultry          Dinners/Snacks H
Chicken &        Chix: Kosher        Protein Foods
Poultry          (Cold)
Chicken &        Chix: Rotisserie    Protein Foods
Poultry          Cold
Chicken &        Chix: Frd 8pc/Cut   Protein Foods
Poultry          Up (Cold)
Chicken &        Chix: Value-Added   Protein Foods
Poultry          (Cold)
Chicken Fresh    Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
Boneless
Chicken Fresh    Chicken Drums       Protein Foods
Chicken Fresh    Chicken Legs/       Protein Foods
Quarters
Chicken Fresh    Chicken Thighs      Protein Foods
Chicken Fresh    Chicken Wings       Protein Foods
Chicken Fresh    Mixed Packs         Protein Foods
Chicken Fresh    Whole Chicken       Protein Foods
(Roasters/Fryer)
Chicken Frozen   Chicken--Frz Iqf--  Protein Foods
Raw
Chicken Frozen   Frzn Chicken--Drk   Protein Foods
Meat
Chicken Frozen   Frzn Chicken--Wht   Protein Foods
Meat
Chicken Frozen   Frzn Chicken--      Protein Foods
Wings
Chicken Frozen   Whole/Cutup         Protein Foods
[Chicken]
Chicken Frozen   Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
(Rw)             Bone In
Chicken Frozen   Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
(Rw)             Boneless
Chicken Frozen   Chicken Drums       Protein Foods
(Rw)
Chicken Frozen   Chicken Legs/       Protein Foods
(Rw)             Quarters
Chicken Frozen   Chicken Thighs      Protein Foods
(Rw)
Chicken Frozen   Chicken Wings       Protein Foods
(Rw)
Chicken Frozen   Whole Chicken       Protein Foods
(Rw)             (Roasters/Fryer)
Chicken Grinds   Ground Chicken      Protein Foods
Chicken Offal    External [Chicken   Protein Foods
Offal]
Chicken Offal    Internal [Chicken   Protein Foods
Offal]
Chicken Organic  Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
Bone In
Chicken Smoked   Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
Bone In
Chicken          Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
Specialty/       Bone In
Natural
Chicken          Chicken Breast      Protein Foods
Specialty/       Boneless
Natural
Chicken          Chicken Drums       Protein Foods
Specialty/
Natural
Chicken          Chicken Legs/       Protein Foods
Specialty/       Quarters
Natural
Chicken          Chicken Thighs      Protein Foods
Specialty/
Natural
Chicken          Chicken Wings       Protein Foods
Specialty/
Natural
Chicken          Mixed Packs         Protein Foods
Specialty/       [Chicken]
Natural
Chicken          Whole Chicken       Protein Foods
Specialty/       (Roasters/Fryer)
Natural
Condiments       Nut Butters/Peanut  Protein Foods
Butter
Deli Meat: Bulk  Bologna/Loaves/     Protein Foods
Franks
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat Bulk:          Protein Foods
Specialty Dry
Meats
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Bacon         Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Beef Bulk     Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Chicken Bulk  Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Gift Pack     Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Ham Ppk/      Protein Foods
Prslc
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Pates/Mousse  Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Saus Dry Ppk/ Protein Foods
Prslc
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Turkey Bulk   Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat:Ham Bulk       Protein Foods
Deli Meat: Bulk  Meat: Lnchmt Ppk/   Protein Foods
Prslc
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Bacon    Protein Foods
Other
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Kosher   Protein Foods
Other
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Pates/   Protein Foods
Other            Mousse
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat:          Protein Foods
Other            Shippers/Gift
Packs
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Beef     Protein Foods
Presliced
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Bologna/ Protein Foods
Presliced        Loaves/Fran
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Chicken  Protein Foods
Presliced
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Ham      Protein Foods
Presliced
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Semi-    Protein Foods
Presliced        Dry Sausage
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat:          Protein Foods
Presliced        Specialty Dry
Meats
Deli Meat:       Deli Meat: Turkey   Protein Foods
Presliced
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Beef   Protein Foods
Rope Ckd/Sm
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--       Protein Foods
Cocktails
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Fresh  Protein Foods
Poultry
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Links  Protein Foods
Beef Ckd
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Links  Protein Foods
Fresh
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Links  Protein Foods
Pork Ckd
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Links  Protein Foods
Poultry Ck
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--       Protein Foods
Natural/Organic
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Other  Protein Foods
Forms
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--Pork   Protein Foods
Rope Ckd/Sm
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Sausage--       Protein Foods
Poultry Rope Ckd
Dinner Sausage   Dnr Saus-Rope/Link- Protein Foods
Smkd/Preckd
Eggs/Muffins/    Eggs--Jumbo         Protein Foods
Potatoes
Eggs/Muffins/    Eggs--Large         Protein Foods
Potatoes
Eggs/Muffins/    Eggs--Medium        Protein Foods
Potatoes
Eggs/Muffins/    Eggs--Small         Protein Foods
Potatoes
Eggs/Muffins/    Eggs--X-Large       Protein Foods
Potatoes
Eggs/Muffins/    Eggs Substitute     Protein Foods
Potatoes
Eggs/Muffins/    Specialty Eggs      Protein Foods
Potatoes
Exotic           Goat                Protein Food
Exotic           Rabbit              Protein Foods
Frozen           Frzn Breakfast      Protein Foods
Breakfast        Sausage
Foods
Frozen           Frzn Egg            Protein Foods
Breakfast        Substitutes
Foods
Frozen Entrees   Meat Protein        Protein Foods
Frozen Meat      Frozen Meat         Protein Foods
Frozen Meat      Alternatives Meat   Protein Foods
Frozen Meat      Alternatives Soy/   Protein Foods
Tofu
Frzn Multi       Frzn Burgers        Protein Foods
Serve
Frzn Multi       Fz Bbq              Protein Foods
Serve
Frzn Multi       Fz Meatballs        Protein Foods
Serve
Frzn Prepared    Bone-In Wings       Protein Foods
Chicken
Frzn Prepared    Boneless Snack/     Protein Foods
Chicken          18oz And Larger
Frzn Prepared    Boneless Snack/     Protein Foods
Chicken          Value/Small
Frzn Prepared    Value Forms/18oz    Protein Foods
Chicken          And Larger
[Chicken]
Frzn Prepared    Whole Muscle        Protein Foods
Chicken          Breaded/18oz And
Frzn Prepared    Whole Muscle        Protein Foods
Chicken          Unbreaded
Frzn Seafood     Frz Coated Fish     Protein Foods
Fillets
Frzn Seafood     Frz Fishsticks/     Protein Foods
Tenders/Nuggets
Frzn Seafood     Frz Non-Coated      Protein Foods
Fish Fillets
Frzn Seafood     Frz Seafood         Protein Foods
Entrees
Frzn Seafood     Frzn Misc Seafood   Protein Foods
Hot Dogs         Hot Dogs--Base      Protein Foods
Beef
Hot Dogs         Hot Dogs--Base      Protein Foods
Meat
Hot Dogs         Hot Dogs--Base      Protein Foods
Poultry
Hot Dogs         Hot Dogs--Premium   Protein Foods
Hot Dogs         Hot Dogs-Rw-All     Protein Foods
Kosher           Beef                Protein Foods
Kosher           Chicken             Protein Foods
Kosher           Lamb                Protein Foods
Kosher           Turkey              Protein Foods
Kosher           Veal                Protein Foods
Kosher Foods     Kosher Seafood      Protein Foods
And Products
Lamb             Chuck/Shoulder      Protein Foods
[Lamb]
Lamb             Grinds [Lamb]       Protein Foods
Lamb             Loin [Lamb]         Protein Foods
Lamb             Offals [Lamb]       Protein Foods
Lamb             Rib [Lamb]          Protein Foods
Lamb             Round/Leg [Lamb]    Protein Foods
Lamb             Thin Meats [Lamb]   Protein Foods
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Brauns/  Protein Foods
Liver/Loave
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Chip     Protein Foods
Meat
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Chop/    Protein Foods
Form Pltry & Ha
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Other    Protein Foods
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Peggabl  Protein Foods
e Deli Fres
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Variety  Protein Foods
Pack
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Whole    Protein Foods
Muscle Pltry
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Rw-All   Protein Foods
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Bologna/ Protein Foods
Sausage
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Deli     Protein Foods
Fresh
Lunchmeat        Lunchmeat--Natural/ Protein Foods
Organic
Meat--Shelf      Beef Stew           Protein Foods
Stable
Meat--Shelf      Beef/Pork--Dried    Protein Foods
Stable           Sliced W/Gra
Meat--Shelf      Chicken &           Protein Foods
Stable           Dumplings
Meat--Shelf      Chili: Canned       Protein Foods
Stable
Meat--Shelf      Chunk Meats--Chix/  Protein Foods
Stable           Ham/Etc.
Meat--Shelf      Corn Beef           Protein Foods
Stable
Meat--Shelf      Hash: Canned        Protein Foods
Stable
Meat--Shelf      Hot Dog Chili       Protein Foods
Stable           Sauce
Meat--Shelf      Luncheon Meat       Protein Foods
Stable           (Spam)
Meat--Shelf      Misc Cnd Meats      Protein Foods
Stable
Meat--Shelf      Potted Meats And    Protein Foods
Stable           Spreads
Meat--Shelf      Sandwich Sauce      Protein Foods
Stable           (Manwich)
Meat--Shelf      Vienna Sausage      Protein Foods
Stable
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--Beef     Protein Foods
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--         Protein Foods
Breakfast Sausage
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--Exotic   Protein Foods
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--Natural/ Protein Foods
Organic
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--Offals   Protein Foods
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--Pork     Protein Foods
Meat Frozen      Frzn Meat--Turkey   Protein Foods
Meat Frozen      Meat--Misc-Misc     Protein Foods
Meat Snacks      Jerky/Nuggets/      Protein Foods
Tenders
Meat Snacks      Meat Sticks/Bites   Protein Foods
Nat Foods--      Ntrn Refrig Meat:   Protein Foods
Refrigerated     Breakfast Me
Meat
Nat Foods--      Ntrn Refrig Meat:   Protein Foods
Refrigerated     Hot Dogs/Sau
Meat
Nat Foods--      Ntrn Refrig Meat:   Protein Foods
Refrigerated     Lunchmeat
Meat
Non-Dairy/Dairy  Nut Milk            Protein Foods
Aseptic
Nuts             Almonds             Protein Foods
Nuts             Almonds Shelled     Protein Foods
Nuts             Almonds W/          Protein Foods
Sweetener
Nuts             Cashews             Protein Foods
Nuts             Cashews W/          Protein Foods
Sweetener
Nuts             Dry Roast Peanuts   Protein Foods
Nuts             Dry Roast Peanuts   Protein Foods
W/Sweetener
Nuts             Misc Snack Nuts     Protein Foods
Nuts             Misc Snacks Nuts W/ Protein Foods
Sweetener
Nuts             Mixed Nuts          Protein Foods
Nuts             Mixed Nuts W/       Protein Foods
Sweetener
Nuts             Nuts Inshell        Protein Foods
Nuts             Nuts Other          Protein Foods
Nuts             Nuts Other Organic  Protein Foods
Nuts             Nuts Sugar Coated   Protein Foods
All
Nuts             Oil Roast Peanuts   Protein Foods
Nuts             Oil Roast Peanuts   Protein Foods
W/Sweetener
Nuts             Peanuts All         Protein Foods
Nuts             Pecans Shelled      Protein Foods
Nuts             Pecans W/Sweetener  Protein Foods
Nuts             Pistachios          Protein Foods
Nuts             Sunflower/Other     Protein Foods
Seeds
Nuts             Sunflower/Other     Protein Foods
Seeds W/Sweete
Nuts             Trail Mix           Protein Foods
Nuts             Walnuts Shelled     Protein Foods
Packaged         Nuts                Protein Foods
Natural Snacks
Packaged         Nuts W/Sweetener    Protein Foods
Natural Snacks
Peanut Butter/   Peanut Butter       Protein Foods
Jelly/Jams &
Honey
Pkgd Meat Corp   Only Pkgd Meat      Protein Foods
Use              Corp Use Only
Pork Bone In     Dry [Pork Bone In   Protein Foods
Loin/Rib         Loin/Rib]
Pork Boneless    Enhanced [Pork      Protein Foods
Loin/Rib         Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Pork Boneless    Natural [Pork       Protein Foods
Loin/Rib         Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Pork Grinds      Ground Pork         Protein Foods
Pork Offal       External Fresh      Protein Foods
[Pork Offal]
Pork Offal       Internal Fresh      Protein Foods
[Pork Offal]
Pork Shoulder    Butts [Pork         Protein Foods
Shoulder]
Pork Shoulder    Fresh Hams          Protein Foods
Pork Thin Meats  Kabobs [Pork]       Protein Foods
Pork Thin Meats  Organics [Pork]     Protein Foods
Pork Thin Meats  Ribs [Pork]         Protein Foods
Pork Thin Meats  Stir Fry/Strips/    Protein Foods
Fajitas [Pork]
Poultry Other    Capons              Protein Foods
Poultry Other    Cornish Hen         Protein Foods
Poultry Other    Ducks               Protein Foods
Poultry Other    Geese               Protein Foods
Poultry Other    Poultry/Other       Protein Foods
Prepared/Pdgd    Meat--Can/Pouch     Protein Foods
Foods
Processed        Beans Dried         Protein Foods
Random Weight    Lunch Meats         Protein Foods
Meat Products
Refrigerated     Eggs                Protein Foods
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Non-Dairy Cheese    Protein Foods
Vegetarian
Refrigerated     Tofu                Protein Foods
Vegetarian
Refrigerated     Vegetarian Meats    Protein Foods
Vegetarian
Restricted Diet  Pnut Btr/Jelly      Protein Foods
Salad & Dips     Protein Salads--    Protein Foods
Bulk
Salad & Dips     Protein Salads--    Protein Foods
Prepack
Seafood--Catfis  Catfish--Fillet     Protein Foods
h
Seafood--Catfis  Catfish--Nuggets    Protein Foods
h
Seafood--Catfis  Catfish--Other      Protein Foods
h                Form
Seafood--Catfis  Catfish--Whole      Protein Foods
h
Seafood--Cod     Cod--Fillet         Protein Foods
Seafood--Cod     Cod--Other Form     Protein Foods
Seafood--Cod     Cod--Whole          Protein Foods
Seafood--Crab    Crab--Dungy         Protein Foods
Seafood--Crab    Crab--King          Protein Foods
Seafood--Crab    Crab--Other         Protein Foods
Seafood--Crab    Crab--Snow          Protein Foods
Seafood--Exotic  Exotic--Mahi Mahi   Protein Foods
Seafood--Exotic  Exotic--Other       Protein Foods
Seafood--Exotic  Exotic--Red         Protein Foods
Snapper
Seafood--Exotic  Exotic--Shark       Protein Foods
Seafood--Exotic  Exotic--Swordfish   Protein Foods
Seafood--Exotic  Exotic--Tuna        Protein Foods
Seafood--Finfis  Finfish--Halibut    Protein Foods
h Other
Seafood--Finfis  Finfish--Other      Protein Foods
h Other
Seafood--Finfis  Finfish--Other      Protein Foods
h Other
Seafood--Finfis  Finfish--Rockfish   Protein Foods
h Other
Seafood--Finfis  Finfish--Sole/      Protein Foods
h Other          Flounder
Seafood--Finfis  Finfish--Sole/      Protein Foods
h Other          Flounder
Seafood--Imitat  Imitation Crab      Protein Foods
ion Seafood
Seafood--Imitat  Imitation Other     Protein Foods
ion Seafood
Seafood--Imitat  Imitation Shrimp    Protein Foods
ion Seafood
Seafood--Lobste  Lobster--Live       Protein Foods
r
Seafood--Lobste  Lobster--Meat       Protein Foods
r
Seafood--Lobste  Lobster--Other      Protein Foods
r                Form
Seafood--Lobste  Lobster--Tails      Protein Foods
r
Seafood--Oyster  Oyster--Bulk        Protein Foods
Seafood--Oyster  Oyster--Cup         Protein Foods
(Packaged)
Seafood--Oyster  Oyster--Cup         Protein Foods
(Packaged)
Seafood--Party   Party Tray--Shrimp  Protein Foods
Trays
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Fr--         Protein Foods
Farm Raised      Altantic
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Fr--Other    Protein Foods
Farm Raised      Form
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Fr--         Protein Foods
Farm Raised      Atlantic
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Fr--Coho     Protein Foods
Farm Raised
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Fr--King     Protein Foods
Farm Raised
Seafood--Salmon- Seafood--Fre-       Protein Foods
Farm Raised      Catfish
Seafood--Salmon- Seafood--Fre-Misc   Protein Foods
Farm Raised
Seafood--Salmon- Seafood--Fre-Raw    Protein Foods
Farm Raised      Finfish--Other
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--Other    Protein Foods
Wild Caught      Form
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--Coho     Protein Foods
Wild Caught
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--King     Protein Foods
Wild Caught
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--Pink     Protein Foods
Wild Caught
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--         Protein Foods
Wild Caught      Silverbrite
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--         Protein Foods
Wild Caught      Silverbrite
Seafood--Salmon- Salmon Wc--Sockeye  Protein Foods
Wild Caught
Seafood--Scallo  Scallops--Bay       Protein Foods
ps
Seafood--Scallo  Scallops--Sea       Protein Foods
ps
Seafood--Shellf  Shellfish--Clams    Protein Foods
ish Other
Seafood--Shellf  Shellfish--Clams    Protein Foods
ish Other
Seafood--Shellf  Shellfish--Mussles  Protein Foods
ish Other
Seafood--Shellf  Shellfish--Other    Protein Foods
ish Other
Seafood--Shrimp  Shrimp--Cooked      Protein Foods
Seafood--Shrimp  Shrimp--Natural/    Protein Foods
Organic
Seafood--Shrimp  Shrimp--Raw         Protein Foods
Seafood--Smoked  Smoked Other        Protein Foods
Seafood
Seafood--Smoked  Smoked Salmon       Protein Foods
Seafood
Seafood--Tilapi  Tilapia--Fillet     Protein Foods
a
Seafood--Tilapi  Tilapia--Other      Protein Foods
a                Form
Seafood--Tilapi  Tilapia--Whole      Protein Foods
a
Seafood--Trout   Steelhead Fr        Protein Foods
Seafood--Trout   Trout--Fillet       Protein Foods
Seafood--Trout   Trout--Whole        Protein Foods
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added         Protein Foods
Added Seafood    Catfish
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added In-     Protein Foods
Added Seafood    Store Cooked Ho
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added         Protein Foods
Added Seafood    Breaded Shrimp
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added Crab    Protein Foods
Added Seafood
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added         Protein Foods
Added Seafood    Finfish
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added In-     Protein Foods
Added Seafood    Store Cooked Co
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added Kabobs  Protein Foods
Added Seafood
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added Other   Protein Foods
Added Seafood
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added Salmon  Protein Foods
Added Seafood
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added Shrimp  Protein Foods
Added Seafood
Seafood--Value-  Value-Added         Protein Foods
Added Seafood    Tilapia
Seafood--Salad/  Herring             Protein Foods
Dips/Sce/Cond
Service Case     Cooked              Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Ingredients         Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Kabobs Beef         Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Kabobs Pork         Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Kabobs Poultry      Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Marinated Beef      Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Marinated Pork      Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Marinated Poultry   Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Seasoned            Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Seasoned Beef       Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Seasoned Pork       Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Seasoned Poultry    Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Stuffed/Mixed Beef  Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Stuffed/Mixed Pork  Protein Foods
Meat
Service Case     Stuffed/Mixed       Protein Foods
Meat             Poultry
Smoked Hams      Hams--Canned        Protein Foods
Smoked Hams      Hams--Dry Cured/    Protein Foods
Country
Smoked Hams      Hams--Half/Port     Protein Foods
Bone-In
Smoked Hams      Hams--Half/Port     Protein Foods
Boneless
Smoked Hams      Hams--Spiral        Protein Foods
Smoked Hams      Hams--Whole Bone-   Protein Foods
In
Smoked Hams      Hams--Whole         Protein Foods
Boneless
Smoked Pork      Bacon--Belly/Jowl   Protein Foods
Smoked Pork      Ham Steaks/Cubes/   Protein Foods
Slices
Smoked Pork      Smoked Chops Bone-  Protein Foods
In [Pork]
Smoked Pork      Smoked Chops        Protein Foods
Boneless [Pork]
Smoked Pork      Smoked Offal        Protein Foods
[Pork]
Smoked Pork      Smoked Picnics      Protein Foods
[Pork]
Snack Meat       Grnd/Patty--Chuck   Protein Foods
Snack Meat       Snack Meat--Other   Protein Foods
Snack Meat       Snack Meat--        Protein Foods
Pepperoni
Snack Meat       Snack Meat--Salami/ Protein Foods
Smr Sausag
Snacks           Snacks: Deli Nuts   Protein Foods
Ss/Vending--     Tube Nuts           Protein Foods
Salty Snacks
Ss/Vending--     Tube Nuts W/        Protein Foods
Salty Snacks     Sweetener
Turkey Fresh     Turkey Legs         Protein Foods
Turkey Fresh     Whole Hen (Under    Protein Foods
16lbs) [Turkey]
Turkey Fresh     Whole Tom (Over     Protein Foods
16lbs) [Turkey]
Turkey Frozen    Turkey Breast Bone  Protein Foods
In
Turkey Frozen    Turkey Breast       Protein Foods
Boneless
Turkey Frozen    Turkey Halves/      Protein Foods
Quarters
Turkey Frozen    Turkey Thighs       Protein Foods
Turkey Frozen    Whole Hens (Under   Protein Foods
16lbs) [Turkey]
Turkey Frozen    Whole Toms (Over    Protein Foods
16lbs) [Turkey]
Turkey Grinds    Ground Turkey       Protein Foods
Turkey Offal     External [Turkey    Protein Foods
Offal]
Turkey Offal     Internal [Turkey    Protein Foods
Offal]
Turkey Organic   Whole Hens (Under   Protein Foods
15lbs) [Turkey]
Turkey Organic   Whole Toms (Over    Protein Foods
15lbs) [Turkey]
Turkey Smoked    Turkey Drums        Protein Foods
Turkey Smoked    Turkey Wings        Protein Foods
Turkey           Whole Hens (Under   Protein Foods
Specialty        15lbs) [Turkey]
Natural
Turkey           Whole Toms (Over    Protein Foods
Specialty        15lbs) [Turkey]
Natural
Unknown          Beef--Boneless-     Protein Foods
Choice
Unknown          Beef--Grinds        Protein Foods
Unknown          Breast--Bone-In     Protein Foods
(Frz)
Unknown          Frozen Burgers      Protein Foods
Unknown          Frozen Meat         Protein Foods
Unknown          Frozen Meat         Protein Foods
(Vegetarian)
Unknown          Ham--Bone-In Whole  Protein Foods
Unknown          Ham--Boneless Half/ Protein Foods
Port
Unknown          Marinated           Protein Foods
Unknown          Meal Sol--          Protein Foods
Precooked Meats
Unknown          Meal Sol--Raw       Protein Foods
Frthr Preprd Mt
Unknown          Meat Frz--Misc      Protein Foods
Unknown          Seafood--Frz--Rw--  Protein Foods
All
Unknown          Smkd Ham Country--  Protein Foods
All
Unknown          Turkey--Grinds      Protein Foods
Unknown          Turkey--Other       Protein Foods
Parts/Pieces--Fre
Unknown          Whole--Tom (16 Lbs  Protein Foods
& Over Frz
Veal             Whole/Half [Veal]   Protein Foods
Nuts             Pecans              Protein Foods
Authentic        Authentic Peppers   Vegetables
Hispanic Fds &
Product
Authentic        Authentic Sauces/   Vegetables
Hispanic Fds &   Salsa/Picante
Product
Authentic        Authentic           Vegetables
Hispanic Fds &   Vegetables And
Product          Foods
Authentic        Italian Vegetables  Vegetables
Italian Foods
Broccoli/        Brocco--Flower      Vegetables
Cauliflower
Broccoli/        Broccoli Whole &    Vegetables
Cauliflower      Crowns Organi
Broccoli/        Broccoli            Vegetables
Cauliflower      Whole&Crowns
Broccoli/        Cauliflower Whole   Vegetables
Cauliflower
Broccoli/        Cauliflower Whole   Vegetables
Cauliflower      Organic
Can Vegetables-- Artichokes          Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Beans/Wax/Shellies  Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Beets               Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Carrots             Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Corn                Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Fried Onions        Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Green Beans: Fs/    Vegetables
Shelf Stable     Whl/Cut
Can Vegetables-- Hominy              Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Kraut & Cabbage     Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Lima Beans          Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Miscellaneous       Vegetables
Shelf Stable     Vegetables
Can Vegetables-- Mixed Vegetables    Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Mushrooms Cnd &     Vegetables
Shelf Stable     Glass
Can Vegetables-- Peas & Onions/Peas  Vegetables
Shelf Stable     & Carrot
Can Vegetables-- Peas Fresh Pack/    Vegetables
Shelf Stable     Crowder
Can Vegetables-- Peas/Green          Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Pimentos            Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Salads Cnd (Bean/   Vegetables
Shelf Stable     Potato)
Can Vegetables-- Spinach & Greens    Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Squash              Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- Sweet Potatoes      Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Can Vegetables-- White Potatoes      Vegetables
Shelf Stable
Carrots          Carrots--Bulk       Vegetables
Carrots          Carrots Bagged      Vegetables
Carrots          Carrots Bagged      Vegetables
Organic
Carrots          Carrots Bulk        Vegetables
Organic
Carrots          Carrots Mini        Vegetables
Peeled
Carrots          Carrots Mini        Vegetables
Peeled Organic
Condiments       Salsa/Dips          Vegetables
Convenience/     Convenience/        Vegetables
Snacking         Snacking Organic
Convenience/     Convenience/        Vegetables
Snacking         Snacking
Vegetable
Corn             Corn Bulk           Vegetables
Corn             Corn Is Packaged    Vegetables
Corn             Corn Organic        Vegetables
Corn             Corn Packaged       Vegetables
Corn             Corn White          Vegetables
Dry Sauce/Gravy/ Potatoes: Dry       Vegetables
Potatoes/
Stuffing
Frozen Potatoes  Frzn Baked/Stuffed/ Vegetables
Mashed & Spec
Frozen Potatoes  Frzn French Fries   Vegetables
Frozen Potatoes  Frzn Hashbrown      Vegetables
Potatoes
Frozen Potatoes  Frzn Onion Rings    Vegetables
Frozen Potatoes  Frzn Tater Tots/    Vegetables
Other Extruded
Frozen           Frzn Breaded        Vegetables
Vegetable &      Vegetables
Veg Dish
Frozen           Frzn Corn On The    Vegetables
Vegetable &      Cob
Veg Dish
Frozen           Frzn Organic        Vegetables
Vegetable &      Vegetables
Veg Dish
Frozen           Frzn Steamable      Vegetables
Vegetable &      Vegetables
Veg Dish
Frozen           Fz Bag Vegetables-- Vegetables
Vegetable &      Plain
Veg Dish
Frozen           Fz Bag Vegetables-- Vegetables
Vegetable &      Value-Added
Veg Dish
Frozen           Fz Box Vegetables-- Vegetables
Vegetable &      Plain
Veg Dish
Frozen           Fz Box Vegetables-- Vegetables
Vegetable &      Value-Added
Veg Dish
Frozen           Bag Vegetables      Vegetables
Vegetables And
Potatoes
Frozen           Box Vegetables      Vegetables
Vegetables And
Potatoes
Frozen           Edamame             Vegetables
Vegetables And
Potatoes
Frozen           Potatoes            Vegetables
Vegetables And
Potatoes
Fruit & Veg      Herbs (Outdoor)     Vegetables
Plants
(Outdoor)
Fruit & Veg      Vegetable           Vegetables
Plants
(Outdoor)
Herbs/Garlic     Garlic Whole        Vegetables
Cloves
Herbs/Garlic     Garlic Whole        Vegetables
Cloves Organic
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Basil         Vegetables
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Basil         Vegetables
Organic
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Cilanto       Vegetables
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Cilantro      Vegetables
Organic
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Fresh Other   Vegetables
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Fresh Other   Vegetables
Organic
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Parsley       Vegetables
Herbs/Garlic     Herbs Parsley       Vegetables
Organic
Herbs/Garlic     Sprouts             Vegetables
Kosher Foods     Kosher Potato       Vegetables
And Products     Vegetable
Mushrooms        Mushrooms Dried     Vegetables
Mushrooms        Mushrooms Other     Vegetables
Mushrooms        Mushrooms Others    Vegetables
Organic
Mushrooms        Mushrooms           Vegetables
Portabella
Mushrooms        Mushrooms White     Vegetables
Bulk
Mushrooms        Mushrooms White     Vegetables
Sliced Pkg
Mushrooms        Mushrooms White     Vegetables
Whole Pkg
Mushrooms        Mushrooms White     Vegetables
Whole Pkg Organic
Onions           Onions Gourmet      Vegetables
Onions           Onions Other        Vegetables
Onions           Onions Other        Vegetables
Organic
Onions           Onions Red (Bulk &  Vegetables
Bag)
Onions           Onions Sweet (Bulk  Vegetables
& Bag)
Onions           Onions White (Bulk  Vegetables
& Bag)
Onions           Onions Yellow       Vegetables
(Bulk & Bag)
Organics Fruit   Organic Broccoli/   Vegetables
& Vegetables     Cauliflower
Organics Fruit   Organic Fruit/Veg   Vegetables
& Vegetables     Instore Proc
Organics Fruit   Organic Other       Vegetables
& Vegetables
Organics Fruit   Organic Processed   Vegetables
& Vegetables
Organics Fruit   Organic Salad Mix   Vegetables
& Vegetables
Organics Fruit   Organic Value-      Vegetables
& Vegetables     Added Vegetables
Organics Fruit   Organic Vegetables  Vegetables
& Vegetables     Salad
Pasta & Pizza    Mainstream [Pasta   Vegetables
Sauce            & Pizza Sauce]
Pasta & Pizza    Pizza Sauce         Vegetables
Sauce
Pasta & Pizza    Specialty Italian   Vegetables
Sauce            Sauce
Pasta & Pizza    Value [Pasta &      Vegetables
Sauce            Pizza Sauce]
Peppers          Peppers All Other   Vegetables
Peppers          Peppers All Others  Vegetables
Organic
Peppers          Peppers Green Bell  Vegetables
Peppers          Peppers Green Bell  Vegetables
Organic
Peppers          Peppers Jalapeno    Vegetables
Peppers          Peppers Mini Sweet  Vegetables
Packaged
Peppers          Peppers Other Bell  Vegetables
Peppers          Peppers Other Bell  Vegetables
Organic
Peppers          Peppers Red Bell    Vegetables
Peppers          Peppers Red Bell    Vegetables
Organic
Peppers          Peppers Serrano     Vegetables
Peppers          Peppers Yellow      Vegetables
Bell
Peppers          Peppers Yellow      Vegetables
Bell Organic
Potatoes         Potatoes Gold       Vegetables
(Bulk & Bag)
Potatoes         Potatoes Gourmet    Vegetables
Potatoes         Potatoes Other      Vegetables
Potatoes         Potatoes Other      Vegetables
Organic
Potatoes         Potatoes Red (Bulk  Vegetables
& Bag)
Potatoes         Potatoes Russet     Vegetables
(Bulk & Bag)
Potatoes         Potatoes            Vegetables
Sweet&Yams
Potatoes         Potatoes White      Vegetables
(Bulk & Bag)
Prepared/Pdgd    Vegetables/Dry      Vegetables
Foods            Beans
Processed        Jarred Vegetables   Vegetables
Refrigerated     Refrigerated Pasta  Vegetables
Italian          Sauce
Salad & Dips     Sal: Hommus         Vegetables
Salad & Dips     Sal: Salsa/Dips     Vegetables
Bulk
Salad & Dips     Sal: Salsa Prepack  Vegetables
Salad & Dips     Salad Bar           Vegetables
Salad & Dips     Salad: Ingredients  Vegetables
Salad & Dips     Salad: Lettuce      Vegetables
Salad & Dips     Vegetable Salads--  Vegetables
Bulk
Salad & Dips     Vegetable Salads--  Vegetables
Prepack
Salad Bar        Processed Salad     Vegetables
Salad Mix        Blends [Salad Mix]  Vegetables
Salad Mix        Coleslaw            Vegetables
Salad Mix        Garden Plus [Salad  Vegetables
Mix]
Salad Mix        Kits [Salad Mix]    Vegetables
Salad Mix        Regular Garden      Vegetables
[Salad Mix]
Salad Mix        Salad Bowls         Vegetables
Salad Mix        Salad Mix Blends    Vegetables
Organic
Salad Mix        Salad Mix Kits      Vegetables
Organic
Salad Mix        Salad Mix Other     Vegetables
Salad Mix        Salad Spinach       Vegetables
Salad Mix        Salad Spinach       Vegetables
Organic
Salad Mix        Shredded Lettuce    Vegetables
Seasonal         Pumpkins            Vegetables
Shelf Stable     Tomato Juice (50%   Vegetables
Juice            And Under)
Shelf Stable     Tomato Juice (Over  Vegetables
Juice            50% Juice)
Shelf Stable     Veg Juice (Except   Vegetables
Juice            Tomato) (50% And
Under)
Shelf Stable     Veg Juice (Except   Vegetables
Juice            Tomato) (Over 50%
Juice)
Snack            Salsa               Vegetables
Spices/Jarred    Garlic Jar          Vegetables
Garlic
Spices/Jarred    Garlic Jar Organic  Vegetables
Garlic
Spices/Jarred    Herbs Dried         Vegetables
Garlic
Spices/Jarred    Herbs Squeeze Tube  Vegetables
Garlic           Organic
Spices/Jarred    Peppers Dried       Vegetables
Garlic
Tomato           Tomato Stewed       Vegetables
Products--Shel
f
Tomato           Tomato Paste        Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomato           Tomatoes Diced      Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomato           Tomato Crushed      Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomato           Tomato Puree        Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomato           Tomato Sauce        Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomato           Tomato Sun Dried    Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomato           Tomatoes/Whole      Vegetables
Products--Shel
f Stable
Tomatoes         Roma Tomatoes       Vegetables
(Bulk/Pkg)
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Cherry     Vegetables
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Cherry     Vegetables
Organic
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Cocktail   Vegetables
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Grape      Vegetables
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Grape      Vegetables
Organic
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Hot House  Vegetables
Bulk
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Hothouse   Vegetables
On The Vine
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Hothouse   Vegetables
Pkg
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Others     Vegetables
Organic
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Snacking   Vegetables
Colored
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Vine Ripe  Vegetables
Bulk
Tomatoes         Tomatoes Vine Ripe  Vegetables
Pkg
Tomatoes         Tomatoes--Other     Vegetables
Traditional      Asian Vegetables    Vegetables
Asian Foods
Traditional      Mexican Beans/      Vegetables
Mexican Foods    Refried
Traditional      Mexican Enchilada   Vegetables
Mexican Foods    Sauce
Traditional      Mexican Peppers     Vegetables
Mexican Foods    Chilies
Traditional      Mexican Sauces And  Vegetables
Mexican Foods    Picante Sau
Tropical Fruit   Avocado             Vegetables
Tropical Fruit   Avocado Organic     Vegetables
Unknown          Frozen Vegetables   Vegetables
Value-Added      Celery Chopped/     Vegetables
Vegetables       Sticks
Value-Added      Cut Vegetables All  Vegetables
Vegetables       Other
Value-Added      Instore Cut         Vegetables
Vegetables       Vegetables
Value-Added      Onions Processed    Vegetables
Vegetables
Value-Added      Vegetable Party     Vegetables
Vegetables       Tray
Vegetables       Asparagus           Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Beans               Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Beans Organic       Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Cabbage             Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Cabbage Organic     Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Celery              Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Celery Organic      Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Greens Bulk         Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Greens Bulk         Vegetables
Cooking Bulk     Organic
Vegetables       Hard Squash         Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Organic Vegetables  Vegetables
Cooking Bulk     All Others
Vegetables       Squash Other        Vegetables
Cooking Bulk
Vegetables       Squash Other        Vegetables
Cooking Bulk     Organic
Vegetables       Vegetables All      Vegetables
Cooking Bulk     Other
Vegetables       Vegetables Cooking  Vegetables
Cooking          Packaged Organic
Packaged
Vegetables       Broccoli/           Vegetables
Cooking          Cauliflower
Packaged         Processed
Vegetables       Potatoes/Onions     Vegetables
Cooking          Processed
Packaged
Vegetables       Vegetables Cooking  Vegetables
Cooking          Packaged
Packaged
Vegetables       Cucumbers           Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Cucumbers Organic   Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Green Onions        Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Green Onions        Vegetables
Salad            Organic
Vegetables       Head Lettuce        Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Head Lettuce        Vegetables
Salad            Organic
Vegetables       Radish              Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Radishes Organic    Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Spinach Bulk        Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Spring Mix Bulk     Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Variety Lettuce     Vegetables
Salad
Vegetables       Variety Lettuce     Vegetables
Salad            Organic
Authentic        Italian Oils And    Oils
Italian Foods    Dressings
Deli             Dl Spec: Sauces/    Oils
Specialties      Sld Dressings
(Retail Pk)
Dressings/Dips   Dressing Blue       Oils
Cheese
Dressings/Dips   Dressing Cole Slaw  Oils
Dressings/Dips   Dressing Creamy     Oils
Dressings/Dips   Dressing Ginger     Oils
Dressings/Dips   Dressing Organics   Oils
Dressings/Dips   Dressing            Oils
Vinegarette
Dressings/Dips   Dressing Yogurt     Oils
Based
Margarines       Margarine: Squeeze  Oils
Margarines       Margarine: Tubs     Oils
And Bowls
Processed        Dressings           Oils
Salad Dresing &  Mayonnaise &        Oils
Sandwich         Whipped Dressing
Spreads
Salad Dresing &  Pourable Salad      Oils
Sandwich         Dressings
Spreads
Salad Dresing &  Sand/Horseradish &  Oils
Sandwich         Tartar Sauce
Spreads
Shortening &     Canola Oils         Oils
Oil
Shortening &     Cooking Oil:        Oils
Oil              Peanut/Safflower
Shortening &     Cooking Sprays      Oils
Oil
Shortening &     Corn Oil            Oils
Oil
Shortening &     Misc Oils           Oils
Oil
Shortening &     Olive Oil           Oils
Oil
Shortening &     Vegetable Oil       Oils
Oil
Aseptic Juice    Aseptic Pack Juice  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Drinks          Added Sugar
Aseptic Juice    Aseptic Pack Juice  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Drinks          Added Sugar
Aseptic Juice    Aseptic Pack Juice  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Drinks          Added Sugar
Authentic        Central American    Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Central          Candy W/O Flour     Added Sugar
American Fds
Authentic        Central American    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Central          Carbonated Bev      Added Sugar
American Fds
Authentic        Hispanic            Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Hispanic Fds &   Carbonated          Added Sugar
Product          Beverages
Authentic        Authentic Dry       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Hispanic Fds &   Beverages W/        Added Sugar
Product          Sweetener
Authentic        Hispanic Juice      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Hispanic Fds &   Under 50% Juice     Added Sugar
Product
Authentic South  South American      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
American Fds     Candy W/O Flour     Added Sugar
Bag Snacks       Pork Skins/         Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Cracklins           Added Sugar    fat
Bagels & Cream   Cream Cheese        Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Cheese                               Added Sugar    fat
Baking           Chocolate Chips &   Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Bars (Sweete)       Added Sugar
Baking Mixes     Frosting            Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Baking Needs     Coconut [Baking     Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Needs]              Added Sugar    fat
Baking Needs     Marshmallow Creme   Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Baking Needs     Marshmallows        Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Beverages        Can/Btl Carb Beve   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
50% And Under       Added Sugar
Beverages        Can/Btl N/Carb      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Beve 50% And        Added Sugar
Under
Beverages        Tea (Canned/        Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Bottled) W/         Added Sugar
Sweetener
Bulk Food        Candy Bulk          Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Bulk Food        Candy Bulk W/Flour  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Cake Decor       Cake Decors--       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Candies             Added Sugar
Cake Decor       Cake Decors &       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Icing               Added Sugar
Candy            Candy W/Flour       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy            Candy/Chocolate     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Checklan  Candy Bars          Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
e                (Singles)           Added Sugar
(Including)
Candy--Checklan  Candy Bars          Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
e                (Singles)           Added Sugar
(Including)
Candy--Checklan  Chewing Gum         Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
e                                    Added Sugar
Candy--Checklan  Mints/Candy &       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
e                Breath (Not         Added Sugar
Lifesavers)
Candy--Checklan  Mints/Candy &       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
e                Breath (Not         Added Sugar
Lifesavers)
Candy--Checklan  Misc Checklane      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
e                Candy               Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Bulk Candy          Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Bulk Candy W/Flour  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy & Breath      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Mints (Pkgd)        Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy & Breath      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Mints (Pkgd)        Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Bags--        Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate           Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Bags--        Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate W/Flour   Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Bags--Non     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate           Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Bags--Non     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate W/Flour   Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Bars (Multi   Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Pack)               Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Bars Multi    Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Pack W/Flour        Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Box Non-      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate           Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Box Non-      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate W/Flour   Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Boxed         Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolates          Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Candy Boxed         Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolates W/       Added Sugar
Flour
Candy--Packaged  Candy Refrigerated  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Gum (Packaged)      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Hispanic Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Miscellaneous       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Candy               Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Miscellaneous       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Candy               Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Novelty Candy       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Novelty Candy W/    Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Flour               Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Novelty Candy--     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Taxable             Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Bags Non-           Added Sugar
Chocolate
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Bags Non-           Added Sugar
Chocolate
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Bags--Chocolate     Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Bags--Chocolate     Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy Box  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Non-Chocolate       Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy Box  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Non-Chocolate       Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Box--Chocolate      Added Sugar
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal Candy      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Box--Chocolate W/   Added Sugar
Flour
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal            Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Miscellaneous       Added Sugar
[Candy]
Candy--Packaged  Seasonal            Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Miscellaneous W/    Added Sugar
Flour
Cocoa Mixes      Hot Chocolate/      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Cocoa Mix           Added Sugar
Cocoa Mixes      Malted Mlk/Syrup/   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Pwdrs (Eggnog)      Added Sugar
Coffee &         Coffee Sweeteners   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Creamers                             Added Sugar
Coffee &         Non Dairy Creamer   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Creamers                             Added Sugar
Coffee Shop      Coffee Shop: Candy  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Sweet Goods &                        Added Sugar
Rtl
Condiments       Honey/Syrup         Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Added Sugar
Condiments       Jellies/Preserves/  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Apple Butter        Added Sugar
Deli             Dl Spec: Jellies/   Solid Fats &   Sugar candy/sweet
Specialties      Toppings            Added
(Retail Pk)
Dressings/Dips   Dips Caramel/Fruit  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Glazes              Added Sugar
Dressings/Dips   Dips Fruit And      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Chocolate           Added Sugar
Dry Mix          Desserts Topping    Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Mixes/Whip          Added Sugar    fat
Topping
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Coco Mix            Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Coco Mixes                           Added Sugar
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Tea Concentrate W/  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Coco Mixes       Sweetener/Su        Added Sugar
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Tea Rtd With        Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Coco Mixes       Sweetener/Sugar     Added Sugar
Energy Drinks    Energy Drink--      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Multi-Pack          Added Sugar
Energy Drinks    Energy Drink--      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Multi-Pack (Non)    Added Sugar
Energy Drinks    Energy Drink--      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Single Serve        Added Sugar
Energy Drinks    Energy Drink--      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Single Serve        Added Sugar
European Foods   British Carbonated  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Beverages           Added Sugar
European Foods   European            Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Carbonated          Added Sugar
Beverages
Fluid Milk       Refrigerated        Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Products         Coffee Creamers     Added Sugar    fat
Fluid Milk       Whipping Cream      Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Products                             Added Sugar    fat
Frozen           Frzn Non-Dairy      Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Breakfast        Creamers            Added Sugar    fat
Foods
Frozen Juice     Cocktail Mixes-Frz  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Smoothies                        Added Sugar
Frozen Juice     Frzn Conc Under     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Smoothies    50% Juice           Added Sugar
Frozen Juice     Frzn Fruit Drinks   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Smoothies    (Under 10% J)       Added Sugar
Frozen Whipped   Frzn Whipped        Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Topping          Topping             Added Sugar    fat
Gift & Fruit     Candy Arrangements  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Baskets          Food Only           Added Sugar
Juice            Drinks--Carb Juice  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
(Under 50%)         Added Sugar
Juice            Non-Carb Jce        Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
(Under 50% Juice)   Added Sugar
Juices Super     Juices (50% And     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Premium          Under Juice)        Added Sugar
Juices Super     Juices Organic      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Premium          (50% And Under)     Added Sugar
Juices Super     Juices Smoothies/   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverages
Premium          Blended             Added Sugar
Juices Super     Juices Superfoods/  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverages
Premium          Enhanced            Added Sugar
Juices Super     Juices/Smoothies    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverages
Premium          Instore Produ       Added Sugar
Kosher Foods     Kosher Beverage     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverages
And Products                         Added Sugar
Kosher Foods     Kosher Candy        Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
And Products                         Added Sugar
Kosher Foods     Kosher Carbonated   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
And Products     Soft Drinks         Added Sugar
Margarines       Butter              Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Added Sugar    fat
Margarines       Margarine Stick     Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Added Sugar    fat
Milk By-         Aerosol Toppings    Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Products         [Milk By-           Added Sugar    fat
Products]
Milk By-         Refrig Dips         Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Products                             Added Sugar    fat
Milk By-         Sour Creams         Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Products                             Added Sugar    fat
Mixers           Cocktail Mixes--    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Dry                 Added Sugar
Mixers           Cocktail Mixes--    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Fluid: Add Liq      Added Sugar
Molasses/Syrups/ Molasses & Syrups   Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Pancake Mixes                        Added Sugar
Packaged         Candy               Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Natural Snacks                       Added Sugar
Peanut Butter/   Preserves/Jam/      Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Jelly/Jams &     Marmalade           Added Sugar
Honey
Peanut Butter/   Honey               Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Jelly/Jams &                         Added Sugar
Honey
Peanut Butter/   Jelly               Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Jelly/Jams &                         Added Sugar
Honey
Powder &         Breakfast Crystals  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Crystal Drink                        Added Sugar
Mix
Powder &         Enhanced Stick      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Crystal Drink    [Powder Drink       Added Sugar
Mix              Mix]
Powder &         Fluid Pouch         Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Crystal Drink    [Powder Drink       Added Sugar
Mix              Mix]
Powder &         Soft Drink          Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Crystal Drink    Canisters [Powder   Added Sugar
Mix              Drink Mix]
Powder &         Sugar Sweetened     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Crystal Drink    Envelopes           Added Sugar
Mix
Powder &         Sugar Sweetened     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Crystal Drink    Sticks              Added Sugar
Mix
Processed        Dips                Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Added Sugar    fat
Processed        Packaged Dry        Solid Fats &   sweetened beverages
Smoothie Mix        Added Sugar
Refrgratd        Dairy Case Citrus   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juices/Drinks    Pnch/Oj Subs        Added Sugar
Refrgratd        Dairy Case Fruit    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juices/Drinks    Drinks (No Ju)      Added Sugar
Refrgratd        Dairy Case Juice    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juices/Drinks    Drnk Under 10       Added Sugar
Refrgratd        Dairy Case Tea      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juices/Drinks    With Sugar Or S     Added Sugar
Refrigerated     Ntrn Refrig Juice   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Dairy Case       Under 50%           Added Sugar
Refrigerated     Sour Cream/Cottage  Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Dairy Case       Cheese              Added Sugar    fat
Refrigerated     Tea With Sweetener/ Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Dairy Case       Sugar               Added Sugar
Rtd Tea/New Age  Juice (Under 10%    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Juice)              Added Sugar
Rtd Tea/New Age  Juice (Under 50%    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Juice)              Added Sugar
Rtd Tea/New Age  Tea Sweetened       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice                                Added Sugar
Service          Sv Bev: Bev/Juic    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Beverage         10-50% Juice        Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Apple Juice &       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Cider (50% And      Added Sugar
Under Juice)
Shelf Stable     Apple Juice &       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Cider (Under 10%    Added Sugar
Juice)
Shelf Stable     Blended Juice &     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Combinations        Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Blended Juice &     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Combinations        Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Cranapple/Cran      Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Grape Juice         Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Cranberry Juice     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            (50% And Under      Added Sugar
Juice)
Shelf Stable     Fruit Drinks:       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Canned & Glass      Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Fruit Drinks:       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Canned & Glass      Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Fruit Drinks:       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Canned & Glass      Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Fruit Drinks:       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Canned & Glass      Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Grape Juice (50%    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            And Under Juice)    Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Grapefruit Juice    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            (50% And Under      Added Sugar
Juice)
Shelf Stable     Lemon Juice & Lime  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Juice (50% And      Added Sugar
Under Juice)
Shelf Stable     Lemon Juice & Lime  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Juice               Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Nectars (50% And    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            Under Juice)        Added Sugar
Shelf Stable     Prune Juice (50%    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Juice            And Under Juice)    Added Sugar
Shortening &     Solid Shortening    Solid Fats &   butter/cream/solid
Oil                                  Added Sugar    fat
Soft Drinks      Mixers (Tonic       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Water/Gngr Ale)     Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Mixers (Tonic Wtr/  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Gngr Ale)           Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk 1 Liter    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Btl Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk 2 Liter    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Btl Carb Incl       Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk 3 Liter    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Btl Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk Misc Btl   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
(Any Btl)           Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk Misc Can   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
(Ex: 4/8/18pk)      Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk Mlt-Pk     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Btl Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Sft Drnk Sngl Srv   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Btl Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drink Bottle   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Non-Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drinks 12/18   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
& 15pk Can Car      Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drinks 20pk &  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
24pk Can Carb       Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drinks 6pk     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Can Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drinks Bottle  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Returnable          Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drinks Can     Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Non-Carb            Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Soft Drinks Single  Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Cans Carb           Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Tea Bottles With    Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Sweetener/Sugar     Added Sugar
Soft Drinks      Tea Can With        Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Sweetener/Sugar     Added Sugar
Sugars &         Sugar               Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Sweeteners                           Added Sugar
Sugars &         Sweeteners          Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Sweeteners                           Added Sugar
Sweet Goods &    Sweet Goods: Candy  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Snacks                               Added Sugar
Sweet Goods &    Sweet Goods: Candy  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Snacks           W/Flour             Added Sugar
Syrups Toppings  Ice Cream Toppings  Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
& Cones                              Added Sugar
Teas             Instant Tea & Tea   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Mix (W/Sugar)       Added Sugar
Traditional      Mexican Candy       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Mexican Foods                        Added Sugar
Trail Mix &      Candy W/Flour       Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Snacks                               Added Sugar
Trail Mix &      Candy W/O Flour     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Snacks                               Added Sugar
Trail Mix &      Candy W/O Flour     Solid Fats &   candy/sweet
Snacks           Organic             Added Sugar
Water            Carb Water--Flvrd   Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Sweetened           Added Sugar
Water            Energy Drinks       Solid Fats &   sweetened beverage
Added Sugar
Authentic        Authentic Pasta/    Composite                           entree/meal
Hispanic Fds &   Rice/Beans
Product
Authentic        Authentic Soups/    Composite                           soup
Hispanic Fds &   Bouillons
Product
Authentic        Hispanic Cookies/   Composite                           desserts
Hispanic Fds &   Crackers
Product
Authentic        Italian Pasta And   Composite                           entree/meal
Italian Foods    Pasta Sauce
Bag Snacks       Store Brand         Composite                           snacks
Bag Snacks       Misc Bag Snacks     Composite                           snacks
Bag Snacks       Mult Pk Bag Snacks  Composite                           snacks
Bag Snacks       Potato Chips        Composite                           snacks
Bag Snacks       Salsa & Dips        Composite                           snacks
Baked Sweet      Snack Cake--Multi   Composite                           desserts
Goods            Pack
Baked Sweet      Sweet Goods--Full   Composite                           desserts
Goods            Size
Bakery Party                         Composite                           desserts
Trays
Bakery Party     Party Trays:        Composite                           desserts
Trays            Breakfast Sweets
Bakery Party     Party Trays: Cakes  Composite                           desserts
Trays
Bakery Party     Party Trays:        Composite                           desserts
Trays            Cookies--Rolls
Baking Mixes     Brownie Mix         Composite                           desserts
Baking Mixes     Cookies Mix         Composite                           desserts
Baking Mixes     Layer Cake Mix      Composite                           desserts
Baking Mixes     Microwavable Cake   Composite                           desserts
Mix
Baking Needs     Pie Crust Mixes &   Composite                           desserts
Shells
Baking Needs     Pie Filling/        Composite                           desserts
Mincemeat/Glazes
Bulk Food        Grain/Beans Bulk    Composite                           entree/meal
Bulk Food        Misc Bulk Snacks    Composite                           snacks
Sweetened
Bulk Food        Snacks Bulk         Composite                           snacks
Cakes            Cakes Ingredients   Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Angel Fds/   Composite                           desserts
Cke Rolls
Cakes            Cakes: Angl Fd/     Composite                           desserts
Roll Novelties
Cakes            Cakes: Birthday/    Composite                           desserts
Celebration Sheet
Cakes            Cakes: Cheesecake   Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Cheesecake   Composite                           desserts
Novelties
Cakes            Cakes: Cndles/Retl  Composite                           desserts
Accss
Cakes            Cakes: Creme/       Composite                           desserts
Pudding
Cakes            Cakes: Creme/       Composite                           desserts
Pudding Novelties
Cakes            Cakes: Cupcakes     Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Fancy/       Composite                           desserts
Service Case
Cakes            Cakes: Ice Cream    Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Kosher       Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Layers       Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Layers/      Composite                           desserts
Sheets Novelties
Cakes            Cakes: Novelties    Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Pound        Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Pound Cake   Composite                           desserts
Novelties
Cakes            Cakes: Sheet        Composite                           desserts
Cakes            Cakes: Birthday/    Composite                           desserts
Celebration Layer
Cakes            Cakes: Wedding/     Composite                           desserts
Designer Series
Canned Pasta &   Can Pasta           Composite                           entree/meal
Mwv Fd--Shlf
Stbl
Canned Pasta &   Microwavable Cups   Composite                           entree/meal
Mwv Fd--Shlf     [Canned Pasta]
Stbl
Canned Pasta &   Microwavable Trays  Composite                           entree/meal
Mwv Fd--Shlf     [Canned Pasta]
Stbl
Canned Soups     Condensed Soup      Composite                           soup
Chilled Ready    Store Brand         Composite                           entree/meal
Meals
Chilled Ready    Fresh Meals         Composite                           entree/meal
Meals
Chilled Ready    Fresh Side Dishes   Composite                           entree/meal
Meals
Cnv Breakfast &  Treats              Composite                           snacks
Wholesome Snks
Convenient       Convenient Meals--  Composite                           entree/meal
Meals            Adult Meal
Convenient       Convenient Meals--  Composite                           entree/meal
Meals            Kids Meal
Cookie/Cracker   Multi-Pack Cookies  Composite                           desserts
Multi-Pks
Cookies          Chocolate Covered   Composite                           desserts
Cookies
Cookies          Cookies/Sweet       Composite                           desserts
Goods
Cookies          Cookies: Gourmet    Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Cookies: Holiday/   Composite                           desserts
Special Occas
Cookies          Cookies: Kosher     Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Cookies: Less Than  Composite                           desserts
6
Cookies          Cookies: Message    Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Cookies: Party      Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Cookies: Regular    Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Fruit Filled        Composite                           desserts
Cookies
Cookies          Premium Cookies     Composite                           desserts
(Ex: Pepperidge)
Cookies          Sandwich Cookies    Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Specialty Cookies   Composite                           desserts
Cookies          Tray Pack/Choc      Composite                           desserts
Chip Cookies
Cookies          Vanilla Wafer/Kids  Composite                           desserts
Cookies
Cookies          Wellness/Portion    Composite                           desserts
Control [Cookies]
Dinner Mixes--   Macaroni & Cheese   Composite                           entree/meal
Dry              Dnrs
Dinner Mixes--   Microwave Dinners   Composite                           entree/meal
Dry
Dinner Mixes--   Package Dinners     Composite                           entree/meal
Dry              Meat Included
Dinner Mixes--   Package Dinners W/  Composite                           entree/meal
Dry              O Meat
Dinner Mixes--   Package Dinners/    Composite                           entree/meal
Dry              Pasta Salads
Dinner Mixes--   Skillet Dinners     Composite                           entree/meal
Dry
Dressings/Dips   Dips Guacamole/     Composite                           snacks
Salsa/Queso
Dressings/Dips   Dips Organic        Composite                           snacks
Dressings/Dips   Dips Veggie         Composite                           snacks
Dry Bean Veg &   Dry Beans/Peas/     Composite                           entree/meal
Rice             Barley: Bag & B
Dry Mix          Freeze Mixes/Pwdrs/ Composite                           desserts
Desserts         Liquids
Dry Mix          Misc: Cheesecake/   Composite                           desserts
Desserts         Mousse Mixes
Dry Mix          Pudding & Gelatin   Composite                           desserts
Desserts         Cups/Cans
Dry Mix          Puddings Dry        Composite                           desserts
Desserts
Dry/Ramen        12 Pack Soup/Case   Composite                           soup
Bouillon         Soup/Etc.
Dry/Ramen        Bouillon            Composite                           soup
Bouillon
Dry/Ramen        Dry Soup            Composite                           soup
Bouillon
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Composite                           snacks
Bars (Supplement)
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Composite                           snacks
Bars W/Flour
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Composite                           snacks
Bars W/O Flour
Frozen Bread     Desserts            Composite                           desserts
And Desserts
Frozen           Donuts              Composite                           desserts
Breakfast
Frozen           Meals/Sandwichs     Composite                           entree/meal
Breakfast
Frozen           Foods Frzn          Composite                           entree/meal
Breakfast        Breakfast Entrees
Frozen           Foods Frzn          Composite                           entree/meal
Breakfast        Breakfast
Sandwiches
Frozen Desserts  Frozen Cakes/       Composite                           desserts
Desserts
Frozen Desserts  Frozen Cream Pies   Composite                           desserts
Frozen Desserts  Frozen Fruit Pies   Composite                           desserts
& Cobblers
Frozen Desserts  Frzn                Composite                           desserts
Pastry&Cookies
Frozen Desserts  Frzn Pie Shells/    Composite                           desserts
Pastry Shell/F
Frozen Desserts  Single Serv/        Composite                           desserts
Portion Control
Frozen Entrees   Bowls               Composite                           entree/meal
Frozen Entrees   Meatless/           Composite                           entree/meal
Vegetarian
Frozen Entrees   Pasta/Skillet       Composite                           entree/meal
Meals
Frozen Entrees   Soup                Composite                           soup
Frozen           Burritos            Composite                           entree/meal
Handhelds &
Snacks
Frozen           Corn Dogs           Composite                           snacks
Handhelds &
Snacks
Frozen           Sandwiches &        Composite                           entree/meal
Handhelds &      Handhelds
Snacks
Frozen           Snacks/Appetizers   Composite                           snacks
Handhelds &
Snacks
Frozen Ice       Almond              Composite                           desserts
Cream &
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Ice Cream           Composite                           desserts
Cream &
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Novelties--Dairy    Composite                           desserts
Cream &
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Novelties--Non      Composite                           desserts
Cream &          Dairy
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Novelties--Water    Composite                           desserts
Cream &          Base
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Rice                Composite                           desserts
Cream &
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Soy                 Composite                           desserts
Cream &
Novelties
Frozen Ice       Yogurt/Sorbet And   Composite                           desserts
Cream &          Kefir
Novelties
Frozen Juice     Smoothies--Frz      Composite                           desserts
And Smoothies
Frozen           Adult Premium       Composite                           desserts
Novelties--Wat   [Frozen
er Ice           Novelties]
Frozen           Cones [Frozen       Composite                           desserts
Novelties--Wat   Novelties]
er Ice
Frozen           Cups/Push Ups/      Composite                           desserts
Novelties--Wat   Other [Frozen
er Ice           Novelties]
Frozen           Ice Cream           Composite                           desserts
Novelties--Wat   Sandwiches
er Ice
Frozen           Sticks/Enrobed      Composite                           desserts
Novelties--Wat   [Frozen
er Ice           Novelties]
Frozen           Water Ice [Frozen   Composite                           desserts
Novelties--Wat   Novelties]
er Ice
Frozen Pizza     Meatless/           Composite                           entree/meal
Vegetarian
Frozen Pizza     Pizza/Economy       Composite                           entree/meal
Frozen Pizza     Pizza/Premium       Composite                           entree/meal
Frozen Pizza     Pizza/Single Serve/ Composite                           entree/meal
Microwave
Frozen Pizza     Pizza/Traditional   Composite                           entree/meal
Frozen Pizza     Pizza/Value         Composite                           entree/meal
Frozen Pizza     Single Serve        Composite                           entree/meal
Frozen Snacks    Burritos--Meatless/ Composite                           entree/meal
And              Vegetarian
Frozen Snacks    Appetizers          Composite                           snacks
And Handhelds
Frozen Snacks    Burritos--Meat      Composite                           entree/meal
And Handhelds    Protein
Frozen Snacks    Wraps/Handhelds--   Composite                           entree/meal
And Handhelds    Meat
Frozen Snacks    Wraps/Handhelds--   Composite                           entree/meal
And Handhelds    Meatless
Frozen           Meals               Composite                           entree/meal
Vegetables And
Potatoes
Frzn Meatless    Meatless Breakfast  Composite                           entree/meal
Frzn Meatless    Meatless Burgers    Composite                           entree/meal
Frzn Meatless    Meatless Entrees    Composite                           entree/meal
Frzn Meatless    Meatless Meal       Composite                           entree/meal
Starters
Frzn Meatless    Meatless            Composite                           entree/meal
Miscellaneous
Frzn Meatless    Meatless Poultry    Composite                           entree/meal
Frzn Meatless    Meatless Snacks     Composite                           snacks
Frzn Multi       Fz Crockpots/Soups  Composite                           soup
Serve
Frzn Multi       Fz Family Style     Composite                           entree/meal
Serve            Entrees
Frzn Multi       Fz Skillet Meals    Composite                           entree/meal
Serve
Frzn Prepared    Fz Meal Kits/       Composite                           entree/meal
Chicken          Stuffed/Other
Frzn Ss Economy  Fz Ss Economy       Composite                           entree/meal
Meals            Meals All
Frzn Ss Premium  Fz Regional/Other   Composite                           entree/meal
Meals
Frzn Ss Premium  Fz Ss Prem          Composite                           entree/meal
Meals            Nutritional Meals
Frzn Ss Premium  Fz Ss Prem          Composite                           entree/meal
Meals            Traditional Meals
Gift & Fruit     Snack Packs W/Soda  Composite                           snacks
Baskets
Ice Cream Ice    Pails [Ice Cream &  Composite                           desserts
Milk &           Sherbert]
Sherbets
Ice Cream Ice    Premium [Ice Cream  Composite                           desserts
Milk &           & Sherbert]
Sherbets
Ice Cream Ice    Premium Pints [Ice  Composite                           desserts
Milk &           Cream & Sherbert]
Sherbets
Ice Cream Ice    Quarts [Ice Cream   Composite                           desserts
Milk &           & Sherbert]
Sherbets
Ice Cream Ice    Super Premium       Composite                           desserts
Milk &           Pints [Ice Cream
Sherbets         & Sherbert]
Ice Cream Ice    Traditional [Ice    Composite                           desserts
Milk &           Cream & Sherbert]
Sherbets
Kosher Foods     Kosher Snacks       Composite                           snacks
And Products
Kosher Foods     Kosher Soups        Composite                           soup
And Products
Packaged         Trail Mixes         Composite                           snacks
Natural Snacks
Party Tray       Deli Tray--         Composite                           entree/meal
Includes Non-
Foods
Party Tray       Deli Tray:          Composite                           entree/meal
Appetizers & Hors
D'oe
Party Tray       Deli Tray: Chicken  Composite                           entree/meal
Party Tray       Deli Tray: Fruit    Composite                           entree/meal
And Vegetable
Party Tray       Deli Tray: Meat     Composite                           entree/meal
And Cheese
Party Tray       Deli Tray:          Composite                           entree/meal
Sandwiches
Party Tray       Deli Trays: Hot     Composite                           entree/meal
Pies             Pie Ingredients     Composite                           desserts
Pies             Pies: Cream/        Composite                           desserts
Meringue
Pies             Pies: Fruit/Nut     Composite                           desserts
Pies             Pies: Kosher        Composite                           desserts
Pies             Pies: Pumpkin/      Composite                           desserts
Custard
Pies             Pies: Tarts/Minis/  Composite                           desserts
Crstdas
Prepared/Pdgd    Boxed Prepared/     Composite                           entree/meal
Foods            Entree/Dry Prep
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Composite                           desserts
Dough Products   Cookie Dough
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Composite                           desserts
Dough Products   Cookies--Brand
Refrgrated       Refrigerated        Composite                           desserts
Dough Products   Cookies--Seasonal
Refrgrated       Refrigerated Pie    Composite                           desserts
Dough Products   Crust
Refrigerated     Refrigerated        Composite                           desserts
Desserts         Pudding
Restricted Diet  Cookies             Composite                           desserts
Rts/Micro Soup/  Broth               Composite                           soup
Broth
Rts/Micro Soup/  Microwavable Soups  Composite                           soup
Broth
Rts/Micro Soup/  Rts Soup: Chunky/   Composite                           soup
Broth            Homestyle/Et
Salad & Dips     Sal: Desserts--     Composite                           desserts
Bulk
Salad & Dips     Sal: Desserts--     Composite                           desserts
Prepack
Salad Bar        Soups               Composite                           soup
Sandwiches       Sandwich            Composite                           entree/meals
Ingredients
Sandwiches       Sandwiches--(Cold)  Composite                           entree/meals
Sandwiches       Sandwiches: Kosher  Composite                           entree/meals
(Cold)
Seafood--Party   Party Tray Other    Composite                           entree/meal
Trays
Seafood--Party   Party Tray Other    Composite                           entree/meal
Trays
Seafood--Salad/  Salads              Composite                           entree/meal
Dips/Sce/Cond
Service Case     Side Dishes         Composite                           entree/meal
Meat
Service Case     Stuffed/Mixed       Composite                           entree/meal
Meat
Single Serve     Single Serve        Composite                           desserts
Items            Desserts
Single Serve     Single Serve        Composite                           snacks
Items            Snacks
Single Serve     Snack Cake--Single  Composite                           desserts
Sweet Goods      Serve
Snack            Nuts/Trail Mix/     Composite                           snacks
Dried Fruit
Snack            Soy/Rice Snacks     Composite                           snacks
Snack            Specialty Chips     Composite                           snacks
Snacks           Snacks: Dry         Composite                           snacks
Snacks           Snacks: Gift Packs  Composite                           snacks
Snacks           Snacks: Salty       Composite                           snacks
Snacks           Snacks:Chippery     Composite                           snacks
Soup             Asceptic            Composite                           soup
Soup             Broths              Composite                           soup
Soup             Cans Soup/Chili     Composite                           soup
Soup             Cups                Composite                           soup
Ss/Vending--     Vendor Size/Single  Composite                           desserts
Cookie/Cracker   Serve Cookie
Ss/Vending--     Salty Snacks        Composite                           snacks
Salty Snacks     Vending
Ss/Vending--     Salty Snacks W/     Composite                           snacks
Salty Snacks     Sweetener Vending
Sushi            Sushi--In Store     Composite                           entree/meal
Prepared
Sushi            Sushi--Kosher       Composite                           entree/meal
Sushi            Sushi--Prepackaged  Composite                           entree/meal
Sushi            Sushi: In Store     Composite                           entree/meal
Prepared (Hot)
Sushi            Sushi: Ingredients  Composite                           entree/meal
Sushi            Sushi: In-Store     Composite                           entree/meal
Prepared (Dine)
Sushi            Sushi: Smallwares   Composite                           entree/meal
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Kosher      Composite                           desserts
Breakfast
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Muffins     Composite                           desserts
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Sw Rolls/   Composite                           desserts
Dan
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Coffee      Composite                           desserts
Cakes
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Donuts      Composite                           desserts
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Donuts--    Composite                           desserts
Less Than 6
Sweet Goods      Sw Gds: Muffins--   Composite                           desserts
Lss Thn 6
Sweet Goods      Swt Gds             Composite                           desserts
Ingredients
Sweet Goods &    Sw Gds: Brownie/    Composite                           desserts
Snacks           Bar Cookie
Sweet Goods &    Sw Gds: Kosher      Composite                           desserts
Snacks
Sweet Goods &    Sw Gds: Puff        Composite                           desserts
Snacks           Pastry
Sweet Goods &    Sw Gds: Specialty   Composite                           desserts
Snacks           Desserts
Sweet Goods &    Sw Gds: Swt/Flvrd   Composite                           desserts
Snacks           Loaves
Traditional      Asian Foods And     Composite                           entree/meal
Asian Foods      Meals
Traditional      Mexican Dinners     Composite                           entree/meal
Mexican Foods    And Foods
Trail Mix &      Trail Mixes/Snack   Composite                           snacks
Snacks
Trail Mix &      Trail Mixes/Snacks  Composite                           snacks
Snacks           Organic
Unknown          Frozen Breakfast    Composite                           entree/meal
Unknown          Frozen Dessert      Composite                           desserts
(Ice Cream Cake)
Unknown          Frozen Entrees      Composite                           entree/meal
Unknown          Frozen Ice Cream    Composite                           desserts
Unknown          Frozen Side Dish    Composite                           entree/meal
Value-Added      Parfait Cups        Composite                           desserts
Fruit            Instore
Warehouse        Canister Snacks     Composite                           snacks
Snacks
Warehouse        Misc Snacks         Composite                           snacks
Snacks
Warehouse        Misc Snacks W/      Composite                           snacks
Snacks           Sweetener
Warehouse        Snack Mix           Composite                           snacks
Snacks
Authentic Asian  Authentic Chinese   Other                                                    misc
Foods            Foods
Authentic Asian  Authentic Japanese  Other                                                    misc
Foods            Foods
Authentic Asian  Authentic Thai      Other                                                    misc
Foods            Foods
Authentic Asian  Other Authentic     Other                                                    misc
Foods            Asian Foods
Authentic        Caribbean Foods     Other                                                    misc
Caribbean
Foods
Authentic        Central American    Other                                                    misc
Central          Foods
American Fds
Authentic        Hispanic Baking     Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Hispanic Fds &   Needs                                                                        need
Product
Authentic        Authentic Dry       Other                                                    unsweetened
Hispanic Fds &   Beverages W/O                                                                beverage
Product          Sweetener
Authentic        Hispanic            Other                                                    condiments
Hispanic Fds &   Condiments
Product
Authentic        Hispanic Spices     Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Hispanic Fds &   And Seasonings                                                               need
Product
Authentic        Other Italian       Other                                                    misc
Italian Foods    Foods
Authentic South  South American      Other                                                    misc
American Fds     Foods
Baby Food        Baby Cereal         Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Food        Baby Crackers       Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Food        Baby Food           Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Food        Baby Formula        Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Food        Baby Misc           Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Foods       Baby Food--         Other                                                    infant formula/
Beginner                                                                     baby food
Baby Foods       Baby Food Cereals   Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Foods       Baby Food Junior/   Other                                                    infant formula/
All Brands                                                                   baby food
Baby Foods       Baby Juices         Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baby Foods       Baby Spring Waters  Other                                                    infant formula/
baby food
Baking           Flours/Grains/      Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Sugar                                                                        need
Baking           Mixes               Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Baking           Spices              Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Baking Mixes     Microwave Mixes:    Other                                                    seasoning/baking
All Other                                                                    need
Baking Mixes     Miscellaneous       Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Package Mixes                                                                need
Baking Needs     Baking Cocoa        Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Baking Needs     Baking Powder &     Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Soda                                                                         need
Baking Needs     Bits & Morsels      Other                                                    seasoning/baking
[Baking Needs]                                                               need
Baking Needs     Cooking Chocolate   Other                                                    seasoning/baking
(Ex.: Smi-Swt)                                                               need
Baking Needs     Cooking Chocolate   Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Unsweetened                                                                  need
Baking Needs     Yeast: Dry          Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Beverages        Tea Unsweetened     Other                                                    unsweetened
(Can/Bottle)                                                                 beverage
Bulk Food        Bulk Spices         Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Bulk Food        Coffee & Tea Bulk   Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Bulk Food        Misc Bulk           Other                                                    misc
Coffee &         Bulk Coffee         Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers                                                                                      beverage
Coffee &         Coffee Pods/        Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Singles/Filter                                                               beverage
Pac
Coffee &         Flavored Bag        Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee &         Flavored Can        Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee &         Flavored Instant    Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee &         Ready To Drink      Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee &         Ready To Drink      Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee Suppleme                                                              beverage
Coffee &         Specialty Instant   Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee W/O S                                                                 beverage
Coffee &         Specialty Instant   Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee W/Swe                                                                 beverage
Coffee &         Unflavored Bag      Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee &         Unflavored Can      Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee &         Unflavored Instant  Other                                                    unsweetened
Creamers         Coffee                                                                       beverage
Coffee Shop      Sv Bev: Inged/      Other                                                    unsweetened
Portion Pk                                                                   beverage
Coffee Shop      Sv Bev: Carb Wat-   Other                                                    unsweetened
Flv/Unflv                                                                    beverage
Coffee Shop      Coff Shop: Instant  Other                                                    unsweetened
Sweet Goods &    Retail Pack                                                                  beverage
Rtl
Coffee Shop      Coff Shop: Retail   Other                                                    unsweetened
Sweet Goods &    Pack Beverag                                                                 beverage
Rtl
Coffee Shop      Coff Shop: Whole    Other                                                    unsweetened
Sweet Goods &    Bean Retail P                                                                beverage
Rtl
Condiments       Ketchup/Mustard/    Other                                                    condiments
Bbq Sce/Marina
Condiments       Oils/Vinegar        Other                                                    condiments
Condiments       Pickles/Olives/     Other                                                    condiments
Kraut
Condiments &     Bbq Sauce           Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Catsup              Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Chili Sauce/        Other                                                    condiments
Sauces           Cocktail Sauce
Condiments &     Hot Sauce           Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Marinades           Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Misc Meat Sauces    Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Mustard--All Other  Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Steak & Worchester  Other                                                    condiments
Sauces           Sauce
Condiments &     Wing Sauce          Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Condiments &     Yellow Mustard      Other                                                    condiments
Sauces
Deli             Dl Spec: Beverages  Other                                                    unsweetened
Specialties                                                                                   beverage
(Retail Pk)
Deli             Dl Spec: Must/Oils/ Other                                                    condiments
Specialties      Vinegars
(Retail Pk)
Deli/Bakery      Deli/Bakery         Other                                                    misc
Discontnued      Discontinued
Items            Items
Dietary Aid      Diet Cntrl Liqs     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    Supplement                                                                   replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Cntrl Powders  Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    Nutritional                                                                  replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Control Water  Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq                                                                                 replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Cntrl Bars     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    (Supplement)                                                                 replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Cntrl Bars     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    Nutritional                                                                  replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Cntrl Bars     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    Nutritional W/                                                               replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Cntrl Liqs     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    Nutritional                                                                  replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Diet Energy Drinks  Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq                                                                                 replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dietary Aid      Powder Nutrition    Other                                                    supplements/meal
Prdct/Med Liq    Products                                                                     replacements/
Nutr                                                                                          energy drinks
Dry Mix          Desserts Gelatin    Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Coffee Ground       Other                                                    unsweetened
Coco Mixes                                                                                    beverage
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Coffee Whole Bean   Other                                                    unsweetened
Coco Mixes                                                                                    beverage
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Tea Bags            Other                                                    unsweetened
Coco Mixes       (Supplement)                                                                 beverage
Dry Tea/Coffee/  Tea Dry             Other                                                    unsweetened
Coco Mixes                                                                                    beverage
Dry Sauce/Gravy/ Cooking Bags With   Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Potatoes/        Spices/Seaso                                                                 need
Stuffing
Dry Sauce/Gravy/ Gravy Can/Glass     Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Potatoes/                                                                                     need
Stuffing
Dry Sauce/Gravy/ Sauce Mixes/Gravy   Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Potatoes/        Mixes Dry                                                                    need
Stuffing
Eggs/Muffins/    Misc Dairy          Other                                                    misc
Potatoes         Refigerated
Enhancements     Enhancements--Othe  Other                                                    supplements/meal
r                                                                            replacements/
energy drinks
Enhancements     Enhancements--Pick  Other                                                    condiments
led Items
Enhancements     Enhancements--Pick  Other                                                    condiments
les/Kraut
Enhancements     Enhancements--Sala  Other                                                    condiments
ds/Spreads
Enhancements     Enhancements--Spic  Other                                                    seasoning/baking
es/Sauces                                                                    need
European Foods   British Foods       Other                                                    misc
European Foods   French Foods        Other                                                    misc
European Foods   German Foods        Other                                                    misc
European Foods   Mediterranean/      Other                                                    misc
Greek Foods
European Foods   Other Ethnic Foods  Other                                                    misc
European Foods   Polish Foods        Other                                                    misc
European Foods   Scandinavian Foods  Other                                                    misc
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet      Other                                                    supplements/meal
Energy Drinks F/S                                                            replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet      Other                                                    supplements/meal
Energy Drinks Non                                                            replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet      Other                                                    supplements/meal
Isotonic Drinks                                                              replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet      Other                                                    supplements/meal
Isotonic Drinks                                                              replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Other                                                    supplements/meal
Liq (Supplement)                                                             replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Other                                                    supplements/meal
Liq Ntrtnl                                                                   replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Other                                                    supplements/meal
Powder                                                                       replacements/
(Supplement)                                                                 energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness & Diet--    Other                                                    supplements/meal
Powder Ntrtnl                                                                replacements/
energy drinks
Fitness & Diet   Fitness/Diet--Meal  Other                                                    supplements/meal
Replacement                                                                  replacements/
energy drinks
Frozen Ethnic    Frozen              Other                                                    misc
Internaional
Frozen Ethnic    Frozen Kosher       Other                                                    misc
Frozen Meat      Alternatives Micro  Other                                                    supplements/meal
Protein                                                                      replacements/
energy drinks
Frzn Multi       Frozen Other        Other                                                    misc
Serve
Gift & Fruit     Gift Baskets W/     Other                                                    misc
Baskets          Food
Gift & Fruit     Snack Packs W/Food  Other                                                    misc
Baskets
Indian Foods     Authentic Indian    Other                                                    misc
Foods
Infant Formula   Baby Isotonic       Other                                                    infant formula/
Drinks                                                                       baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Concentrate                                                                  baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Milk Base                                                                    baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Ready To Use                                                                 baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Solutions Large                                                              baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula Soy  Other                                                    infant formula/
Base                                                                         baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Specialty                                                                    baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Starter Large Pk                                                             baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Starter/Solution                                                             baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula      Other                                                    infant formula/
Toddler                                                                      baby food
Infant Formula   Infant Formula Up   Other                                                    infant formula/
Age                                                                          baby food
Isotonic Drinks  Isotonic Drinks     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Multi-Pack                                                                   replacements/
energy drinks
Isotonic Drinks  Isotonic Drinks     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Multi-Serve                                                                  replacements/
energy drinks
Isotonic Drinks  Isotonic Drinks     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Powdered                                                                     replacements/
energy drinks
Isotonic Drinks  Isotonic Drinks     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Single Serve                                                                 replacements/
energy drinks
Isotonic Drinks  Sports Bars         Other                                                    supplements/meal
replacements/
energy drinks
Isotonic Drinks  Sports Drink N/     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Supplmnt Milk                                                                replacements/
energy drinks
Isotonic Drinks  Sports Drink        Other                                                    supplements/meal
Supplement                                                                   replacements/
energy drinks
Juices Super     Juices Antioxidant/ Other                                                    supplements/meal
Premium          Wellness                                                                     replacements/
energy drinks
Juices Super     Juices Proteins     Other                                                    supplements/meal
Premium                                                                                       replacements/
energy drinks
Kosher           Exotic [Kosher      Other                                                    misc
Foods]
Kosher           Further Prepared    Other                                                    misc
Kosher Foods     Kosher Baking       Other                                                    seasoning/baking
And Products     Needs                                                                        need
Kosher Foods     Kosher Condiments   Other                                                    condiments
And Products
Kosher Foods     Passover Products   Other                                                    misc
And Products
Mediterranean    Sal: Olives/        Other                                                    condiments
Bar              Pickles--Bulk
Mediterranean    Sal: Olives/        Other                                                    condiments
Bar              Pickles--Bulk
Mediterranean    Sal: Olives/        Other                                                    condiments
Bar              Pickls--Prpck
Mediterranean    Sal: Olives/        Other                                                    condiments
Bar              Pickls--Prpck
Mixers           Margarita Salt/     Other                                                    condiments
Sugar/Misc
Multicultural    Asian Processed     Other                                                    misc
Products
Multicultural    Hispanic Processed  Other                                                    misc
Products         Produce
Non-Dairy/Dairy  Aseptic Soy/Rice    Other                                                    misc
Powder
Pickle/Relish/   Green Olives        Other                                                    condiments
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Pickle/Relish/   Peppers             Other                                                    condiments
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Pickle/Relish/   Pickld Veg/Peppers/ Other                                                    condiments
Pckld Veg &      Etc.
Olives
Pickle/Relish/   Relishes            Other                                                    condiments
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Pickle/Relish/   Ripe Olives         Other                                                    condiments
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Pickle/Relish/   Specialty Olives    Other                                                    condiments
Pckld Veg &
Olives
Powder &         Sugar Free          Other                                                    unsweetened
Crystal Drink    Canister [Powder                                                             beverage
Mix              Drink Mix]
Powder &         Sugar Free Sticks   Other                                                    unsweetened
Crystal Drink    [Powder Drink                                                                beverage
Mix              Mix]
Powder &         Tea                 Other                                                    unsweetened
Crystal Drink                                                                                 beverage
Mix
Powder &         Unsweetened         Other                                                    unsweetened
Crystal Drink    Envelope [Powder                                                             beverage
Mix              Drink Mix]
Prepared/Pdgd    Prepared/Pkgd Food  Other                                                    misc
Foods            Misc
Processed        Packaged Dry Mixes  Other                                                    misc
Processed        Processed Other     Other                                                    misc
Refrgratd        Dairy Case Tea No   Other                                                    unsweetened
Juices/Drinks    Sugar Or Swe                                                                 beverage
Refrigerated     Non-Dairy Milks     Other                                                    misc
Dairy Case
Refrigerated     Tea W/O Sweetener/  Other                                                    unsweetened
Dairy Case       Sugar                                                                        beverage
Refrigerated     Misc: Herring/      Other                                                    condiments
Grocery          Pickles/Horserad
Refrigerated     Refrigerated        Other                                                    misc
Grocery          Kosher Products
Refrigerated     Hispanic Cultured   Other                                                    misc
Hispanic         Products
Grocery
Refrigerated     Misc Hispanic       Other                                                    misc
Hispanic         Grocery
Grocery
Refrigerated     Refrigerated        Other                                                    misc
Hispanic         Hispanic Drinks
Grocery
Refrigerated     Vegetarian Misc     Other                                                    misc
Vegetarian
Restricted Diet  Baking              Other                                                    seasoning/baking
need
Restricted Diet  Beverage            Other                                                    supplements/meal
replacements/
energy drinks
Restricted Diet  Breakfast Foods     Other                                                    supplements/meal
replacements/
energy drinks
Restricted Diet  Diet Bars/Diet      Other                                                    supplements/meal
Liquid Meals                                                                 replacements/
energy drinks
Restricted Diet  Misc Diet           Other                                                    supplements/meal
replacements/
energy drinks
Rtd Tea/New Age  Sparkling Tea       Other                                                    unsweetened
Juice                                                                                         beverage
Rtd Tea/New Age  Tea Unsweetened     Other                                                    unsweetened
Juice                                                                                         beverage
Salad & Dips     Sal: Kosher         Other                                                    misc
Salad & Dips     Sal:Dip Prepack     Other                                                    condiments
Salad Bar        Condiments/         Other                                                    condiments
Supplies
Salad Bar        Salad Bar Other     Other                                                    misc
Salad Dresing &  Dry Salad Dressing  Other                                                    condiments
Sandwich         & Dip Mixes
Spreads
Seafood--Salad/  Dips/Spreads        Other                                                    condiments
Dip/Sce/Cond
Seafood--Salad/  Sauces              Other                                                    condiments
Dip/Sce/Cond
Seafood--Salad/  Other Pkgd Dip/     Other                                                    condiments
Dips/Sce/Cond    Sauce/Condiment
Seafood--Salad/  Sauces              Other                                                    condiments
Dips/Sce/Cond
Seafood--Salad/  Spices/Marinades    Other                                                    condiments
Dips/Sce/Cond
Service          Sv Bev: Coffee      Other                                                    unsweetened
Beverage                                                                                      beverage
Service          Sv Bev: Flav Tea    Other                                                    unsweetened
Beverage         Products                                                                     beverage
Service          Sv Bev: N/Carb Flv  Other                                                    unsweetened
Beverage         Frk/Minwtr                                                                   beverage
Service          Sv Bev: Spring      Other                                                    unsweetened
Beverage         Water                                                                        beverage
Shelf Stable     Tea Bottles         Other                                                    unsweetened
Juice                                                                                         beverage
Soft Drinks      Club Soda           Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Soft Drinks      Misc Items For      Other                                                    unsweetened
Soft Drinks                                                                  beverage
Soft Drinks      Seltzer Unflavored  Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Soft Drinks      Unswntd Flavored    Other                                                    unsweetened
Seltzer Water                                                                beverage
Spices &         Food Colorings      Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts                                                                                      need
Spices &         Gourmet Spices      Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts                                                                                      need
Spices &         Imitation Extracts  Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts                                                                                      need
Spices &         Pure Extracts       Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts                                                                                      need
Spices &         Salt Substitutes    Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts                                                                                      need
Spices &         Spices &            Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts         Seasonings                                                                   need
Spices &         Table Salt/Popcorn  Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts         Salt/Ice Cr                                                                  need
Spices &         Traditional Spices  Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Extracts                                                                                      need
Spices/Jarred    Spices &            Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Garlic           Seasonings                                                                   need
Spices/Jarred    Spices &            Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Garlic           Seasonings                                                                   need
Organic
Teas             Bulk Tea            Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Teas             Instant Tea & Tea   Other                                                    unsweetened
Mix                                                                          beverage
Teas             Supplemental Tea    Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Teas             Tea Bags & Bulk     Other                                                    unsweetened
Tea                                                                          beverage
Teas             Tea Bags/Chai       Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Teas             Tea Bags/Green      Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Teas             Tea Bags/Herbal     Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Traditional      Asian Other Sauces/ Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Asian Foods      Marinad                                                                      need
Traditional      Asian Soy Sauce     Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Asian Foods                                                                                   need
Traditional      Traditional Thai    Other                                                    misc
Asian Foods      Foods
Traditional      Mexican Seasoning   Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Mexican Foods    Mixes                                                                        need
Traditional      Mexican Taco Sauce  Other                                                    condiments
Mexican Foods
Unknown          Frozen Misc         Other                                                    misc
Vinegar &        Cooking Wines       Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Cooking Wines                                                                                 need
Vinegar &        Specialty Vinegar   Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Cooking Wines                                                                                 need
Vinegar &        Vinegar/White &     Other                                                    seasoning/baking
Cooking Wines    Cider                                                                        need
Water            Carb Water Unflvrd  Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Water            Carb Water--Flvrd   Other                                                    unsweetened
Unsweetened                                                                  beverage
Water            Fortified/Water     Other                                                    unsweetened
beverage
Water            Non-Carb Water      Other                                                    unsweetened
Flvr--Drnk/Mnr                                                               beverage
Water            Non-Carb Water      Other                                                    unsweetened
Flvr--Unsweetened                                                            beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Distilled Water     Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)                                                                                   beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Sparkling Water--   Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)      Flvrd Sweet                                                                  beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Sparkling Water--   Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)      Flvrd Unsweetened                                                            beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Sparkling Water--   Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)      Unflavored                                                                   beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Spring Water        Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)                                                                                   beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Still Water         Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)      Drnking/Mnrl                                                                 beverage
Water
Water--(Sparkli  Still Water Flvrd   Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)      Drnk/Mnrl Wt                                                                 beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Still Water Flvrd   Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)      Unsweetened                                                                  beverage
Water--(Sparkli  Water--Supplies     Other                                                    unsweetened
ng & Still)                                                                                   beverage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.

Appendix D. Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households By Expenditure
for Each USDA Food Pattern Category

Exhibit D-1: Dairy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Dairy                                      ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $191.1        33.25%  1          $853.8        25.69%  1       $1,044.9        26.80%
White Only
Shredded        2           $74.7        13.00%  2          $342.0        10.29%  2         $416.7        10.69%
Cheese
American        3           $44.1         7.67%  4          $136.6         4.11%  4         $180.7         4.63%
Single Cheese
Natural Cheese  4           $35.3         6.14%  3          $216.1         6.50%  3         $251.4         6.45%
Chunks
Bagged Cheese   5           $17.1         2.98%  16          $52.0         1.56%  15         $69.1         1.77%
Snacks
Flavored Milk   6           $16.0         2.78%  14          $59.4         1.79%  12         $75.4         1.93%
String Cheese   7           $15.1         2.63%  9           $99.0         2.98%  8         $114.1         2.93%
Yogurt/Kids     8           $14.0         2.44%  20          $42.4         1.28%  17         $56.5         1.45%
Cottage Cheese  9           $13.9         2.42%  7          $108.8         3.27%  6         $122.7         3.15%
Natural Cheese  10          $13.4         2.33%  6          $113.2         3.41%  5         $126.6         3.25%
Slices
Yogurt/Ss       11          $11.0         1.91%  11          $69.0         2.07%  11         $79.9         2.05%
Regular
Loaf Cheese     12          $10.9         1.90%  23          $38.1         1.15%  21         $49.1         1.26%
Yogurt/Ss       13          $10.2         1.78%  8          $103.1         3.10%  9         $113.3         2.91%
Light
Yogurt/Pro      14           $7.4         1.29%  13          $63.5         1.91%  13         $70.9         1.82%
Active Health
Yogurt/Adult    15           $7.2         1.25%  19          $42.5         1.28%  20         $49.7         1.28%
Multi-Packs
Specialty/      16           $6.7         1.17%  17          $48.4         1.46%  18         $55.1         1.41%
Lactose Free
Milk
Grated Cheese   17           $6.2         1.08%  25          $33.6         1.01%  24         $39.9         1.02%
Bulk Semi-Hard  18           $6.1         1.05%  18          $44.0         1.32%  19         $50.1         1.28%
[Cheese]
Fluid Milk      19           $5.9         1.02%  5          $113.3         3.41%  7         $119.2         3.06%
Canned Milk     20           $5.5         0.96%  27          $27.9         0.84%  26         $33.4         0.86%
Yogurt/         21           $5.0         0.86%  10          $77.4         2.33%  10         $82.4         2.11%
Specialty
Greek
Half & Half     22           $4.4         0.77%  15          $54.6         1.64%  16         $59.1         1.52%
Yogurt/Large    23           $4.4         0.76%  22          $40.4         1.22%  23         $44.8         1.15%
Size (16oz Or
Lar)
Miscellaneous   24           $3.8         0.67%  21          $42.1         1.27%  22         $45.9         1.18%
Cheese
Bulk Processed  25           $3.4         0.59%  29          $19.8         0.60%  29         $23.2         0.59%
[Cheese]
Yogurt          26           $3.2         0.56%  12          $67.0         2.02%  14         $70.2         1.80%
Bulk Semi-Soft  27           $3.0         0.53%  28          $23.3         0.70%  28         $26.3         0.68%
[Cheese]
Egg Nog/Boiled  28           $2.7         0.47%  39          $13.3         0.40%  35         $16.0         0.41%
Custard
Buttermilk      29           $2.4         0.42%  33          $15.9         0.48%  31         $18.3         0.47%
Organic Milk    30           $2.0         0.34%  24          $35.4         1.06%  25         $37.3         0.96%
Ricotta Cheese  31           $1.9         0.33%  34          $15.6         0.47%  32         $17.5         0.45%
Aerosol Cheese  32           $1.8         0.31%  54           $5.2         0.16%  51          $7.0         0.18%
Hispanic        33           $1.7         0.29%  50           $6.9         0.21%  45          $8.6         0.22%
Cheese
Specialty Ppk   34           $1.5         0.27%  26          $28.7         0.86%  27         $30.2         0.78%
Cheese Hard/
Grat
Aseptic Milk    35           $1.4         0.24%  38          $13.6         0.41%  38         $15.0         0.38%
Misc Dry        36           $1.4         0.24%  46           $7.3         0.22%  44          $8.7         0.22%
Cheese
Soy Milk        37           $1.3         0.22%  49           $7.1         0.22%  47          $8.4         0.22%
Specialty Ppk   38           $1.2         0.21%  31          $16.2         0.49%  33         $17.5         0.45%
Cheese
Spreads
Mexican Con     39           $1.2         0.21%  63           $3.1         0.09%  61          $4.3         0.11%
Queso
Specialty Ppk   40           $1.2         0.20%  30          $18.5         0.56%  30         $19.6         0.50%
Cheese Feta
Pre-Sliced      41           $1.1         0.20%  35          $14.4         0.43%  36         $15.5         0.40%
Semi-Soft
[Cheese]
Pre-Sliced      42           $1.0         0.18%  36          $14.3         0.43%  37         $15.3         0.39%
Semi-Hard
[Cheese]
Specialty Ppk   43           $0.9         0.15%  32          $16.2         0.49%  34         $17.1         0.44%
Cheese
Mozzarell
Specialty Ppk   44           $0.8         0.15%  52           $6.0         0.18%  52          $6.8         0.17%
Cheese
Processed
Yogurt/Adult    45           $0.8         0.14%  60           $3.8         0.12%  60          $4.7         0.12%
Drinks
Specialty Ppk   46           $0.8         0.14%  37          $13.9         0.42%  39         $14.7         0.38%
Cheese
Cheddar & C
Soy Beverage    47           $0.7         0.12%  53           $5.3         0.16%  54          $6.0         0.15%
Specialty Ppk   48           $0.6         0.10%  40          $11.4         0.34%  40         $12.0         0.31%
Cheese Semi
Soft
Specialty Ppk   49           $0.6         0.10%  42          $10.8         0.32%  41         $11.4         0.29%
Cheese Soft &
Ripe
Specialty Ppk   50           $0.6         0.10%  41          $10.8         0.33%  42         $11.4         0.29%
Cheese Blue/
Gorg
Non Fat Dry     51           $0.6         0.10%  55           $5.2         0.16%  55          $5.7         0.15%
Milk
Kefir           52           $0.6         0.10%  48           $7.2         0.22%  48          $7.8         0.20%
Specialty Ppk   53           $0.5         0.09%  68           $1.5         0.05%  68          $2.0         0.05%
Cheese
Hispanic
Specialty Ppk   54           $0.5         0.08%  44           $8.0         0.24%  46          $8.5         0.22%
Cheese Gouda
& Eda
Specialty Ppk   55           $0.5         0.08%  43          $10.4         0.31%  43         $10.9         0.28%
Cheese Goat
Milk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Dairy              $571.2        99.37%           $3,989.3        98.04%          $4,767.6        98.22%
Expenditure
s * Among
Top 1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=================================================================================================
Total                  $574.9          100%           $3,323.6          100%          $3,898.5          100%
Dairy
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Only 55 dairy subcommodities among the top 1,000 subcommodities.

Exhibit D-2: Fruit
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Fruit                                      ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dairy Case      1           $43.5        10.18%  1          $269.0         9.35%  1         $312.6         9.46%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Bananas         2           $34.2         8.00%  2          $242.7         8.43%  2         $276.9         8.38%
Strawberries    3           $23.5         5.48%  3          $178.4         6.20%  3         $201.9         6.11%
Fruit Snacks    4           $17.6         4.13%  17          $43.2         1.50%  12         $60.8         1.84%
Grapes Red      5           $15.8         3.70%  4          $121.7         4.23%  4         $137.5         4.16%
Grapes White    6           $15.5         3.61%  6           $84.9         2.95%  5         $100.4         3.04%
Apple Juice &   7           $13.3         3.11%  14          $45.8         1.59%  13         $59.0         1.79%
Cider (Over
50%)
Instore Cut     8           $13.2         3.09%  5           $85.8         2.98%  6          $99.0         3.00%
Fruit
Oranges Navels  9           $12.6         2.94%  8           $79.3         2.75%  7          $91.8         2.78%
All
Fruit Cup       10          $10.6         2.47%  19          $42.7         1.49%  14         $53.3         1.61%
Blended Juice   11           $9.3         2.17%  29          $29.6         1.03%  24         $38.9         1.18%
&
Combinations
(Ov)
Clementines     12           $8.8         2.06%  9           $78.6         2.73%  8          $87.5         2.65%
Melons Instore  13           $8.2         1.93%  18          $42.8         1.49%  17         $51.1         1.55%
Cut
Watermelon      14           $7.9         1.84%  16          $43.9         1.53%  16         $51.8         1.57%
Seedless
Whole
Cherries Red    15           $6.9         1.61%  11          $56.7         1.97%  11         $63.6         1.93%
Apples Gala     16           $6.6         1.54%  10          $69.3         2.41%  10         $75.9         2.30%
(Bulk & Bag)
Cranapple/Cran  17           $6.1         1.43%  31          $27.3         0.95%  29         $33.4         1.01%
Grape Juice
(50)
Apples Red      18           $5.8         1.35%  23          $35.2         1.22%  20         $41.0         1.24%
Delicious
(Bulk & Bag)
Dairy Case      19           $5.4         1.26%  25          $32.3         1.12%  26         $37.7         1.14%
100% Pure
Juice Oth
Cantaloupe      20           $5.3         1.24%  15          $44.4         1.54%  18         $49.7         1.50%
Whole
Blueberries     21           $5.1         1.19%  7           $79.4         2.76%  9          $84.5         2.56%
Pineapple       22           $4.9         1.15%  33          $24.0         0.83%  33         $28.9         0.87%
Peaches Yellow  23           $4.8         1.13%  22          $35.6         1.24%  21         $40.5         1.22%
Flesh
Grape Juice     24           $4.8         1.12%  44          $17.1         0.60%  41         $21.9         0.66%
(Over 50%
Juice)
Lemons          25           $4.6         1.08%  24          $33.6         1.17%  25         $38.2         1.16%
Peaches         26           $4.6         1.07%  39          $21.3         0.74%  35         $25.9         0.78%
Apples Granny   27           $4.4         1.03%  27          $30.9         1.07%  28         $35.3         1.07%
Smith (Bulk &
Bag)
Frozen Fruit    28           $4.3         1.01%  12          $48.6         1.69%  15         $52.9         1.60%
Applesauce Cup  29           $4.1         0.95%  35          $22.6         0.79%  34         $26.7         0.81%
Non-Carb Jce    30           $3.8         0.88%  26          $31.7         1.10%  27         $35.4         1.07%
(Over 50%
Jce)
Raspberries     31           $3.5         0.83%  13          $45.8         1.59%  19         $49.3         1.49%
Grapes Black/   32           $3.4         0.80%  37          $21.8         0.76%  37         $25.2         0.76%
Blue
Fruit Cocktail/ 33           $3.4         0.79%  54          $12.5         0.43%  52         $15.8         0.48%
Fruit Salad
Mixed Fruit     34           $3.2         0.75%  79           $5.7         0.20%  73          $8.9         0.27%
Bags
Jarred Fruit    35           $3.1         0.73%  49          $14.6         0.51%  47         $17.7         0.54%
Single Serve
Raisins         36           $2.9         0.69%  32          $26.0         0.90%  32         $28.9         0.87%
Apples Other    37           $2.8         0.66%  30          $27.4         0.95%  31         $30.2         0.91%
(Bulk & Bag)
Apples Fuji     38           $2.8         0.65%  21          $36.2         1.26%  23         $39.0         1.18%
(Bulk & Bag)
Apples Gold     39           $2.8         0.65%  43          $17.9         0.62%  43         $20.7         0.62%
Delicious
(Bulk & Bag)
Blackberries    40           $2.7         0.63%  28          $29.9         1.04%  30         $32.6         0.99%
Limes           41           $2.7         0.62%  34          $22.7         0.79%  36         $25.3         0.77%
Nectarines      42           $2.5         0.60%  42          $18.6         0.64%  42         $21.1         0.64%
Yellow Flesh
Pineapple       43           $2.5         0.59%  36          $22.1         0.77%  38         $24.6         0.75%
Whole & Peel/
Cored
Apples          44           $2.4         0.57%  20          $36.9         1.28%  22         $39.4         1.19%
Honeycrisp
Grapefruit      45           $2.4         0.56%  40          $21.2         0.74%  39         $23.6         0.71%
Plums           46           $2.4         0.56%  52          $13.1         0.46%  53         $15.5         0.47%
Mandarin        47           $2.3         0.53%  53          $12.6         0.44%  54         $14.8         0.45%
Oranges/
Citrus Sect
Frzn Conc       48           $2.2         0.52%  57          $10.1         0.35%  56         $12.3         0.37%
Allieds Over
50% Jui
Mango           49           $2.2         0.52%  50          $14.1         0.49%  50         $16.3         0.49%
Apple Sauce     50           $2.2         0.51%  51          $13.8         0.48%  51         $16.0         0.48%
(Excludes
Cup)
Tangerines &    51           $2.1         0.49%  55          $11.3         0.39%  55         $13.4         0.41%
Tangelos
Frzn Oj & Oj    52           $1.9         0.44%  45          $16.2         0.56%  45         $18.1         0.55%
Substitutes
(Over 5)
Watermelon      53           $1.9         0.44%  46          $15.9         0.55%  46         $17.8         0.54%
Personal
Bananas         54           $1.9         0.44%  41          $18.7         0.65%  44         $20.6         0.62%
Organic
Pears           55           $1.9         0.43%  59          $10.0         0.35%  58         $11.8         0.36%
Convenience/    56           $1.8         0.41%  64           $9.4         0.33%  60         $11.2         0.34%
Snacking
Fruit Pro
Cranberry       57           $1.7         0.39%  58          $10.0         0.35%  59         $11.6         0.35%
Sauce
Strawberries    58           $1.6         0.38%  38          $21.4         0.74%  40         $23.0         0.70%
Organic
Cut Fruit All   59           $1.6         0.38%  69           $8.5         0.29%  65         $10.1         0.31%
Other Prepack
Caramel/Candy   60           $1.6         0.36%  94           $3.4         0.12%  84          $4.9         0.15%
Apples
Pears Bartlett  61           $1.5         0.35%  47          $15.7         0.55%  48         $17.2         0.52%
Fruit Party     62           $1.4         0.33%  74           $6.5         0.23%  75          $7.9         0.24%
Tray Prepack
Dried Fruit--   63           $1.4         0.33%  48          $15.6         0.54%  49         $17.0         0.51%
Other
Pineapple       64           $1.4         0.33%  75           $6.4         0.22%  76          $7.8         0.24%
Juice (Over
50% Juic)
Cranberry       65           $1.4         0.32%  70           $8.4         0.29%  69          $9.8         0.30%
Juice (Over
50% Jce)
Lemon Juice &   66           $1.2         0.29%  72           $7.8         0.27%  72          $9.0         0.27%
Lime Juice
(Over)
Oranges Non     67           $1.2         0.28%  81           $5.0         0.18%  80          $6.2         0.19%
Navel All
Prune Juice     68           $1.2         0.27%  71           $8.3         0.29%  71          $9.5         0.29%
(Over 50%
Juice)
Drinks--Carb    69           $1.1         0.26%  61           $9.7         0.34%  62         $10.8         0.33%
Juice (Over
50%)
Juice Single    70           $1.1         0.26%  66           $9.4         0.33%  63         $10.5         0.32%
Blend
Pears Anjou     71           $1.1         0.26%  60           $9.8         0.34%  61         $10.9         0.33%
Kiwi Fruit      72           $1.0         0.24%  73           $7.0         0.24%  74          $8.0         0.24%
Dried Plums     73           $1.0         0.24%  56          $11.0         0.38%  57         $12.0         0.36%
Cherries        74           $1.0         0.23%  68           $9.0         0.31%  68         $10.0         0.30%
Ranier
Cranapple/Cran  75           $0.9         0.21%  77           $6.3         0.22%  77          $7.2         0.22%
Grape Juice
(Ov)
Juice (Over     76           $0.9         0.21%  100          $2.7         0.09%  98          $3.6         0.11%
50% Juice)
Watermelon W/   77           $0.9         0.20%  98           $3.0         0.11%  93          $3.9         0.12%
Seeds Whole
Honeydew Whole  78           $0.8         0.18%  78           $5.9         0.21%  79          $6.7         0.20%
Grapes Red      79           $0.8         0.18%  92           $3.5         0.12%  91          $4.2         0.13%
Globe
Pomegranates    80           $0.7         0.17%  85           $4.3         0.15%  83          $5.0         0.15%
Grapes Other    81           $0.7         0.17%  89           $3.8         0.13%  89          $4.6         0.14%
Maraschino      82           $0.7         0.17%  88           $4.1         0.14%  87          $4.8         0.14%
Cherries
Apples          83           $0.7         0.17%  63           $9.4         0.33%  64         $10.1         0.31%
Braeburn
(Bulk & Bag)
Grapefruit      84           $0.7         0.17%  86           $4.1         0.14%  85          $4.8         0.15%
Juice (Over
50% Jui)
Apples Gala     85           $0.6         0.15%  65           $9.4         0.33%  67         $10.0         0.30%
(Bulk & Bag)
Organic
Peaches White   86           $0.6         0.15%  80           $5.5         0.19%  81          $6.2         0.19%
Flesh
Jarred Fruit    87           $0.6         0.14%  82           $4.5         0.16%  82          $5.1         0.16%
Multi Serve
Squeeze Lemons/ 88           $0.5         0.12%  95           $3.3         0.12%  94          $3.9         0.12%
Limes
Raspberries     89           $0.5         0.12%  67           $9.1         0.32%  70          $9.6         0.29%
Organic
Pears Bosc      90           $0.5         0.11%  84           $4.3         0.15%  86          $4.8         0.14%
Blueberries     91           $0.5         0.11%  62           $9.6         0.33%  66         $10.1         0.30%
Organic
Pears Asian     92           $0.4         0.10%  90           $3.8         0.13%  92          $4.2         0.13%
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total Fruit              $416.8        97.49%           $2,772.4        96.36%          $3,189.2        96.54%
Expenditure
s * Among
Top 1,000
subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                  $427.6          100%           $2,877.2          100%          $3,304.8          100%
Fruit
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
*Only 92 fruit subcommodities among top 1,000 subcommodities.

Exhibit D-3: Grains
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Grain                                      ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kids Cereal     1           $78.1         9.88%  3          $186.4         4.51%  1         $264.5         5.37%
Mainstream      2           $48.0         6.07%  7          $136.8         3.31%  6         $184.7         3.75%
White Bread
Tortilla/Nacho  3           $47.4         5.99%  2          $209.0         5.05%  2         $256.4         5.21%
Chips
Mainstream      4           $38.4         4.86%  5          $173.2         4.19%  4         $211.7         4.30%
Variety
Breads
All Family      5           $36.2         4.58%  1          $214.9         5.20%  3         $251.1         5.10%
Cereal
Adult Cereal    6           $24.9         3.15%  4          $182.6         4.42%  5         $207.5         4.21%
Mexican Soft    7           $23.7         3.00%  8          $113.1         2.74%  8         $136.8         2.78%
Tortillas And
Wra
Waffles/        8           $17.3         2.19%  13          $77.4         1.87%  12         $94.7         1.92%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Ramen Noodles/  9           $16.7         2.12%  43          $28.1         0.68%  34         $44.8         0.91%
Ramen Cups
Cheese          10          $16.5         2.08%  10          $90.2         2.18%  10        $106.7         2.17%
Crackers
Hamburger Buns  11          $16.2         2.05%  14          $70.2         1.70%  14         $86.4         1.75%
Hot Dog Buns    12          $16.2         2.05%  18          $62.2         1.50%  16         $78.4         1.59%
Refrigerated    13          $14.7         1.86%  30          $45.2         1.09%  26         $59.9         1.22%
Biscuits
Butter Spray    14          $14.6         1.85%  15          $68.7         1.66%  15         $83.3         1.69%
Cracker
Toaster         15          $14.0         1.77%  27          $47.6         1.15%  23         $61.6         1.25%
Pastries
Rice Side Dish  16          $14.0         1.76%  28          $46.7         1.13%  24         $60.6         1.23%
Mixes Dry
Popcorn--Micro  17          $13.1         1.65%  17          $63.4         1.53%  17         $76.5         1.55%
wave
Long Cut Pasta  18          $13.0         1.64%  19          $60.4         1.46%  19         $73.4         1.49%
Granola Bars    19          $12.8         1.61%  11          $88.9         2.15%  11        $101.7         2.06%
Premium Bread   20          $12.3         1.55%  6          $144.7         3.50%  7         $157.0         3.19%
Cereal Bars     21          $10.9         1.38%  12          $78.4         1.90%  13         $89.3         1.81%
Short Cut       22           $9.9         1.25%  21          $56.2         1.36%  20         $66.1         1.34%
Pasta
Rolls: Dinner   23           $9.5         1.21%  23          $50.5         1.22%  25         $60.1         1.22%
Frzn Garlic     24           $9.1         1.16%  44          $27.8         0.67%  39         $36.9         0.75%
Toast
Corn Chips      25           $9.1         1.15%  29          $45.6         1.10%  28         $54.7         1.11%
Instant         26           $8.9         1.13%  33          $41.1         0.99%  32         $50.0         1.02%
Oatmeal
Snack Crackers  27           $8.9         1.13%  9           $98.6         2.39%  9         $107.6         2.18%
Saltine/Oyster  28           $8.2         1.03%  31          $43.1         1.04%  30         $51.3         1.04%
Multi-Pack      29           $8.0         1.01%  32          $41.3         1.00%  33         $49.3         1.00%
Crackers
Bagels          30           $7.8         0.99%  16          $66.9         1.62%  18         $74.7         1.52%
Noodle Side     31           $7.3         0.92%  53          $21.1         0.51%  49         $28.4         0.58%
Dish Mixes
Rice--Dry Bag   32           $7.1         0.90%  37          $33.9         0.82%  36         $41.1         0.83%
And Box
Sandwich Buns   33           $7.1         0.90%  20          $56.8         1.37%  21         $63.9         1.30%
Rice--Instant   34           $6.8         0.86%  34          $38.0         0.92%  35         $44.8         0.91%
& Microwave
Frzn Breakfast  35           $6.5         0.82%  57          $19.0         0.46%  52         $25.4         0.52%
Pastry
Flour: White &  36           $6.4         0.81%  42          $28.8         0.70%  41         $35.2         0.71%
Self Rising
Pretzels        37           $6.2         0.79%  22          $55.4         1.34%  22         $61.6         1.25%
Bread: Italian/ 38           $6.1         0.77%  25          $49.0         1.19%  27         $55.1         1.12%
French
Muffin & Corn   39           $6.0         0.76%  41          $28.9         0.70%  42         $34.9         0.71%
Bread Mix
Refrigerated    40           $5.5         0.70%  45          $27.5         0.66%  44         $33.0         0.67%
Specialty
Rolls
Refrigerated    41           $5.4         0.68%  38          $31.2         0.76%  40         $36.6         0.74%
Crescent
Rolls
Mexican Taco/   42           $5.2         0.66%  56          $19.1         0.46%  55         $24.3         0.49%
Tostado/
Shells
Noodles Dry     43           $4.5         0.58%  48          $24.9         0.60%  47         $29.4         0.60%
Rolls:          44           $4.1         0.52%  46          $26.7         0.65%  46         $30.9         0.63%
Sandwich
Salad Toppers   45           $4.1         0.52%  68          $15.1         0.37%  64         $19.2         0.39%
Graham          46           $4.0         0.51%  47          $24.9         0.60%  48         $29.0         0.59%
Crackers
Standard        47           $3.9         0.49%  39          $29.9         0.72%  43         $33.8         0.69%
Oatmeal
English         48           $3.8         0.48%  24          $49.5         1.20%  29         $53.3         1.08%
Muffins/
Waffles
Main Meal       49           $3.8         0.48%  36          $34.9         0.84%  37         $38.7         0.79%
Bread
Dinner Rolls    50           $3.5         0.44%  71          $14.5         0.35%  67         $18.0         0.36%
Breadings/      51           $3.2         0.41%  65          $16.0         0.39%  62         $19.3         0.39%
Coatings/
Crumbs
Bread:          52           $3.2         0.40%  51          $22.9         0.55%  51         $26.0         0.53%
Specialty
Bagged Popped   53           $3.0         0.38%  77          $12.5         0.30%  75         $15.5         0.32%
Popcorn
Frzn Dinner     54           $3.0         0.38%  54          $20.9         0.50%  56         $23.9         0.48%
Rolls
Rolls:          55           $2.9         0.37%  64          $16.5         0.40%  61         $19.4         0.39%
Croissants/
Breadsticks
Grits           56           $2.8         0.36%  96           $6.7         0.16%  92          $9.6         0.19%
Cereal--Cold    57           $2.8         0.36%  26          $47.8         1.16%  31         $50.7         1.03%
Refrigerated    58           $2.8         0.36%  86           $9.4         0.23%  80         $12.3         0.25%
Tortillas
Croutons        59           $2.8         0.36%  73          $14.0         0.34%  69         $16.8         0.34%
Frzn Garlic     60           $2.7         0.34%  78          $11.1         0.27%  78         $13.8         0.28%
Bread
Frzn Biscuits   61           $2.6         0.33%  76          $12.9         0.31%  74         $15.6         0.32%
Frozen Pasta    62           $2.6         0.33%  62          $16.9         0.41%  59         $19.6         0.40%
Pasta/Grain     63           $2.6         0.33%  82          $10.3         0.25%  79         $12.9         0.26%
Salads--Prepa
ck
Cornmeal        64           $2.5         0.32%  95           $7.3         0.18%  90          $9.8         0.20%
Refrigerated    65           $2.5         0.32%  93           $7.7         0.19%  87         $10.2         0.21%
Bagels
Refrigerated    66           $2.4         0.30%  40          $29.3         0.71%  45         $31.7         0.64%
Pasta
Diet/Light      67           $2.4         0.30%  49          $24.0         0.58%  50         $26.3         0.53%
Bread
Pasta/Grain     68           $2.3         0.30%  63          $16.9         0.41%  63         $19.3         0.39%
Salads--Bulk
Mini-Cakes      69           $2.3         0.30%  60          $17.2         0.42%  60         $19.5         0.40%
Fruit/          70           $2.2         0.28%  58          $18.7         0.45%  58         $21.0         0.43%
Breakfast
Bread
Breading        71           $2.2         0.28%  114          $3.7         0.09%  104         $5.9         0.12%
Frzn            72           $2.2         0.28%  106          $5.0         0.12%  97          $7.2         0.15%
Breadsticks
Rye Breads      73           $2.0         0.25%  52          $22.3         0.54%  54         $24.3         0.49%
Other Hot       74           $1.9         0.24%  80          $10.3         0.25%  81         $12.2         0.25%
Cereal
Rolls: Bagels   75           $1.9         0.24%  67          $15.4         0.37%  68         $17.3         0.35%
Biscuit Flour   76           $1.9         0.23%  74          $13.8         0.33%  72         $15.7         0.32%
& Mixes
Bread: Artisan  77           $1.7         0.22%  35          $36.7         0.89%  38         $38.4         0.78%
Flour: Misc/    78           $1.6         0.20%  75          $13.6         0.33%  77         $15.2         0.31%
Specialty/
Blend Et
Bread: Pita/    79           $1.5         0.19%  72          $14.1         0.34%  73         $15.6         0.32%
Pocket/
Flatbrd
Pizza Mix Dry   80           $1.4         0.18%  102          $5.4         0.13%  98          $6.8         0.14%
Breakfast Bars/ 81           $1.4         0.18%  50          $23.6         0.57%  53         $25.0         0.51%
Tarts/Scones
Popcorn--Other  82           $1.4         0.17%  84          $10.0         0.24%  84         $11.4         0.23%
Asian Noodles/  83           $1.3         0.17%  79          $10.5         0.25%  82         $11.8         0.24%
Rice
Instant         84           $1.3         0.16%  91           $8.1         0.20%  93          $9.4         0.19%
Breakfast
Tortilla Chips  85           $1.3         0.16%  55          $19.9         0.48%  57         $21.2         0.43%
Bread: Sweet/   86           $1.3         0.16%  90           $8.4         0.20%  91          $9.7         0.20%
Breakfast
Refrigerated    87           $1.2         0.16%  83          $10.2         0.25%  83         $11.5         0.23%
Breads
Bread:          88           $1.2         0.15%  61          $17.1         0.41%  66         $18.3         0.37%
Sourdough
Bread:          89           $1.0         0.13%  85           $9.8         0.24%  86         $10.8         0.22%
Tortillas/
Wraps
Vending Size/   90           $1.0         0.12%  124          $2.3         0.06%  120         $3.3         0.07%
Sngl Serve
Cracke
Snacks: Pita    91           $0.9         0.12%  66          $15.7         0.38%  70         $16.7         0.34%
Chips
Granola         92           $0.9         0.12%  69          $15.1         0.37%  71         $16.0         0.33%
Caramel Coated  93           $0.9         0.11%  118          $3.1         0.08%  115         $4.0         0.08%
Snacks
Specialty       94           $0.9         0.11%  59          $17.8         0.43%  65         $18.7         0.38%
Crackers
Crackers        95           $0.8         0.10%  70          $14.6         0.35%  76         $15.4         0.31%
Bread: Rye/     96           $0.7         0.09%  92           $8.1         0.20%  95          $8.8         0.18%
Cocktail
Whole Grain     97           $0.7         0.09%  88           $9.2         0.22%  88          $9.9         0.20%
Bread
Frzn Bagels     98           $0.7         0.09%  120          $2.9         0.07%  119         $3.6         0.07%
Bread: Wheat/   99           $0.7         0.09%  81          $10.3         0.25%  85         $11.0         0.22%
Whl Grain
Pies: Sugar     100          $0.7         0.09%  111          $4.5         0.11%  111         $5.2         0.11%
Free
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                  $778.3        98.43%           $3,989.3        96.47%          $4,767.6        96.79%
Grain
Expenditure
s *
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total Grain              $783.8        99.13%           $4,049.9        96.28%          $4,833.8        98.63%
Expenditure
s Among Top
1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                  $790.7          100%           $4,135.0          100%          $4,925.7          100%
Grain
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit D-4: Oils
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Oil                                       ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pourable Salad  1           $29.0        22.71%  1          $139.4        24.28%  1         $168.4        23.99%
Dressings
Mayonnaise &    2           $27.3        21.34%  2          $119.1        20.73%  2         $146.3        20.84%
Whipped
Dressing
Margarine:      3           $23.4        18.37%  3          $100.9        17.56%  3         $124.3        17.71%
Tubs And
Bowls
Vegetable Oil   4           $20.5        16.07%  5           $35.4         6.16%  5          $55.9         7.96%
Canola Oils     5            $8.3         6.49%  6           $29.3         5.10%  6          $37.6         5.35%
Olive Oil       6            $7.3         5.69%  4           $63.8        11.11%  4          $71.1        10.12%
Cooking Sprays  7            $3.2         2.49%  7           $21.0         3.65%  7          $24.1         3.44%
Dressing        8            $1.6         1.23%  8           $14.5         2.53%  8          $16.1         2.30%
Creamy
Sand/           9            $1.4         1.14%  10           $7.2         1.26%  10          $8.7         1.23%
Horseradish &
Tartar Sauce
Corn Oil        10           $1.3         1.01%  14           $4.1         0.71%  12          $5.4         0.77%
Cooking Oil:    11           $1.1         0.89%  11           $6.7         1.17%  11          $7.8         1.12%
Peanut/
Safflower/
Dressing Blue   12           $0.9         0.71%  9            $9.5         1.65%  9          $10.4         1.48%
Cheese
Margarine:      13           $0.6         0.44%  13           $4.2         0.74%  14          $4.8         0.68%
Squeeze
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total Oil                $125.9        98.58%             $555.0        96.65%            $680.9        96.99%
Expenditure
s * Among
Top 1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total Oil              $127.0          100%             $574.4          100%            $702.1          100%
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Only 13 oil subcommodities among the top 1,000 subcommodities.

Exhibit D-5: Protein Foods
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Protein Foods                                  ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lean [Beef]     1          $112.4         7.38%  2          $257.9         4.03%  1         $370.3         4.67%
Primal [Beef]   2           $62.4         4.10%  5          $219.8         3.43%  5         $282.2         3.56%
Lunchment--Del  3           $55.8         3.67%  4          $242.6         3.79%  4         $298.4         3.76%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     4           $52.1         3.43%  3          $251.6         3.93%  3         $303.7         3.83%
Chicken Breast  5           $49.6         3.26%  1          $292.9         4.57%  2         $342.5         4.32%
Boneless
Enhanced [Pork  6           $41.5         2.73%  6          $168.0         2.62%  6         $209.5         2.64%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Bacon--Trad     7           $40.7         2.68%  8          $157.6         2.46%  7         $198.3         2.50%
16oz Or Less
Ribs [Pork]     8           $35.0         2.30%  15         $106.8         1.67%  13        $141.8         1.79%
Frzn Chicken--  9           $30.0         1.97%  17          $99.8         1.56%  16        $129.8         1.64%
Wht Meat
Choice Beef     10          $28.4         1.87%  11         $136.6         2.13%  10        $165.1         2.08%
(Loins)
Select Beef     11          $27.9         1.83%  9          $143.7         2.24%  9         $171.5         2.16%
Hot Dogs--Base  12          $25.1         1.65%  27          $56.8         0.89%  23         $81.9         1.03%
Meat
Choice Beef     13          $24.0         1.58%  20          $72.5         1.13%  19         $96.5         1.22%
(Rounds)
Chicken Wings   14          $22.2         1.46%  58          $28.6         0.45%  40         $50.9         0.64%
Frzn Chicken--  15          $22.2         1.46%  97          $17.4         0.27%  52         $39.5         0.50%
Wings
Lunchment--Bol  16          $21.8         1.43%  24          $60.9         0.95%  22         $82.7         1.04%
ogna/Sausage
Tuna            17          $21.1         1.39%  14         $109.9         1.72%  15        $131.0         1.65%
Peanut Butter   18          $20.4         1.34%  12         $127.8         1.99%  12        $148.2         1.87%
Meat: Turkey    19          $19.3         1.27%  7          $159.6         2.49%  8         $178.9         2.26%
Bulk
Frzn Meat--     20          $19.0         1.25%  34          $46.3         0.72%  30         $65.2         0.82%
Beef
Value Forms/    21          $18.6         1.22%  41          $42.6         0.67%  33         $61.2         0.77%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Chicken Drums   22          $17.3         1.14%  49          $31.5         0.49%  44         $48.8         0.62%
Angus [Beef]    23          $17.1         1.13%  16         $103.8         1.62%  17        $120.9         1.53%
Dnr Sausage--   24          $16.4         1.08%  45          $37.6         0.59%  38         $54.1         0.68%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Meat: Ham Bulk  25          $15.3         1.00%  13         $115.9         1.81%  14        $131.2         1.65%
Bkfst Sausage-- 26          $15.1         0.99%  23          $61.4         0.96%  25         $76.5         0.96%
Fresh Rolls
Shrimp--Raw     27          $15.0         0.99%  21          $69.0         1.08%  21         $84.1         1.06%
Shrimp--Cooked  28          $14.8         0.97%  29          $54.0         0.84%  28         $68.8         0.87%
Prepared        29          $13.4         0.88%  28          $55.3         0.86%  29         $68.7         0.87%
Beans--Baked
W/Pork
Chili: Canned   30          $13.3         0.88%  39          $42.8         0.67%  36         $56.1         0.71%
Ground Turkey   31          $13.1         0.86%  19          $78.0         1.22%  20         $91.1         1.15%
Dnr Sausage--   32          $13.0         0.86%  25          $58.0         0.91%  26         $71.1         0.90%
Links Fresh
Whole Chicken   33          $12.9         0.85%  26          $56.9         0.89%  27         $69.8         0.88%
(Roasters/
Fryer)
Chicken Thighs  34          $12.2         0.80%  31          $50.0         0.78%  31         $62.2         0.78%
Dnr Sausage--   35          $12.1         0.80%  43          $38.2         0.60%  42         $50.4         0.64%
Pork Rope Ckd/
Sm
Bacon--Trad     36          $12.0         0.79%  35          $44.6         0.70%  35         $56.6         0.71%
Greater Than
16oz
Soup/Stew       37          $11.2         0.74%  36          $44.1         0.69%  37         $55.3         0.70%
Whole Muscle    38          $11.1         0.73%  53          $29.9         0.47%  49         $41.0         0.52%
Breaded/18oz
And
Variety Beans-- 39          $10.5         0.69%  22          $68.0         1.06%  24         $78.5         0.99%
Kidney/Pinto/
E
Cubed Meats     40          $10.5         0.69%  54          $29.8         0.46%  51         $40.3         0.51%
[Beef]
Hot Dogs--Base  41          $10.3         0.68%  32          $49.4         0.77%  34         $59.8         0.75%
Beef
Eggs--Medium    42          $10.1         0.66%  81          $21.0         0.33%  64         $31.1         0.39%
Butts [Pork     43           $9.7         0.63%  56          $29.2         0.46%  54         $38.8         0.49%
Shoulder]
Boneless Snack/ 44           $9.6         0.63%  77          $21.5         0.33%  65         $31.1         0.39%
18oz And
Larger
Chix: Value-    45           $9.5         0.63%  62          $26.7         0.42%  58         $36.2         0.46%
Added (Cold)
Angus [Beef]    46           $9.3         0.61%  50          $31.4         0.49%  50         $40.6         0.51%
Patties [Beef]  47           $9.1         0.60%  42          $39.7         0.62%  45         $48.8         0.61%
Bkfst Sausage-- 48           $8.9         0.59%  64          $26.3         0.41%  59         $35.3         0.44%
Fresh Links
Bone-In Wings   49           $8.8         0.58%  123         $12.0         0.19%  94         $20.8         0.26%
Hams--Half/     50           $8.2         0.54%  52          $30.0         0.47%  56         $38.2         0.48%
Port Bone-In
Meat: Beef      51           $7.9         0.52%  30          $53.4         0.83%  32         $61.3         0.77%
Bulk
Hams--Spiral    52           $7.6         0.50%  46          $36.5         0.57%  47         $44.1         0.56%
Hot Dogs--      53           $7.4         0.49%  40          $42.7         0.67%  43         $50.1         0.63%
Premium
Snack Meat--    54           $7.4         0.48%  48          $32.1         0.50%  53         $39.5         0.50%
Pepperoni
Frzn Meat--     55           $7.3         0.48%  128         $11.3         0.18%  109        $18.6         0.23%
Breakfast
Sausage
Angus [Beef]    56           $7.3         0.48%  37          $43.3         0.68%  41         $50.7         0.64%
Select Beef     57           $7.1         0.46%  51          $30.4         0.47%  57         $37.5         0.47%
Frz Coated      58           $6.9         0.45%  79          $21.1         0.33%  74         $28.0         0.35%
Fish Fillets
Jerky/Nuggets/  59           $6.8         0.45%  67          $25.8         0.40%  62         $32.6         0.41%
Tenders
Catfish--Fille  60           $6.8         0.45%  110         $13.1         0.20%  102        $19.9         0.25%
t
Chicken Legs/   61           $6.6         0.43%  109         $13.5         0.21%  101        $20.1         0.25%
Quarters
Value-Added     62           $6.4         0.42%  98          $16.9         0.26%  86         $23.3         0.29%
Breaded
Shrimp
Pancake Mixes   63           $6.3         0.41%  65          $21.9         0.34%  68         $28.1         0.35%
Frz Fishsticks/ 64           $6.1         0.40%  104         $14.7         0.23%  95         $20.8         0.26%
Tenders/
Nuggets
Crab--Snow      65           $6.1         0.40%  127         $11.4         0.18%  110        $17.5         0.22%
Chix: Frd 8pc/  66           $6.0         0.39%  117         $12.7         0.20%  107        $18.7         0.24%
Cut Up (Cold)
Lunchmeat--Cho  67           $5.1         0.34%  121         $12.1         0.19%  111        $17.2         0.22%
p/Form Pltry
& Ha
Salmon Fr--     68           $5.0         0.33%  33          $48.8         0.76%  39         $53.8         0.68%
Altantic
Party Tray--    69           $4.8         0.32%  73          $24.8         0.39%  71         $29.6         0.37%
Shrimp
Ham Steaks/     70           $4.7         0.31%  63          $26.3         0.41%  66         $31.0         0.39%
Cubes/Slices
Eggs--X-Large   71           $4.5         0.29%  44          $37.9         0.59%  48         $42.4         0.54%
Bacon--Poultry  72           $4.5         0.29%  91          $18.4         0.29%  88         $22.9         0.29%
Hams--Whole     73           $4.5         0.29%  105         $14.6         0.23%  106        $19.1         0.24%
Boneless
Meat Bulk:      74           $4.4         0.29%  59          $28.3         0.44%  61         $32.8         0.41%
Specialty Dry
Meats
Chunk Meats--   75           $4.4         0.29%  70          $25.3         0.40%  70         $29.7         0.37%
Chix/Ham/Etc.
Whole Toms      76           $4.3         0.28%  84          $20.0         0.31%  83         $24.2         0.31%
(Over 16lbs)
[Turkey]
Lunchmeat--Who  77           $4.2         0.28%  86          $19.7         0.31%  84         $24.0         0.30%
le Muscle
Pltry
Bacon--Pre-     78           $4.1         0.27%  72          $24.8         0.39%  72         $28.9         0.36%
Cooked
Baking Nuts     79           $4.1         0.27%  38          $43.2         0.67%  46         $47.3         0.60%
Bologna/Loaves/ 80           $4.0         0.26%  87          $19.2         0.30%  87         $23.1         0.29%
Franks
Pistachios      81           $3.9         0.26%  57          $29.1         0.45%  60         $33.0         0.42%
Seasoned        82           $3.9         0.26%  100         $16.5         0.26%  99         $20.4         0.26%
Poultry
Protein         83           $3.9         0.26%  65          $26.3         0.41%  69         $30.2         0.38%
Salads--Bulk
Bkfst Sausage-- 84           $3.8         0.25%  136          $9.8         0.15%  126        $13.6         0.17%
Fresh Patties
Meat: Chicken   85           $3.7         0.25%  47          $34.6         0.54%  55         $38.4         0.48%
Bulk
Bkfst Sausage-- 86           $3.7         0.25%  78          $21.4         0.33%  80         $25.2         0.32%
Precooked
Dnr Sausage--   87           $3.7         0.24%  120         $12.2         0.19%  115        $15.9         0.20%
Beef Rope Ckd/
Sm
Whole Hens      88           $3.6         0.24%  89          $19.0         0.30%  89         $22.6         0.29%
(Under 16lbs)
[Turkey]
Dnr Sausage--   89           $3.6         0.24%  76          $21.6         0.34%  81         $25.2         0.32%
Other Forms
External Fresh  90           $3.5         0.23%  204          $4.2         0.06%  169         $7.7         0.10%
[Pork Offal]
Corned Beef     91           $3.5         0.23%  99          $16.9         0.26%  98         $20.4         0.26%
Fz Meatballs    92           $3.5         0.23%  95          $17.7         0.28%  93         $21.1         0.27%
Hams--Half/     93           $3.4         0.23%  80          $21.0         0.33%  82         $24.5         0.31%
Port Boneless
Lunchmeat--Chi  94           $3.3         0.22%  138          $9.7         0.15%  130        $13.1         0.16%
p Meat
Salmon          95           $3.2         0.21%  108         $13.6         0.21%  113        $16.8         0.21%
Sandwich Sauce  96           $3.2         0.21%  156          $7.7         0.12%  146        $10.8         0.14%
Tilapia--Fille  97           $3.2         0.21%  101         $16.4         0.26%  103        $19.6         0.25%
t
Frozen Burgers  98           $3.2         0.21%  217          $3.1         0.05%  185         $6.3         0.08%
Frozen          99           $3.1         0.20%  135          $9.8         0.15%  132        $12.9         0.16%
Breakfast
Sausage
Stuffed/Mixed   100          $3.1         0.20%  88          $19.2         0.30%  90         $22.3         0.28%
Beef
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                $1,342.3        87.82%           $5,249.5        81.66%          $6,591.7        82.84%
Protein
Foods
Expenditure
s *
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total                  $1,512.2        98.95%           $6,288.8        97.83%          $7,801.0        98.04%
Protein
Foods
Expenditure
s Among Top
1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                $1,528.3          100%           $6,428.5          100%          $7,956.9          100%
Protein
Foods
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit D-6: Saturated Fats and Added Sugars (SoFAS)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
(SoFAS)                                     ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soft Drinks 12/ 1          $164.6        18.86%  1          $601.2        16.11%  1         $765.8        16.63%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Sft Drnk 2      2           $70.9         8.12%  2          $230.1         6.17%  2         $301.0         6.54%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Soft Drinks     3           $39.7         4.55%  9          $106.4         2.85%  8         $146.1         3.17%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Sugar           4           $36.9         4.23%  8          $112.7         3.02%  7         $149.6         3.25%
Sft Drnk Mlt-   5           $34.0         3.90%  4          $173.6         4.65%  3         $207.6         4.51%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Sft Drnk Sngl   6           $27.8         3.18%  11          $71.4         1.91%  11         $99.2         2.15%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Aseptic Pack    7           $24.2         2.78%  16          $57.1         1.53%  15         $81.4         1.77%
Juice And
Drinks
Refrigerated    8           $24.1         2.76%  6          $147.2         3.95%  5         $171.3         3.72%
Coffee
Creamers
Candy Bags--    9           $21.5         2.46%  5          $147.5         3.95%  6         $169.1         3.67%
Chocolate
Butter          10          $19.6         2.24%  3          $175.6         4.71%  4         $195.2         4.24%
Sour Creams     11          $17.5         2.00%  10          $95.2         2.55%  10        $112.7         2.45%
Cream Cheese    12          $17.2         1.97%  7          $115.5         3.10%  9         $132.7         2.88%
Candy Bars      13          $16.3         1.87%  18          $54.9         1.47%  16         $71.3         1.55%
(Singles)
(Including)
Dairy Case      14          $16.0         1.83%  22          $48.0         1.29%  19         $64.0         1.39%
Juice Drnk
Under 10
Candy Bars      15          $15.6         1.79%  12          $69.6         1.86%  12         $85.2         1.85%
(Multi Pack)
Tea Sweetened   16          $13.9         1.59%  13          $68.7         1.84%  13         $82.6         1.79%
Chewing Gum     17          $13.2         1.51%  14          $68.3         1.83%  14         $81.5         1.77%
Candy Bags--    18          $12.6         1.44%  19          $54.9         1.47%  18         $67.5         1.46%
Non Chocolate
Molasses &      19          $11.7         1.34%  15          $58.7         1.57%  17         $70.4         1.53%
Syrups
Dairy Case      20          $11.0         1.26%  27          $34.4         0.92%  26         $45.4         0.99%
Citrus Pnch/
Oj Subs
Fruit Drinks:   21          $10.6         1.21%  60          $10.9         0.29%  46         $21.5         0.47%
Canned &
Glass
Non Dairy       22          $10.5         1.20%  25          $35.4         0.95%  25         $45.9         1.00%
Creamer
Seasonal        23           $9.2         1.05%  23          $46.9         1.26%  23         $56.0         1.22%
Miscellaneous
[Candy]
Dairy Case Tea  24           $8.4         0.96%  36          $23.1         0.62%  33         $31.5         0.68%
With Sugar Or
S
Seasonal Candy  25           $7.9         0.90%  20          $54.8         1.47%  21         $62.7         1.36%
Bags--Chocola
te
Energy Drink--  26           $7.7         0.88%  32          $26.3         0.70%  29         $33.9         0.74%
Single Serve
Energy Drink--  27           $7.1         0.82%  24          $39.5         1.06%  24         $46.7         1.01%
Single Serve
(N)
Preserves/Jam/  28           $6.7         0.77%  17          $56.2         1.51%  20         $63.0         1.37%
Marmalade
Margarine       29           $6.7         0.77%  41          $22.3         0.60%  37         $29.0         0.63%
Stick
Juice (Under    30           $6.7         0.76%  40          $22.4         0.60%  36         $29.1         0.63%
10% Juice)
Sweeteners      31           $6.4         0.73%  21          $49.8         1.33%  22         $56.2         1.22%
Frosting        32           $6.3         0.72%  31          $27.0         0.72%  30         $33.4         0.72%
Soft Drinks     33           $5.9         0.67%  57          $11.5         0.31%  54         $17.4         0.38%
Can Non-Carb
(Exce)
Refrig Dips     34           $5.7         0.66%  34          $24.7         0.66%  34         $30.4         0.66%
Aseptic Pack    35           $5.3         0.61%  46          $17.5         0.47%  44         $22.9         0.50%
Juice And
Drinks
Candy Bars      36           $5.1         0.59%  50          $15.9         0.43%  48         $21.1         0.46%
(Singles)
(Including)
Cranberry       37           $5.0         0.58%  39          $22.6         0.61%  40         $27.6         0.60%
Juice (50%
And Under)
Frzn Whipped    38           $5.0         0.57%  28          $30.9         0.83%  28         $35.9         0.78%
Topping
Blended Juice   39           $4.8         0.55%  37          $22.9         0.61%  39         $27.7         0.60%
&
Combinations
(50)
Jelly           40           $4.7         0.54%  44          $18.1         0.48%  45         $22.8         0.50%
Energy Drink--  41           $4.3         0.49%  43          $19.0         0.51%  42         $23.3         0.51%
Multi-Pack
Honey           42           $4.1         0.48%  29          $28.9         0.78%  31         $33.1         0.72%
Gum (Packaged)  43           $4.1         0.47%  33          $25.9         0.69%  35         $30.0         0.65%
Soft Drinks     44           $4.1         0.47%  30          $27.8         0.74%  32         $31.9         0.69%
6pk Can Carb
(Exp)
Miscellaneous   45           $4.0         0.46%  42          $19.0         0.51%  43         $23.0         0.50%
Candy
(Including)
Juices          46           $3.8         0.44%  38          $22.8         0.61%  41         $26.6         0.58%
Superfoods/
Enhanced
Dairy Case      47           $3.7         0.42%  102          $2.8         0.08%  80          $6.5         0.14%
Fruit Drinks
(No Ju)
Aseptic Pack    48           $3.5         0.41%  87           $4.2         0.11%  72          $7.7         0.17%
Juice And
Drinks
Aerosol         49           $3.5         0.40%  35          $24.5         0.66%  38         $28.0         0.61%
Toppings
[Milk By-
Products]
Hot Chocolate/  50           $3.5         0.40%  45          $17.8         0.48%  47         $21.2         0.46%
Cocoa Mix
Seasonal Candy  51           $3.4         0.39%  47          $16.6         0.45%  49         $20.0         0.43%
Box--Chocolat
e
Sft Drnk 1      52           $3.3         0.38%  65           $8.2         0.22%  63         $11.5         0.25%
Liter Btl
Carb (Exc)
Fruit Drinks:   53           $3.2         0.37%  80           $5.0         0.13%  71          $8.2         0.18%
Canned &
Glass
Soft Drink      54           $3.1         0.36%  66           $7.9         0.21%  65         $11.1         0.24%
Canisters
Marshmallows    55           $3.0         0.34%  48          $16.4         0.44%  50         $19.4         0.42%
Whipping Cream  56           $3.0         0.34%  26          $35.2         0.94%  27         $38.1         0.83%
Solid           57           $2.9         0.33%  54          $14.0         0.38%  55         $16.9         0.37%
Shortening
Tea Can With    58           $2.7         0.31%  74           $6.1         0.16%  67          $8.8         0.19%
Sweetener/
Sugar
Soft Drink      59           $2.6         0.30%  83           $4.7         0.13%  76          $7.4         0.16%
Bottle Non-
Carb (Ex)
Ice Cream       60           $2.6         0.30%  53          $14.1         0.38%  56         $16.7         0.36%
Toppings
Seasonal Candy  61           $2.6         0.30%  52          $14.9         0.40%  53         $17.5         0.38%
Bags Non-
Chocol
Candy Bars      62           $2.6         0.29%  64           $8.8         0.23%  64         $11.3         0.25%
Multi Pack W/
Flour
Candy Bags--    63           $2.5         0.29%  51          $15.2         0.41%  52         $17.7         0.38%
Chocolate W/
Flour
Pork Skins/     64           $2.2         0.26%  73           $6.2         0.17%  68          $8.4         0.18%
Cracklins
Mints/Candy &   65           $2.1         0.25%  56          $12.1         0.32%  57         $14.3         0.31%
Breath (Not
Life)
Juices          66           $2.1         0.24%  59          $11.0         0.29%  60         $13.1         0.28%
Smoothies/
Blended
Miscellaneous   67           $1.9         0.22%  58          $11.2         0.30%  59         $13.1         0.28%
Candy
(Including)
Cocktail        68           $1.9         0.22%  49          $16.4         0.44%  51         $18.3         0.40%
Mixes--Fluid:
Add Liq
Cake Decors &   69           $1.8         0.20%  62          $10.0         0.27%  62         $11.7         0.25%
Icing
Enhanced Stick  70           $1.7         0.20%  61          $10.7         0.29%  61         $12.5         0.27%
[Powder Drink
Mix]
Novelty Candy   71           $1.6         0.19%  76           $5.7         0.15%  77          $7.4         0.16%
Sugar           72           $1.4         0.16%  104          $2.5         0.07%  96          $3.9         0.08%
Sweetened
Sticks
Dips Caramel/   73           $1.3         0.15%  75           $5.9         0.16%  78          $7.2         0.16%
Fruit Glazes
Seasonal        74           $1.2         0.14%  68           $7.1         0.19%  69          $8.4         0.18%
Miscellaneous
W/Flour
Instant Tea &   75           $1.1         0.13%  84           $4.4         0.12%  85          $5.6         0.12%
Tea Mix (W/
Sugar)
Misc Checklane  76           $1.1         0.13%  103          $2.6         0.07%  97          $3.7         0.08%
Candy
Fluid Pouch     77           $1.1         0.13%  71           $6.6         0.18%  73          $7.7         0.17%
[Powder Drink
Mix]
Sweet Goods:    78           $1.1         0.12%  85           $4.4         0.12%  87          $5.4         0.12%
Candy
Tea Bottles     79           $1.1         0.12%  114          $1.9         0.05%  105         $3.0         0.06%
With
Sweetener/Sug
Hispanic        80           $1.1         0.12%  93           $3.5         0.09%  92          $4.6         0.10%
Carbonated
Beverages
Candy W/O       81           $1.0         0.12%  78           $5.4         0.15%  81          $6.5         0.14%
Flour
Candy Boxed     82           $1.0         0.12%  79           $5.3         0.14%  83          $6.3         0.14%
Chocolates W/
Flour
Apple Juice &   83           $1.0         0.12%  98           $3.0         0.08%  95          $4.0         0.09%
Cider (50%
And U)
Energy Drink--  84           $1.0         0.11%  63           $9.4         0.25%  66         $10.4         0.22%
Multi-Pack
(Non)
Candy Boxed     85           $0.9         0.11%  70           $6.7         0.18%  74          $7.7         0.17%
Chocolates
Seasonal Candy  86           $0.9         0.11%  89           $4.0         0.11%  88          $4.9         0.11%
Box Non-
Chocola
Candy Box Non-- 87           $0.9         0.11%  90           $3.9         0.10%  89          $4.8         0.10%
Chocolate
Cake Decors--   88           $0.9         0.10%  77           $5.4         0.15%  82          $6.3         0.14%
Candies
Non-Carb Jce    89           $0.9         0.10%  82           $4.8         0.13%  84          $5.7         0.12%
(Under 50%
Jce)
Candy Bags--    90           $0.8         0.09%  91           $3.7         0.10%  93          $4.5         0.10%
Non Chocolate
W/Flo
Hispanic Juice  91           $0.7         0.08%  113          $2.0         0.07%  109         $2.7         0.05%
Under 50%
Juice
Can/Btl Carb    92           $0.7         0.08%  67           $7.6         0.20%  70          $8.3         0.18%
Beve 50% And
Unde
Cranapple/Cran  93           $0.6         0.07%  69           $7.0         0.19%  75          $7.6         0.17%
Grape Juice
(Un)
Grapefruit      94           $0.6         0.07%  96           $3.1         0.08%  98          $3.7         0.08%
Juice (50%
And Unde)
Blended Juice   95           $0.6         0.07%  97           $3.0         0.08%  100         $3.6         0.08%
&
Combinations
(Un)
Mixers (Tonic   96           $0.5         0.06%  55          $13.2         0.35%  58         $13.7         0.30%
Water/Gngr
Ale) Un
Marshmallow     97           $0.5         0.06%  92           $3.5         0.09%  94          $4.1         0.09%
Creme
Coconut         98           $0.5         0.06%  81           $4.9         0.13%  86          $5.5         0.12%
[Baking
Needs]
Honey/Syrup     99           $0.5         0.06%  86           $4.3         0.11%  90          $4.8         0.10%
Dips Fruit And  100          $0.5         0.06%  106          $1.9         0.05%  112         $2.4         0.04%
Chocolate
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                  $862.5        98.70%           $3,660.7        97.93%          $4,523.2        98.05%
SoFAS
Expenditure
s *
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total SoFAS              $864.1        98.96%           $3,673.1        98.42%          $4,537.3        98.53%
Expenditure
s Among Top
1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                  $873.2          100%           $3,731.9          100%          $4,605.0          100%
SoFAS
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit D-7: Vegetables
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Vegetable                                    ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Potatoes        1           $35.8         6.74%  1          $154.5         4.60%  1         $190.2         4.89%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Fz Bag          2           $25.7         4.85%  2          $131.9         3.93%  2         $157.7         4.05%
Vegetables--P
lain
Mainstream      3           $23.0         4.33%  6           $81.0         2.41%  5         $103.9         2.67%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Frzn French     4           $20.5         3.86%  19          $50.3         1.50%  9          $70.8         1.82%
Fries
Avocado         5           $13.4         2.52%  4          $112.6         3.35%  4         $126.0         3.24%
Blends [Salad   6           $13.1         2.47%  3          $124.0         3.69%  3         $137.1         3.52%
Mix]
Green Beans:    7           $12.8         2.41%  15          $53.1         1.58%  15         $65.9         1.69%
Fs/Whl/Cut
Potatoes: Dry   8           $12.3         2.31%  33          $32.3         0.96%  28         $44.6         1.15%
Corn            9           $12.1         2.28%  22          $44.0         1.31%  19         $56.0         1.44%
Head Lettuce    10          $11.6         2.18%  13          $55.5         1.65%  14         $67.1         1.72%
Frzn Steamable  11          $10.5         1.98%  5           $81.4         2.42%  6          $91.9         2.36%
Vegetables
Mexican Sauces  12          $10.2         1.93%  9           $62.3         1.85%  8          $72.5         1.86%
And Picante
Sau
Tomatoes Diced  13           $9.5         1.79%  11          $59.9         1.78%  11         $69.4         1.79%
Tomatoes        14           $9.2         1.74%  7           $77.7         2.31%  7          $86.9         2.23%
Hothouse On
The Vine
Onions Yellow   15           $8.7         1.65%  27          $39.3         1.17%  24         $48.1         1.24%
(Bulk & Bag)
Cucumbers       16           $8.2         1.55%  12          $58.9         1.75%  13         $67.1         1.73%
Vegetable       17           $7.8         1.48%  29          $36.6         1.09%  29         $44.4         1.14%
Salads--Prepa
ck
Peppers Green   18           $7.8         1.47%  25          $41.5         1.24%  22         $49.3         1.27%
Bell
Regular Garden  19           $7.8         1.46%  35          $31.9         0.95%  31         $39.6         1.02%
Roma Tomatoes   20           $7.5         1.41%  26          $39.6         1.18%  25         $47.1         1.21%
(Bulk/Pkg)
Carrots Mini    21           $7.0         1.32%  10          $61.4         1.83%  12         $68.5         1.76%
Peeled
Onions Sweet    22           $6.2         1.16%  20          $47.4         1.41%  21         $53.6         1.38%
(Bulk & Bag)
Celery          23           $5.9         1.11%  17          $51.2         1.52%  18         $57.1         1.47%
Tomatoes Vine   24           $5.7         1.07%  51          $22.5         0.67%  48         $28.2         0.72%
Ripe Bulk
Garden Plus     25           $5.5         1.03%  36          $31.8         0.95%  34         $37.2         0.96%
[Salad Mix]
Cabbage         26           $5.3         1.00%  43          $25.1         0.75%  43         $30.5         0.78%
Frzn Tater      27           $5.2         0.99%  55          $18.8         0.56%  53         $24.1         0.62%
Tots/Other
Extruded
Broccoli Whole  28           $5.2         0.97%  16          $52.0         1.55%  17         $57.1         1.47%
& Crowns
Tomato Sauce    29           $5.1         0.96%  48          $24.2         0.72%  45         $29.3         0.75%
Variety         30           $5.1         0.96%  8           $65.2         1.94%  10         $70.3         1.81%
Lettuce
Tomatoes Hot    31           $5.0         0.94%  39          $30.3         0.90%  37         $35.3         0.91%
House Bulk
Potatoes Sweet  32           $4.8         0.91%  28          $37.1         1.11%  30         $41.9         1.08%
& Yams
Tomatoes Grape  33           $4.7         0.88%  14          $54.6         1.63%  16         $59.3         1.52%
Mexican Beans/  34           $4.7         0.88%  52          $21.0         0.63%  51         $25.6         0.66%
Refried
Frzn Hashbrown  35           $4.6         0.86%  45          $24.8         0.74%  44         $29.3         0.75%
Potatoes
Corn Bulk       36           $4.5         0.85%  32          $32.5         0.97%  35         $37.1         0.95%
Fz Box          37           $4.4         0.83%  46          $24.7         0.73%  47         $29.1         0.75%
Vegetables--V
alue-Added
Kits [Salad     38           $4.2         0.79%  31          $33.5         1.00%  33         $37.6         0.97%
Mix]
Potatoes Red    39           $4.1         0.78%  34          $32.0         0.95%  36         $36.1         0.93%
(Bulk & Bag)
Frzn Corn On    40           $4.0         0.75%  94           $8.4         0.25%  83         $12.4         0.32%
The Cob
Vegetable       41           $4.0         0.75%  44          $25.1         0.75%  46         $29.1         0.75%
Party Tray
Cut Vegetables  42           $4.0         0.75%  24          $42.2         1.26%  26         $46.2         1.19%
All Other
Vegetable       43           $3.8         0.72%  37          $31.0         0.92%  38         $34.8         0.89%
Salads--Bulk
Veg Juice       44           $3.8         0.72%  38          $30.4         0.91%  39         $34.2         0.88%
(Except
Tomato) (Ove)
Asparagus       45           $3.8         0.72%  18          $50.7         1.51%  20         $54.5         1.40%
Tomatoes Vine   46           $3.6         0.68%  101          $7.3         0.22%  89         $10.9         0.28%
Ripe Pkg
Peppers Red     47           $3.6         0.68%  23          $42.5         1.27%  27         $46.1         1.19%
Bell
Value (Pasta    48           $3.5         0.67%  87           $9.7         0.29%  78         $13.2         0.34%
Tomato Sauce)
Peas/Green      49           $3.5         0.66%  64          $14.7         0.44%  61         $18.2         0.47%
Spinach &       50           $3.5         0.66%  103          $7.0         0.21%  92         $10.5         0.27%
Greens
Peppers Other   51           $3.4         0.63%  41          $28.4         0.85%  41         $31.8         0.82%
Bell
Mushrooms       52           $3.3         0.63%  42          $27.8         0.83%  42         $31.2         0.80%
White Sliced
Pkg
Shredded        53           $3.3         0.62%  81          $10.9         0.32%  75         $14.2         0.36%
Lettuce
Mushrooms       54           $3.1         0.58%  40          $29.6         0.88%  40         $32.7         0.84%
White Whole
Pkg
Green Onions    55           $3.0         0.57%  49          $23.5         0.70%  50         $26.5         0.68%
Salad Bowls     56           $2.9         0.54%  74          $12.3         0.37%  69         $15.2         0.39%
Fz Bag          57           $2.8         0.54%  65          $14.7         0.44%  63         $17.6         0.45%
Vegetables--V
alue-Added
Sal: Hommus     58           $2.8         0.52%  21          $45.4         1.35%  23         $48.2         1.24%
Mushrooms Cnd   59           $2.7         0.52%  67          $14.3         0.42%  64         $17.0         0.44%
& Glass
Mexican         60           $2.7         0.51%  69          $13.7         0.41%  66         $16.4         0.42%
Enchilada
Sauce
Onions Red      61           $2.5         0.48%  53          $20.9         0.62%  54         $23.5         0.60%
(Bulk & Bag)
Onions White    62           $2.5         0.47%  60          $15.8         0.47%  60         $18.3         0.47%
(Bulk & Bag)
Authentic       63           $2.3         0.43%  89           $9.2         0.27%  87         $11.5         0.30%
Sauces/Salsa/
Picante
Salad Mix       64           $2.3         0.43%  30          $36.5         1.09%  32         $38.8         1.00%
Blends
Organic
Salad: Lettuce  65           $2.2         0.42%  77          $12.2         0.36%  72         $14.5         0.37%
Cauliflower     66           $2.2         0.42%  47          $24.5         0.73%  49         $26.8         0.69%
Whole
Mushrooms       67           $2.2         0.42%  50          $22.6         0.67%  52         $24.8         0.64%
Portabella
Mexican         68           $2.2         0.41%  61          $15.7         0.47%  62         $17.9         0.46%
Peppers
Chilies
Fried Onions    69           $2.1         0.39%  75          $12.3         0.37%  73         $14.3         0.37%
Carrots Bagged  70           $2.0         0.39%  58          $17.2         0.51%  58         $19.2         0.49%
Potatoes        71           $2.0         0.38%  54          $20.3         0.60%  55         $22.3         0.57%
Gourmet
Sweet Potatoes  72           $2.0         0.38%  104          $6.7         0.20%  101         $8.7         0.22%
Corn Is         73           $1.9         0.36%  70          $12.8         0.38%  71         $14.7         0.38%
Packaged
Salad Spinach   74           $1.8         0.34%  57          $17.9         0.53%  57         $19.7         0.51%
Tomato Paste    75           $1.8         0.34%  83          $10.2         0.30%  84         $12.0         0.31%
Sal: Salsa/     76           $1.8         0.33%  98           $7.7         0.23%  95          $9.5         0.24%
Dips Bulk
Beans           77           $1.7         0.32%  59          $16.9         0.50%  59         $18.6         0.48%
Tomato Juice    78           $1.7         0.32%  88           $9.6         0.28%  88         $11.2         0.29%
(Over 50%
Jce)
Authentic       79           $1.7         0.32%  136          $3.2         0.10%  128         $4.9         0.13%
Vegetables
And Foods
Potatoes Gold   80           $1.6         0.29%  63          $14.8         0.44%  65         $16.4         0.42%
(Bulk & Bag)
Garlic Whole    81           $1.6         0.29%  71          $12.7         0.38%  74         $14.3         0.37%
Cloves
Coleslaw        82           $1.6         0.29%  79          $11.9         0.35%  77         $13.5         0.35%
Carrots Bagged  83           $1.5         0.29%  56          $18.6         0.55%  56         $20.2         0.52%
Organic
Pumpkins        84           $1.5         0.29%  82          $10.3         0.31%  85         $11.9         0.31%
Herbs Cilanto   85           $1.4         0.26%  84          $10.1         0.30%  86         $11.5         0.30%
Frzn Baked/     86           $1.3         0.25%  91           $9.0         0.27%  93         $10.4         0.27%
Stuffed/
Mashed & Spec
Broccoli/       87           $1.3         0.25%  72          $12.5         0.37%  76         $13.8         0.36%
Cauliflower
Processed
Mixed           88           $1.3         0.24%  124          $4.5         0.13%  119         $5.8         0.15%
Vegetables
Authentic       89           $1.3         0.24%  125          $4.5         0.13%  120         $5.7         0.15%
Peppers
Sal: Salsa      90           $1.3         0.24%  68          $13.7         0.41%  70         $15.0         0.38%
Prepack
Carrots         91           $1.1         0.21%  123          $4.5         0.14%  121         $5.7         0.15%
Peppers Yellow  92           $1.1         0.21%  80          $11.4         0.34%  82         $12.5         0.32%
Bell
Pizza Sauce     93           $1.1         0.21%  110          $6.1         0.18%  107         $7.2         0.18%
Garlic Jar      94           $1.1         0.21%  97           $7.7         0.23%  99          $8.8         0.23%
Peppers         95           $1.0         0.19%  126          $4.4         0.13%  125         $5.5         0.14%
Jalapeno
Tomatoes        96           $1.0         0.19%  78          $12.1         0.36%  80         $13.1         0.34%
Cherry
Instore Cut     97           $1.0         0.19%  86           $9.7         0.29%  91         $10.7         0.28%
Vegetables
Tomato Stewed   98           $1.0         0.19%  108          $6.4         0.19%  105         $7.4         0.19%
White Potatoes  99           $1.0         0.18%  128          $4.3         0.13%  127         $5.2         0.13%
Sauerkraut and  100          $0.9         0.17%  111          $6.0         0.18%  109         $6.9         0.18%
Cabbage
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                  $500.7        94.36%           $3,035.6        90.37%          $3,536.4        90.91%
Vegetable
Expenditure
s *
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total                    $520.5        98.08%           $3,251.8        96.80%          $3,772.3        96.97%
Vegetable
Expenditure
s Among Top
1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                  $530.7          100%           $3,359.3          100%          $3,890.0          100%
Vegetable
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit D-8: Composite Foods
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Composite                                    ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Potato Chips    1           $64.4         5.19%  2          $253.2         4.88%  1         $317.6         4.94%
Snacks/         2           $44.6         3.59%  10         $100.5         1.94%  7         $145.0         2.26%
Appetizers
Fz Ss Prem      3           $43.8         3.53%  4          $175.4         3.38%  4         $219.3         3.41%
Traditional
Meals
Snack Cake--    4           $41.6         3.36%  9          $101.7         1.96%  9         $143.3         2.23%
Multi Pack
Fz Ss Economy   5           $40.9         3.30%  15          $80.7         1.56%  11        $121.6         1.89%
Meals All
Pizza/Premium   6           $39.7         3.20%  6          $153.3         2.95%  5         $193.0         3.00%
Sandwiches &    7           $35.9         2.89%  17          $73.6         1.42%  13        $109.4         1.70%
Handhelds
Convenient      8           $34.2         2.76%  19          $69.7         1.34%  14        $104.0         1.62%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Premium [Ice    9           $31.2         2.52%  3          $226.0         4.35%  3         $257.2         4.00%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Condensed Soup  10          $29.7         2.39%  5          $153.6         2.96%  6         $183.2         2.85%
Fz Family       11          $27.6         2.23%  13          $83.5         1.61%  12        $111.1         1.73%
Style Entrees
Traditional     12          $25.6         2.07%  8          $118.7         2.29%  8         $144.4         2.25%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Fz Ss Prem      13          $24.7         1.99%  1          $271.6         5.23%  2         $296.3         4.61%
Nutritional
Meals
Macaroni &      14          $24.3         1.96%  24          $59.7         1.15%  21         $84.0         1.31%
Cheese Dnrs
Can Pasta       15          $22.2         1.79%  36          $47.7         0.92%  29         $69.9         1.09%
Mult Pk Bag     16          $21.6         1.74%  38          $43.4         0.84%  32         $65.0         1.01%
Snacks
Sw Gds: Donuts  17          $21.3         1.72%  14          $82.3         1.58%  15        $103.6         1.61%
Pizza/Economy   18          $19.8         1.60%  37          $45.1         0.87%  33         $65.0         1.01%
Frzn Breakfast  19          $19.1         1.54%  29          $55.7         1.07%  23         $74.8         1.16%
Sandwiches
Fz Skillet      20          $18.8         1.51%  16          $79.3         1.53%  17         $98.1         1.53%
Meals
Cakes:          21          $18.6         1.50%  33          $50.3         0.97%  31         $68.9         1.07%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Sandwich        22          $18.0         1.45%  18          $71.8         1.38%  19         $89.8         1.40%
Cookies
Pizza/          23          $17.9         1.44%  22          $64.1         1.24%  22         $82.0         1.27%
Traditional
Rts Soup:       24          $17.6         1.42%  7          $119.9         2.31%  10        $137.5         2.14%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Salsa & Dips    25          $17.1         1.38%  28          $57.0         1.10%  24         $74.1         1.15%
Sandwiches--(C  26          $16.9         1.36%  20          $67.7         1.30%  20         $84.6         1.32%
old)
Sweet Goods--   27          $15.8         1.28%  27          $57.9         1.12%  26         $73.8         1.15%
Full Size
Tray Pack/Choc  28          $15.3         1.23%  31          $53.9         1.04%  30         $69.2         1.08%
Chip Cookies
Sticks/Enrobed  29          $14.2         1.14%  25          $59.7         1.15%  25         $73.9         1.15%
[Frozen
Novelties]
Water Ice       30          $14.0         1.13%  32          $50.6         0.97%  34         $64.6         1.00%
[Frozen
Novelties]
Pails [Ice      31          $13.9         1.12%  46          $35.1         0.68%  41         $49.1         0.76%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Skillet         32          $13.0         1.05%  57          $25.8         0.50%  49         $38.9         0.60%
Dinners
Pizza/Single    33          $12.8         1.03%  39          $43.2         0.83%  38         $56.0         0.87%
Serve/
Microwave
Super Premium   34          $11.8         0.95%  11          $91.1         1.76%  16        $103.0         1.60%
Pints [Ice
Cream &
Sherbert]
Cakes:          35          $11.1         0.89%  45          $35.3         0.68%  43         $46.3         0.72%
Cupcakes
Corn Dogs       36          $10.9         0.88%  68          $20.6         0.40%  59         $31.5         0.49%
Cookies:        37          $10.8         0.87%  26          $59.6         1.15%  28         $70.4         1.09%
Regular
Burritos        38          $10.2         0.82%  69          $20.0         0.39%  61         $30.1         0.47%
Microwave       39           $9.8         0.79%  40          $39.9         0.77%  40         $49.8         0.77%
Dinners
Cakes: Layers   40           $9.8         0.79%  42          $38.2         0.74%  42         $48.1         0.75%
Sushi--In       41           $9.2         0.74%  12          $85.4         1.64%  18         $94.6         1.47%
Store
Prepared
Canister        42           $9.1         0.73%  44          $36.4         0.70%  45         $45.5         0.71%
Snacks
Pudding &       43           $8.7         0.70%  53          $27.6         0.53%  51         $36.3         0.56%
Gelatin Cups/
Cans
Salty Snacks    44           $8.4         0.67%  80          $15.8         0.31%  67         $24.2         0.38%
Vending
Cones [Frozen   45           $7.9         0.64%  50          $31.2         0.60%  48         $39.2         0.61%
Novelties]
Vanilla Wafer/  46           $7.5         0.60%  43          $36.7         0.71%  46         $44.2         0.69%
Kids Cookies
Ice Cream       47           $7.4         0.60%  60          $24.2         0.47%  58         $31.6         0.49%
Sandwiches
Cakes: Creme/   48           $7.4         0.59%  58          $25.8         0.50%  54         $33.2         0.52%
Pudding
Refrigerated    49           $7.0         0.57%  34          $49.5         0.95%  37         $56.5         0.88%
Pudding
Layer Cake Mix  50           $7.0         0.56%  47          $35.1         0.68%  47         $42.1         0.65%
Refrigerated    51           $6.8         0.55%  51          $28.8         0.56%  53         $35.6         0.55%
Cookies--Bran
d
Broth           52           $6.7         0.54%  21          $65.6         1.26%  27         $72.3         1.12%
Pies: Fruit/    53           $6.3         0.51%  41          $39.6         0.76%  44         $45.9         0.71%
Nut
Snack Cake--    54           $5.7         0.46%  77          $16.2         0.31%  74         $22.0         0.34%
Single Serve
Better For You  55           $5.6         0.45%  35          $48.1         0.93%  39         $53.7         0.84%
Snacks
Cookies:        56           $5.5         0.44%  56          $26.8         0.52%  56         $32.2         0.50%
Holiday/
Special Occas
Misc Bag        57           $5.5         0.44%  98          $11.5         0.22%  83         $17.0         0.26%
Snacks
Frozen Fruit    58           $5.3         0.43%  62          $23.7         0.46%  62         $28.9         0.45%
Pies &
Cobblers
Frozen Cream    59           $4.9         0.39%  71          $18.9         0.36%  69         $23.8         0.37%
Pies
Sw Gds: Sw      60           $4.8         0.39%  55          $26.9         0.52%  57         $31.7         0.49%
Rolls/Dan
Brownie Mix     61           $4.8         0.39%  54          $27.5         0.53%  55         $32.3         0.50%
Fz Meal Kits/   62           $4.8         0.38%  96          $12.2         0.23%  84         $16.9         0.26%
Stuffed/Other
Sw Gds:         63           $4.5         0.36%  48          $31.8         0.61%  50         $36.3         0.57%
Muffins
Frzn Breakfast  64           $4.5         0.36%  78          $16.2         0.31%  78         $20.7         0.32%
Entrees
Convenient      65           $4.5         0.36%  102         $11.2         0.22%  92         $15.7         0.24%
Meals--Adult
Meal
Dry Beans/Peas/ 66           $4.2         0.34%  72          $18.8         0.36%  71         $23.1         0.36%
Barley: Bag &
B
Adult Premium   67           $4.2         0.34%  30          $54.5         1.05%  36         $58.7         0.91%
[Frozen
Novelties]
Mexican         68           $4.2         0.34%  100         $11.4         0.22%  93         $15.6         0.24%
Dinners And
Foods
Premium         69           $4.2         0.33%  49          $31.5         0.61%  52         $35.7         0.55%
Cookies (Ex:
Pepperidg)
Chocolate       70           $4.0         0.32%  73          $18.5         0.36%  73         $22.5         0.35%
Covered
Cookies
Microwavable    71           $3.7         0.29%  116          $9.0         0.17%  106        $12.7         0.20%
Cups
Cakes:          72           $3.6         0.29%  84          $14.7         0.28%  81         $18.3         0.28%
Cheesecake
Deli Tray:      73           $3.5         0.28%  65          $21.5         0.41%  66         $25.0         0.39%
Meat And
Cheese
Dry Soup        74           $3.5         0.28%  63          $23.3         0.45%  64         $26.8         0.42%
Treats          75           $3.5         0.28%  103         $11.2         0.22%  95         $14.6         0.23%
Fitness &       76           $3.4         0.28%  23          $59.8         1.15%  35         $63.2         0.98%
Diet--Bars W/
Flour
Refrigerated    77           $3.4         0.28%  90          $12.9         0.25%  89         $16.3         0.25%
Cookie Dough
Cakes: Fancy/   78           $3.3         0.27%  76          $17.4         0.34%  77         $20.7         0.32%
Service Case
Package         79           $3.3         0.26%  112          $9.5         0.18%  105        $12.7         0.20%
Dinners/Pasta
Salads
Cakes: Layers/  80           $3.3         0.26%  94          $12.5         0.24%  91         $15.8         0.25%
Sheets
Novelties
Pies: Pumpkin/  81           $3.2         0.26%  89          $13.1         0.25%  87         $16.3         0.25%
Custard
Puddings Dry    82           $3.2         0.26%  67          $20.8         0.40%  68         $23.9         0.37%
Vendor Size/    83           $3.1         0.25%  126          $6.8         0.13%  120         $9.9         0.15%
Single Serve
Cooki
Snack Mix       84           $3.0         0.24%  75          $17.5         0.34%  79         $20.5         0.32%
Multi-Pack      85           $2.9         0.23%  99          $11.4         0.22%  96         $14.3         0.22%
Cookies
Cups/Push Ups/  86           $2.8         0.23%  110          $9.6         0.18%  108        $12.4         0.19%
Other
Frzn Pie        87           $2.7         0.22%  79          $16.0         0.31%  80         $18.7         0.29%
Shells/Pastry
Shell/F
Frozen Cakes/   88           $2.7         0.22%  105         $11.0         0.21%  101        $13.7         0.21%
Desserts
Cakes: Angel    89           $2.7         0.22%  74          $18.1         0.35%  76         $20.8         0.32%
Fds/Cke Rolls
Wellness/       90           $2.7         0.22%  61          $23.8         0.46%  65         $26.5         0.41%
Portion
Control
Pie Filling/    91           $2.7         0.22%  59          $24.8         0.48%  63         $27.5         0.43%
Mincemeat/
Glazes
Misc Snacks     92           $2.6         0.21%  87          $13.2         0.25%  90         $15.8         0.25%
Cakes: Ice      93           $2.6         0.21%  120          $8.6         0.17%  113        $11.2         0.17%
Cream
Sushi--Prepack  94           $2.6         0.21%  70          $19.2         0.37%  75         $21.8         0.34%
aged
Cakes:          95           $2.5         0.20%  114          $9.1         0.18%  110        $11.6         0.18%
Birthday/
Celebration
Lay
Sw Gds: Swt/    96           $2.4         0.20%  85          $13.9         0.27%  88         $16.3         0.25%
Flvrd Loaves
Cakes: Sheet    97           $2.4         0.19%  124          $7.2         0.14%  121         $9.6         0.15%
Cookies:        98           $2.4         0.19%  66          $20.8         0.40%  70         $23.2         0.36%
Gourmet
Premium Pints   99           $2.3         0.18%  128          $6.5         0.13%  125         $8.8         0.14%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Sw Gds:         100          $1.9         0.15%  104         $11.2         0.22%  104        $13.1         0.20%
Brownie/Bar
Cookie
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                $1,179.3        95.05%           $4,717.8        90.90%          $5,897.1        91.70%
Composite
Expenditure
s *
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total                  $1,235.4        99.57%           $5,132.0        98.88%          $6,367.4        99.01%
Composite
Expenditure
s Among Top
1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                $1,240.7          100%           $5,190.0          100%          $6,430.7          100%
Composite
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit D-9: Other Subcommodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
---------------------------------           Expenditures          -------------------------------
Other                                      ---------------------------------
Subcommodity    Rank      $ in        % of                 $ in        % of       Rank     $ in        % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank    millions  Expenditures          millions  Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Infant Formula  1           $54.2         9.60%  14          $45.3         1.70%  6          $99.5         3.07%
Starter/
Solution
Still Water     2           $48.8         8.64%  2          $187.7         7.03%  2         $236.5         7.31%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Unflavored Can  3           $41.3         7.32%  1          $198.0         7.41%  1         $239.3         7.39%
Coffee
Isotonic        4           $30.5         5.40%  4          $119.5         4.47%  3         $150.0         4.63%
Drinks Single
Serve
Spring Water    5           $16.2         2.87%  5           $95.6         3.58%  5         $111.8         3.45%
Traditional     6           $14.1         2.49%  8           $61.2         2.29%  7          $75.2         2.32%
Spices
Bbq Sauce       7           $12.3         2.17%  16          $38.6         1.45%  16         $50.9         1.57%
Baby Food--     8           $11.7         2.07%  21          $28.1         1.05%  18         $39.8         1.23%
Beginner
Non-Carb Water  9           $11.6         2.05%  7           $63.4         2.37%  8          $74.9         2.32%
Flvr--Drnk/
Mnr
Catsup          10          $11.5         2.03%  15          $41.5         1.55%  15         $53.0         1.64%
Sauce Mixes/    11          $11.5         2.03%  13          $46.7         1.75%  12         $58.2         1.80%
Gravy Mixes
Dry
Baby Food       12          $11.2         1.98%  22          $27.5         1.03%  19         $38.7         1.20%
Junior/All
Brands
Isotonic        13          $10.8         1.92%  9           $58.1         2.17%  10         $68.9         2.13%
Drinks Multi-
Pack
Ice--Crushed/   14           $9.3         1.65%  11          $49.9         1.87%  11         $59.2         1.83%
Cubed
Unflavored Bag  15           $8.5         1.50%  3          $137.3         5.14%  4         $145.8         4.50%
Coffee
Infant Formula  16           $8.4         1.49%  71           $9.1         0.34%  47         $17.5         0.54%
Specialty
Infant Formula  17           $8.3         1.46%  30          $22.8         0.85%  27         $31.0         0.96%
Starter Large
P
Steak &         18           $8.2         1.44%  25          $26.7         1.00%  21         $34.9         1.08%
Worchester
Sauce
Unflavored      19           $7.6         1.34%  23          $27.3         1.02%  22         $34.8         1.08%
Instant
Coffee
Non-Dairy       20           $7.1         1.25%  6           $67.7         2.53%  9          $74.8         2.31%
Milks
Unsweetened     21           $7.0         1.25%  88           $6.2         0.23%  61         $13.3         0.41%
Envelope
[Powder Drink
Mix]
Malted Mlk/     22           $6.9         1.23%  28          $25.3         0.95%  26         $32.2         1.00%
Syrup/Pwdrs
(Eggnog)
Still Water     23           $6.3         1.11%  17          $38.1         1.43%  17         $44.4         1.37%
Flvrd Drnk/
Mnrl Wt
Infant Formula  24           $6.0         1.06%  55          $12.4         0.46%  45         $18.4         0.57%
Toddler
Mexican         25           $5.9         1.05%  33          $20.6         0.77%  32         $26.5         0.82%
Seasoning
Mixes
Hot Sauce       26           $5.8         1.03%  42          $16.4         0.61%  38         $22.2         0.69%
Ready To Drink  27           $5.5         0.98%  34          $20.5         0.77%  33         $26.0         0.80%
Coffee
Tea Bags &      28           $5.4         0.95%  24          $27.2         1.02%  25         $32.5         1.01%
Bulk Tea
Infant Formula  29           $5.3         0.95%  47          $15.2         0.57%  42         $20.5         0.63%
Solutions
Large
Stuffing Mixes  30           $5.3         0.94%  31          $22.1         0.83%  30         $27.4         0.85%
Infant Formula  31           $4.9         0.86%  111          $3.9         0.15%  82          $8.8         0.27%
Concentrate
Salad Bar       32           $4.5         0.81%  41          $18.2         0.68%  36         $22.8         0.70%
Other
Bits & Morsels  33           $4.4         0.77%  10          $50.3         1.88%  13         $54.7         1.69%
[Baking
Needs]
Ripe Olives     34           $4.1         0.73%  27          $25.3         0.95%  28         $29.5         0.91%
Gravy Can/      35           $4.0         0.72%  44          $15.7         0.59%  44         $19.8         0.61%
Glass
Marinades       36           $3.9         0.70%  39          $18.4         0.69%  37         $22.4         0.69%
Baby Food       37           $3.8         0.67%  82           $7.1         0.27%  70         $10.9         0.34%
Cereals
Diet Cntrl      38           $3.7         0.66%  20          $30.3         1.13%  24         $34.0         1.05%
Liqs
Nutritional
Enhancements--  39           $3.6         0.64%  36          $19.8         0.74%  35         $23.4         0.72%
Pickles/Kraut
Infant Formula  40           $3.5         0.61%  85           $6.9         0.26%  72         $10.4         0.32%
Ready To Use
Sugar Free      41           $3.5         0.61%  32          $21.1         0.79%  34         $24.5         0.76%
Canister
[Powder Drink
Mix]
Coffee Pods/    42           $3.4         0.60%  12          $49.8         1.87%  14         $53.2         1.65%
Singles/
Filter Pac
Sugar Free      43           $3.3         0.58%  38          $18.8         0.70%  39         $22.1         0.68%
Sticks
[Powder Drink
Mix]
Sparkling       44           $3.1         0.55%  29          $24.1         0.90%  31         $27.2         0.84%
Water--Flvrd
Sweet
Tea Bags/       45           $3.1         0.54%  19          $31.2         1.17%  23         $34.3         1.06%
Herbal
Yellow Mustard  46           $3.0         0.53%  56          $12.4         0.46%  55         $15.4         0.48%
Asian Other     47           $2.8         0.50%  37          $18.9         0.71%  40         $21.8         0.67%
Sauces/
Marinad
Peppers         48           $2.7         0.48%  52          $13.5         0.50%  53         $16.2         0.50%
Mexican Taco    49           $2.6         0.47%  84           $7.0         0.26%  76          $9.7         0.30%
Sauce
Green Olives    50           $2.6         0.46%  43          $15.8         0.59%  46         $18.3         0.57%
Relishes        51           $2.5         0.44%  60          $11.6         0.43%  57         $14.1         0.44%
Flavored Bag    52           $2.4         0.42%  26          $26.2         0.98%  29         $28.6         0.88%
Coffee
Gourmet Spices  53           $2.4         0.42%  18          $33.2         1.24%  20         $35.6         1.10%
Baby Juices     54           $2.3         0.40%  118          $3.1         0.11%  105         $5.3         0.16%
Dry Salad       55           $2.0         0.35%  48          $15.1         0.57%  49         $17.1         0.53%
Dressing &
Dip Mixes
Mustard--All    56           $2.0         0.35%  40          $18.3         0.69%  43         $20.3         0.63%
Other
Gelatin         57           $2.0         0.35%  51          $14.3         0.54%  52         $16.3         0.50%
Vinegar/White   58           $1.9         0.34%  50          $14.4         0.54%  51         $16.3         0.50%
& Cider
Baby Isotonic   59           $1.9         0.33%  101          $4.9         0.18%  92          $6.8         0.21%
Drinks
Wing Sauce      60           $1.8         0.33%  100          $5.0         0.19%  91          $6.8         0.21%
Pure Extracts   61           $1.7         0.31%  46          $15.4         0.58%  48         $17.2         0.53%
Infant Formula  62           $1.7         0.31%  161          $1.1         0.04%  135         $2.8         0.09%
Soy Base
Juices          63           $1.7         0.30%  66          $10.1         0.38%  64         $11.8         0.36%
Proteins
Sal: Dip        64           $1.7         0.30%  59          $12.1         0.45%  58         $13.8         0.43%
Prepack
Diet Energy     65           $1.7         0.30%  54          $12.8         0.48%  56         $14.5         0.45%
Drinks
Baby Spring     66           $1.7         0.30%  138          $2.0         0.07%  119         $3.7         0.11%
Waters
Frozen          67           $1.6         0.28%  86           $6.7         0.25%  83          $8.3         0.26%
Internaional
Table Salt/     68           $1.6         0.28%  72           $8.6         0.32%  73         $10.2         0.31%
Popcorn Salt/
Ice Cr
Distilled       69           $1.6         0.28%  57          $12.2         0.46%  59         $13.7         0.42%
Water
Enhancements--  70           $1.5         0.26%  99           $5.2         0.19%  95          $6.6         0.21%
Salads/
Spreads
Asian Soy       71           $1.5         0.26%  64          $10.3         0.39%  66         $11.7         0.36%
Sauce
Central         72           $1.4         0.25%  94           $5.5         0.21%  90          $6.9         0.21%
American
Foods
Misc Dairy      73           $1.4         0.25%  70           $9.1         0.34%  71         $10.5         0.32%
Refigerated
Diet Cntrl      74           $1.4         0.24%  35          $19.9         0.74%  41         $21.3         0.66%
Bars
Nutritional
Tea Bags/Green  75           $1.2         0.22%  61          $11.2         0.42%  63         $12.5         0.38%
Flours/Grains/  76           $1.2         0.22%  49          $14.6         0.55%  54         $15.9         0.49%
Sugar
Specialty       77           $1.2         0.22%  77           $7.7         0.29%  81          $8.9         0.27%
Instant
Coffee W/Swe
Misc Hispanic   78           $1.2         0.21%  65          $10.2         0.38%  67         $11.4         0.35%
Grocery
Baking Powder   79           $1.1         0.20%  75           $8.2         0.31%  77          $9.4         0.29%
& Soda
Isotonic        80           $1.1         0.19%  103          $4.7         0.18%  103         $5.7         0.18%
Drinks Multi-
Serve
Juices          81           $1.0         0.19%  76           $8.1         0.30%  78          $9.2         0.28%
Antioxidant/
Wellness
Spices &        82           $1.0         0.19%  104          $4.6         0.17%  104         $5.7         0.17%
Seasonings
Infant Formula  83           $1.0         0.18%  119          $3.0         0.11%  117         $4.1         0.13%
Up Age
Oils/Vinegar    84           $1.0         0.18%  67          $10.0         0.37%  69         $11.0         0.34%
Miscellaneous   85           $1.0         0.18%  80           $7.2         0.27%  84          $8.2         0.25%
Package Mixes
Sal: Olives/    86           $1.0         0.18%  45          $15.5         0.58%  50         $16.5         0.51%
Pickles--Bulk
Cooking Bags    87           $1.0         0.17%  132          $2.4         0.09%  124         $3.4         0.10%
With Spices/
Seaso
Cooking         88           $0.9         0.16%  63          $10.3         0.39%  68         $11.2         0.35%
Chocolate
(Ex: Smi-Swt)
Tea Bags        89           $0.9         0.15%  69           $9.2         0.34%  74         $10.0         0.31%
(Supplement)
Specialty       90           $0.8         0.15%  53          $12.9         0.48%  60         $13.7         0.42%
Vinegar
Traditional     91           $0.8         0.14%  74           $8.3         0.31%  80          $9.1         0.28%
Thai Foods
Pickld Veg/     92           $0.8         0.14%  91           $5.9         0.22%  94          $6.7         0.21%
Peppers/Etc.
Specialty       93           $0.8         0.14%  62          $11.0         0.41%  65         $11.7         0.36%
Olives
Authentic       94           $0.8         0.14%  81           $7.1         0.27%  86          $7.9         0.24%
Japanese
Foods
Chili Sauce/    95           $0.7         0.13%  89           $6.0         0.22%  93          $6.7         0.21%
Cocktail
Sauce
Flavored Can    96           $0.7         0.13%  92           $5.8         0.22%  96          $6.5         0.20%
Coffee
Fortified/      97           $0.7         0.13%  108          $4.4         0.17%  107         $5.1         0.16%
Water
Sparkling       98           $0.7         0.12%  58          $12.1         0.45%  62         $12.8         0.40%
Water--Unflav
ored
Fitness &       99           $0.7         0.12%  78           $7.3         0.27%  85          $8.0         0.25%
Diet--Powder
Ntrtnl
Imitation       100          $0.7         0.12%  115          $3.5         0.13%  116         $4.2         0.13%
Extracts
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                  $540.1        95.68%           $2,453.1        91.80%          $2,993.1        92.48%
Other
Expenditure
s *
-------------------------        --------------------------------------------------------
Total Other              $550.7        97.56%           $2,533.2        94.80%          $3,083.9        95.28%
Expenditure
s Among Top
1,000
Subcommodit
ies
=========================        ========================================================
Total                  $564.5          100%           $2,672.1          100%          $3,236.6          100%
Other
Expenditu
res Among
1,792
Subcommod
ities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Appendix E. Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure
by Demographic and Store Characteristics

Exhibit E-1: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Household Head Age 19-44 Year Olds
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $30.7         0.47%  1          $143.7         0.46%  1          $174.3         0.46%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $25.1         0.38%  2           $95.9         0.30%  2          $121.0         0.32%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $17.2         0.26%  8           $42.7         0.14%  5           $59.9         0.16%
Kids Cereal     4          $13.8         0.21%  5           $44.6         0.14%  6           $58.4         0.15%
Shredded        5          $13.0         0.20%  3           $67.1         0.21%  3           $80.1         0.21%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      6          $11.3         0.17%  13          $39.1         0.12%  8           $50.5         0.13%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    7          $10.1         0.15%  11          $39.4         0.13%  9           $49.5         0.13%
Primal [Beef]   8          $10.0         0.15%  16          $35.6         0.11%  14          $45.5         0.12%
Infant Formula  9           $9.8         0.15%  150          $9.2         0.03%  73          $19.0         0.05%
Starter/
Solutio
Lunchment--Del  10          $8.9         0.14%  6           $43.0         0.14%  7           $51.9         0.14%
i Fresh
Chicken Breast  11          $8.4         0.13%  4           $54.2         0.17%  4           $62.5         0.16%
Boneless
Tortilla/Nacho  12          $8.2         0.13%  10          $41.1         0.13%  10          $49.3         0.13%
Chips
Eggs--Large     13          $7.8         0.12%  12          $39.4         0.13%  12          $47.2         0.12%
Snacks/         14          $7.7         0.12%  45          $20.6         0.07%  32          $28.3         0.07%
Appetizers
Still Water     15          $7.6         0.12%  20          $30.5         0.10%  18          $38.1         0.10%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Mainstream      16          $7.4         0.11%  31          $23.4         0.07%  25          $30.8         0.08%
White Bread
American        17          $7.0         0.11%  34          $22.8         0.07%  26          $29.8         0.08%
Single Cheese
Dairy Case      18          $6.8         0.10%  9           $41.4         0.13%  11          $48.2         0.13%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Enhanced [Pork  19          $6.6         0.10%  24          $27.1         0.09%  23          $33.6         0.09%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Pizza/Premium   20          $6.5         0.10%  22          $28.2         0.09%  20          $34.8         0.09%
Snack Cake--    21          $6.5         0.10%  57          $18.9         0.06%  40          $25.5         0.07%
Multi Pack
Fz Ss Economy   22          $6.3         0.10%  90          $13.6         0.04%  72          $19.9         0.05%
Meals All
Convenient      23          $6.2         0.09%  48          $20.3         0.06%  38          $26.6         0.07%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
All Family      24          $6.2         0.09%  14          $37.6         0.12%  15          $43.8         0.11%
Cereal
Fz Ss Prem      25          $6.1         0.09%  52          $19.7         0.06%  39          $25.8         0.07%
Traditional
Meals
Sandwiches &    26          $6.0         0.09%  77          $14.9         0.05%  64          $20.9         0.05%
Handhelds
Soft Drinks     27          $6.0         0.09%  61          $17.9         0.06%  48          $23.9         0.06%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Bacon--Trad     28          $6.0         0.09%  30          $23.5         0.07%  29          $29.4         0.08%
16oz Or Less
Mainstream      29          $5.8         0.09%  23          $28.0         0.09%  22          $33.8         0.09%
Variety
Breads
Sugar           30          $5.6         0.09%  62          $17.9         0.06%  50          $23.5         0.06%
Natural Cheese  31          $5.6         0.08%  17          $34.5         0.11%  17          $40.1         0.11%
Chunks
Unflavored Can  32          $5.5         0.08%  32          $23.3         0.07%  30          $28.8         0.08%
Coffee
Frzn Chicken--  33          $5.4         0.08%  51          $19.9         0.06%  42          $25.2         0.07%
Wht Meat
Potatoes        34          $5.3         0.08%  37          $22.4         0.07%  35          $27.7         0.07%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Bananas         35          $5.2         0.08%  15          $37.0         0.12%  16          $42.2         0.11%
Isotonic        36          $5.1         0.08%  33          $22.9         0.07%  34          $28.0         0.07%
Drinks Single
Serve
Ribs [Pork]     37          $5.1         0.08%  78          $14.8         0.05%  71          $19.9         0.05%
Sft Drnk Mlt-   38          $5.0         0.08%  35          $22.6         0.07%  36          $27.6         0.07%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Premium [Ice    39          $4.7         0.07%  18          $32.9         0.10%  19          $37.6         0.10%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Sft Drnk Sngl   40          $4.7         0.07%  89          $13.7         0.04%  77          $18.4         0.05%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Pourable Salad  41          $4.7         0.07%  36          $22.4         0.07%  37          $27.1         0.07%
Dressings
Condensed Soup  42          $4.6         0.07%  29          $24.0         0.08%  31          $28.6         0.08%
Choice Beef     43          $4.5         0.07%  86          $14.0         0.04%  76          $18.5         0.05%
Fz Family       44          $4.5         0.07%  82          $14.3         0.05%  74          $18.8         0.05%
Style Entrees
Aseptic Pack    45          $4.4         0.07%  66          $16.9         0.05%  61          $21.3         0.06%
Juice And
Drinks
Select Beef     46          $4.3         0.06%  46          $20.5         0.07%  45          $24.8         0.07%
Macaroni &      47          $4.2         0.06%  92          $13.5         0.04%  82          $17.7         0.05%
Cheese Dnrs
Choice Beef     48          $4.1         0.06%  63          $17.8         0.06%  56          $21.9         0.06%
Mainstream      49          $4.0         0.06%  70          $16.1         0.05%  67          $20.1         0.05%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Mayonnaise &    50          $4.0         0.06%  67          $16.8         0.05%  65          $20.8         0.05%
Whipped
Dressing
Fz Ss Prem      51          $4.0         0.06%  7           $42.9         0.14%  13          $46.9         0.12%
Nutritional
Meals
Refrigerated    52          $4.0         0.06%  26          $25.8         0.08%  27          $29.7         0.08%
Coffee
Creamers
Fz Bag          53          $3.9         0.06%  54          $19.4         0.06%  51          $23.3         0.06%
Vegetables--P
lain
Hot Dogs--Base  54          $3.9         0.06%  137          $9.8         0.03%  113         $13.6         0.04%
Meat
Strawberries    55          $3.8         0.06%  19          $30.7         0.10%  21          $34.5         0.09%
Adult Cereal    56          $3.8         0.06%  25          $25.8         0.08%  28          $29.6         0.08%
Can Pasta       57          $3.8         0.06%  119         $10.8         0.03%  102         $14.6         0.04%
Mexican Soft    58          $3.8         0.06%  39          $21.7         0.07%  41          $25.4         0.07%
Tortillas And
Wra
Traditional     59          $3.8         0.06%  69          $16.2         0.05%  70          $19.9         0.05%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Choice Beef     60          $3.7         0.06%  124         $10.6         0.03%  104         $14.3         0.04%
Mult Pk Bag     61          $3.6         0.05%  132         $10.0         0.03%  114         $13.6         0.04%
Snacks
Pizza/Economy   62          $3.5         0.05%  128         $10.3         0.03%  111         $13.7         0.04%
Margarine:      63          $3.5         0.05%  88          $13.8         0.04%  84          $17.3         0.05%
Tubs And
Bowls
Frzn Chicken--  64          $3.4         0.05%  441          $3.0         0.01%  269          $6.4         0.02%
Wings
Frzn French     65          $3.4         0.05%  143          $9.6         0.03%  119         $13.0         0.03%
Fries
Peanut Butter   66          $3.4         0.05%  40          $21.4         0.07%  44          $24.8         0.07%
Candy Bags--    67          $3.4         0.05%  42          $20.8         0.07%  47          $24.2         0.06%
Chocolate
Value Forms/    68          $3.3         0.05%  120         $10.7         0.03%  108         $13.9         0.04%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Fruit Snacks    69          $3.3         0.05%  104         $12.1         0.04%  94          $15.4         0.04%
Sw Gds: Donuts  70          $3.2         0.05%  98          $12.5         0.04%  92          $15.7         0.04%
Meat: Turkey    71          $3.2         0.05%  21          $28.5         0.09%  24          $31.8         0.08%
Bulk
Frzn Meat--     72          $3.2         0.05%  161          $8.8         0.03%  139         $12.0         0.03%
Beef
Chicken Wings   73          $3.1         0.05%  350          $4.0         0.01%  247          $7.2         0.02%
Frzn Breakfast  74          $3.1         0.05%  125         $10.5         0.03%  115         $13.6         0.04%
Sandwiches
Tuna            75          $3.1         0.05%  74          $15.6         0.05%  75          $18.8         0.05%
Waffles/        76          $3.1         0.05%  59          $18.2         0.06%  62          $21.3         0.06%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Cakes:          77          $3.1         0.05%  152          $9.2         0.03%  136         $12.2         0.03%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Sour Creams     78          $3.0         0.05%  64          $17.5         0.06%  66          $20.5         0.05%
Cheese          79          $3.0         0.05%  44          $20.7         0.07%  49          $23.7         0.06%
Crackers
Fz Skillet      80          $3.0         0.05%  97          $12.6         0.04%  93          $15.6         0.04%
Meals
Vegetable Oil   81          $3.0         0.05%  253          $5.7         0.02%  196          $8.7         0.02%
Lunchment--Bol  82          $3.0         0.05%  177          $8.1         0.03%  149         $11.1         0.03%
ogna/Sausage
Pizza/          83          $3.0         0.05%  101         $12.3         0.04%  97          $15.3         0.04%
Traditional
Cream Cheese    84          $3.0         0.04%  49          $20.3         0.06%  53          $23.2         0.06%
Sandwich        85          $2.9         0.04%  100         $12.4         0.04%  95          $15.4         0.04%
Cookies
Butter          86          $2.9         0.04%  27          $25.1         0.08%  33          $28.0         0.07%
Ramen Noodles/  87          $2.9         0.04%  258          $5.6         0.02%  208          $8.5         0.02%
Ramen Cups
String Cheese   88          $2.8         0.04%  38          $22.0         0.07%  46          $24.7         0.06%
Bagged Cheese   89          $2.7         0.04%  153          $9.0         0.03%  142         $11.7         0.03%
Snacks
Salsa & Dips    90          $2.7         0.04%  136          $9.8         0.03%  129         $12.5         0.03%
Toaster         91          $2.7         0.04%  107         $11.8         0.04%  103         $14.5         0.04%
Pastries
Hot Dog Buns    92          $2.7         0.04%  110         $11.2         0.04%  109         $13.9         0.04%
Hamburger Buns  93          $2.7         0.04%  103         $12.2         0.04%  100         $14.9         0.04%
Rts Soup:       94          $2.7         0.04%  65          $17.4         0.06%  68          $20.0         0.05%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Flavored Milk   95          $2.6         0.04%  118         $10.8         0.03%  116         $13.4         0.04%
Candy Bars      96          $2.6         0.04%  158          $8.9         0.03%  146         $11.5         0.03%
(Singles)
(Including)
Yogurt/Kids     97          $2.6         0.04%  80          $14.4         0.05%  85          $17.0         0.04%
Angus [Beef]    98          $2.6         0.04%  75          $15.3         0.05%  80          $17.9         0.05%
Chicken Drums   99          $2.5         0.04%  297          $4.8         0.02%  241          $7.3         0.02%
Sweet Goods--   100         $2.5         0.04%  145          $9.5         0.03%  137         $12.0         0.03%
Full Size
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $537.8         8.17%           $2,251.0         7.14%           $2,788.8         7.32%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-2: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Household Head Age 45-64 Year Olds
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $41.3         0.63%  1          $258.9         0.82%  1          $300.1         0.79%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $36.6         0.56%  2          $197.3         0.63%  2          $233.9         0.61%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $22.4         0.34%  8           $77.3         0.25%  5           $99.7         0.26%
Shredded        4          $16.7         0.25%  3          $112.7         0.36%  6          $129.4         0.34%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      5          $15.6         0.24%  14          $70.8         0.22%  3           $86.4         0.23%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Kids Cereal     6          $15.0         0.23%  27          $52.7         0.17%  8           $67.7         0.18%
Primal [Beef]   7          $14.6         0.22%  11          $74.6         0.24%  9           $89.2         0.23%
Potato Chips    8          $14.6         0.22%  6           $85.6         0.27%  14         $100.2         0.26%
Lunchment--Del  9          $12.2         0.19%  9           $76.8         0.24%  73          $89.1         0.23%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     10         $11.3         0.17%  10          $75.4         0.24%  7           $86.7         0.23%
Chicken Breast  11         $11.1         0.17%  4           $95.0         0.30%  4          $106.1         0.28%
Boneless
Unflavored Can  12         $10.2         0.16%  18          $64.2         0.20%  10          $74.4         0.20%
Coffee
Mainstream      13         $10.2         0.15%  44          $40.6         0.13%  12          $50.8         0.13%
White Bread
Fz Ss Prem      14         $10.1         0.15%  26          $53.5         0.17%  32          $63.7         0.17%
Traditional
Meals
Tortilla/Nacho  15         $10.0         0.15%  17          $67.1         0.21%  18          $77.1         0.20%
Chips
Still Water     16          $9.9         0.15%  22          $56.0         0.18%  25          $65.9         0.17%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Infant Formula  17          $9.8         0.15%  363          $7.7         0.02%  26          $17.4         0.05%
Starter/
Solutio
Dairy Case      18          $9.7         0.15%  7           $80.7         0.26%  11          $90.4         0.24%
100% Pure
Juice--O
American        19          $9.4         0.14%  42          $41.5         0.13%  23          $50.9         0.13%
Single Cheese
Bacon--Trad     20          $9.1         0.14%  30          $50.1         0.16%  20          $59.2         0.16%
16oz Or Less
Enhanced [Pork  21          $9.0         0.14%  24          $54.8         0.17%  40          $63.9         0.17%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Snacks/         22          $8.9         0.14%  64          $32.2         0.10%  72          $41.1         0.11%
Appetizers
Snack Cake--    23          $8.8         0.13%  66          $31.8         0.10%  38          $40.5         0.11%
Multi Pack
Sft Drnk Mlt-   24          $8.6         0.13%  19          $61.3         0.19%  15          $69.9         0.18%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Mainstream      25          $8.4         0.13%  29          $50.8         0.16%  39          $59.2         0.16%
Variety
Breads
Fz Ss Economy   26          $8.3         0.13%  104         $22.2         0.07%  64          $30.6         0.08%
Meals All
Pizza/Premium   27          $8.3         0.13%  34          $48.7         0.15%  48          $57.0         0.15%
Natural Cheese  28          $8.3         0.13%  15          $69.9         0.22%  29          $78.2         0.21%
Chunks
All Family      29          $8.1         0.12%  16          $68.0         0.22%  22          $76.1         0.20%
Cereal
Soft Drinks     30          $8.1         0.12%  62          $33.3         0.11%  50          $41.5         0.11%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Potatoes        31          $8.1         0.12%  31          $49.4         0.16%  17          $57.5         0.15%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Bananas         32          $7.9         0.12%  12          $74.3         0.24%  30          $82.3         0.22%
Sugar           33          $7.7         0.12%  57          $35.2         0.11%  42          $42.9         0.11%
Ribs [Pork]     34          $7.7         0.12%  59          $34.9         0.11%  35          $42.6         0.11%
Premium [Ice    35          $7.4         0.11%  13          $73.2         0.23%  16          $80.6         0.21%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Condensed Soup  36          $7.2         0.11%  33          $49.0         0.16%  34          $56.2         0.15%
Sandwiches &    37          $7.1         0.11%  100         $22.5         0.07%  71          $29.5         0.08%
Handhelds
Fz Ss Prem      38          $6.7         0.10%  5           $91.3         0.29%  36          $98.0         0.26%
Nutritional
Meals
Convenient      39          $6.6         0.10%  143         $18.0         0.06%  19          $24.6         0.06%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Isotonic        40          $6.6         0.10%  54          $36.0         0.11%  77          $42.6         0.11%
Drinks Single
Serve
Select Beef     41          $6.6         0.10%  32          $49.3         0.16%  37          $55.9         0.15%
Frzn Chicken--  42          $6.5         0.10%  65          $32.0         0.10%  31          $38.5         0.10%
Wht Meat
Choice Beef     43          $6.5         0.10%  70          $30.7         0.10%  76          $37.2         0.10%
Choice Beef     44          $6.5         0.10%  39          $45.3         0.14%  74          $51.8         0.14%
Pourable Salad  45          $6.5         0.10%  37          $46.3         0.15%  61          $52.7         0.14%
Dressings
Traditional     46          $6.2         0.09%  52          $37.1         0.12%  45          $43.3         0.11%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Fz Bag          47          $6.2         0.09%  40          $42.0         0.13%  82          $48.2         0.13%
Vegetables--P
lain
Mayonnaise &    48          $6.0         0.09%  49          $38.0         0.12%  56          $44.0         0.12%
Whipped
Dressing
Refrigerated    49          $5.9         0.09%  35          $48.1         0.15%  67          $54.0         0.14%
Coffee
Creamers
Fz Family       50          $5.8         0.09%  80          $26.5         0.08%  65          $32.3         0.08%
Style Entrees
Sft Drnk Sngl   51          $5.7         0.09%  111         $21.2         0.07%  13          $26.9         0.07%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Adult Cereal    52          $5.6         0.08%  21          $57.0         0.18%  27          $62.6         0.16%
Butter          53          $5.4         0.08%  20          $60.1         0.19%  51          $65.5         0.17%
Strawberries    54          $5.4         0.08%  25          $54.8         0.17%  113         $60.1         0.16%
Candy Bags--    55          $5.2         0.08%  28          $50.9         0.16%  21          $56.1         0.15%
Chocolate
Hot Dogs--Base  56          $5.1         0.08%  161         $16.6         0.05%  28          $21.7         0.06%
Meat
Margarine:      57          $5.1         0.08%  71          $30.5         0.10%  102         $35.6         0.09%
Tubs And
Bowls
Choice Beef     58          $5.1         0.08%  99          $22.6         0.07%  41          $27.7         0.07%
Mainstream      59          $4.9         0.07%  87          $25.0         0.08%  70          $29.9         0.08%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Tuna            60          $4.8         0.07%  58          $35.1         0.11%  104         $39.9         0.10%
Lunchment--Bol  61          $4.7         0.07%  138         $18.5         0.06%  114         $23.2         0.06%
ogna/Sausage
Meat: Turkey    62          $4.7         0.07%  23          $55.8         0.18%  111         $60.5         0.16%
Bulk
Macaroni &      63          $4.7         0.07%  154         $17.1         0.05%  84          $21.8         0.06%
Cheese Dnrs
Peanut Butter   64          $4.7         0.07%  45          $40.5         0.13%  269         $45.1         0.12%
Aseptic Pack    65          $4.5         0.07%  194         $14.2         0.04%  119         $18.7         0.05%
Juice And
Drinks
Chicken Wings   66          $4.5         0.07%  346          $8.1         0.03%  44          $12.6         0.03%
Mexican Soft    67          $4.5         0.07%  63          $33.0         0.10%  47          $37.5         0.10%
Tortillas And
Wra
Can Pasta       68          $4.4         0.07%  206         $13.4         0.04%  108         $17.9         0.05%
Sw Gds: Donuts  69          $4.4         0.07%  91          $23.6         0.07%  94          $27.9         0.07%
Frzn French     70          $4.3         0.07%  166         $16.2         0.05%  92          $20.5         0.05%
Fries
Angus [Beef]    71          $4.3         0.07%  53          $36.2         0.11%  24          $40.5         0.11%
Rts Soup:       72          $4.2         0.06%  48          $38.2         0.12%  139         $42.4         0.11%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Fz Skillet      73          $4.1         0.06%  85          $25.2         0.08%  247         $29.4         0.08%
Meals
Cream Cheese    74          $4.1         0.06%  51          $37.6         0.12%  115         $41.7         0.11%
Frzn Chicken--  75          $4.1         0.06%  514          $4.8         0.02%  75           $8.9         0.02%
Wings
Mult Pk Bag     76          $4.1         0.06%  208         $13.4         0.04%  62          $17.5         0.05%
Snacks
Frzn Breakfast  77          $4.0         0.06%  147         $17.7         0.06%  136         $21.6         0.06%
Sandwiches
Sandwich        78          $3.9         0.06%  94          $23.3         0.07%  66          $27.2         0.07%
Cookies
Vegetable Oil   79          $3.9         0.06%  279          $9.8         0.03%  49          $13.7         0.04%
Sour Creams     80          $3.9         0.06%  67          $31.0         0.10%  93          $34.9         0.09%
Frzn Meat--     81          $3.9         0.06%  180         $15.2         0.05%  196         $19.1         0.05%
Beef
Meat: Ham Bulk  82          $3.9         0.06%  46          $40.3         0.13%  149         $44.1         0.12%
Pizza/          83          $3.8         0.06%  125         $19.6         0.06%  97          $23.4         0.06%
Traditional
Hamburger Buns  84          $3.8         0.06%  93          $23.5         0.07%  53          $27.2         0.07%
Pizza/Economy   85          $3.8         0.06%  238         $11.7         0.04%  95          $15.5         0.04%
Flavored Milk   86          $3.7         0.06%  116         $20.3         0.06%  33          $24.0         0.06%
Cheese          87          $3.7         0.06%  74          $29.0         0.09%  46          $32.7         0.09%
Crackers
Candy Bars      88          $3.6         0.05%  96          $22.9         0.07%  142         $26.5         0.07%
(Multi Pack)
Value Forms/    89          $3.6         0.05%  240         $11.6         0.04%  129         $15.2         0.04%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Grapes Red      90          $3.6         0.05%  50          $37.6         0.12%  103         $41.2         0.11%
Hot Dog Buns    91          $3.6         0.05%  122         $19.7         0.06%  109         $23.3         0.06%
Waffles/        92          $3.6         0.05%  105         $22.1         0.07%  100         $25.6         0.07%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Spring Water    93          $3.6         0.05%  73          $29.4         0.09%  68          $32.9         0.09%
Sweet Goods--   94          $3.6         0.05%  144         $18.0         0.06%  116         $21.5         0.06%
Full Size
Cottage Cheese  95          $3.5         0.05%  56          $35.4         0.11%  146         $38.9         0.10%
Cakes:          96          $3.5         0.05%  190         $14.6         0.05%  85          $18.2         0.05%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Bkfst Sausage-- 97          $3.5         0.05%  117         $20.2         0.06%  80          $23.7         0.06%
Fresh Rolls
Dnr Sausage--   98          $3.5         0.05%  242         $11.5         0.04%  241         $15.0         0.04%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Candy Bars      99          $3.5         0.05%  155         $17.1         0.05%  137         $20.5         0.05%
(Singles)
(Including)
Fruit Snacks    100         $3.5         0.05%  224         $12.2         0.04%  203         $15.6         0.04%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $731.2        11.09%           $4,237.7        13.52%           $5,004.7        13.17%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-3: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Household Head Age 65 Years or Older
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $12.6         0.19%  1          $109.6         0.35%  1          $122.2         0.32%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $10.9         0.17%  2           $69.4         0.22%  2           $80.3         0.21%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3           $6.3         0.10%  18          $26.1         0.08%  12          $32.4         0.09%
Sft Drnk 2      4           $4.2         0.06%  29          $21.4         0.07%  24          $25.6         0.07%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Primal [Beef]   5           $4.2         0.06%  15          $27.5         0.09%  13          $31.7         0.08%
Shredded        6           $4.2         0.06%  10          $29.8         0.09%  10          $34.0         0.09%
Cheese
Potato Chips    7           $4.0         0.06%  13          $28.8         0.09%  11          $32.7         0.09%
Kids Cereal     8           $3.8         0.06%  72          $10.7         0.03%  59          $14.5         0.04%
Eggs--Large     9           $3.6         0.06%  8           $32.7         0.10%  8           $36.4         0.10%
Unflavored Can  10          $3.5         0.05%  6           $35.6         0.11%  5           $39.1         0.10%
Coffee
Fz Ss Prem      11          $3.4         0.05%  9           $31.9         0.10%  9           $35.3         0.09%
Traditional
Meals
Lunchment--Del  12          $3.4         0.05%  19          $24.6         0.08%  19          $28.0         0.07%
i Fresh
Mainstream      13          $3.2         0.05%  40          $16.9         0.05%  36          $20.1         0.05%
White Bread
Dairy Case      14          $3.1         0.05%  3           $38.6         0.12%  3           $41.7         0.11%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Bacon--Trad     15          $2.9         0.04%  24          $23.1         0.07%  23          $26.0         0.07%
16oz Or Less
Chicken Breast  16          $2.8         0.04%  17          $26.2         0.08%  18          $29.0         0.08%
Boneless
Bananas         17          $2.7         0.04%  4           $37.1         0.12%  4           $39.8         0.10%
American        18          $2.7         0.04%  38          $17.4         0.06%  35          $20.1         0.05%
Single Cheese
Enhanced [Pork  19          $2.7         0.04%  26          $22.9         0.07%  25          $25.6         0.07%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Mainstream      20          $2.7         0.04%  27          $22.6         0.07%  28          $25.3         0.07%
Variety
Breads
Sft Drnk Mlt-   21          $2.6         0.04%  20          $24.5         0.08%  20          $27.1         0.07%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Still Water     22          $2.6         0.04%  49          $15.2         0.05%  43          $17.8         0.05%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Potatoes        23          $2.6         0.04%  25          $22.9         0.07%  27          $25.5         0.07%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Snack Cake--    24          $2.6         0.04%  68          $11.4         0.04%  62          $14.0         0.04%
Multi Pack
Natural Cheese  25          $2.5         0.04%  14          $28.3         0.09%  16          $30.8         0.08%
Chunks
All Family      26          $2.5         0.04%  12          $29.0         0.09%  14          $31.5         0.08%
Cereal
Fz Ss Economy   27          $2.5         0.04%  87           $9.3         0.03%  73          $11.8         0.03%
Meals All
Premium [Ice    28          $2.5         0.04%  7           $35.5         0.11%  6           $38.0         0.10%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Tortilla/Nacho  29          $2.5         0.04%  48          $15.6         0.05%  41          $18.0         0.05%
Chips
Condensed Soup  30          $2.4         0.04%  22          $24.5         0.08%  21          $26.8         0.07%
Soft Drinks     31          $2.3         0.04%  82           $9.7         0.03%  70          $12.1         0.03%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Sugar           32          $2.3         0.04%  51          $15.1         0.05%  47          $17.5         0.05%
Traditional     33          $2.3         0.03%  23          $23.2         0.07%  26          $25.5         0.07%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Ribs [Pork]     34          $2.3         0.03%  57          $13.4         0.04%  53          $15.6         0.04%
Snacks/         35          $2.2         0.03%  144          $6.6         0.02%  112          $8.9         0.02%
Appetizers
Infant Formula  36          $2.2         0.03%  583          $1.4         0.00%  336          $3.6         0.01%
Starter/
Solutio
Pizza/Premium   37          $2.2         0.03%  59          $12.7         0.04%  57          $14.9         0.04%
Select Beef     38          $2.1         0.03%  35          $17.9         0.06%  37          $19.9         0.05%
Fz Ss Prem      39          $2.0         0.03%  5           $35.8         0.11%  7           $37.8         0.10%
Nutritional
Meals
Fz Bag          40          $2.0         0.03%  32          $19.9         0.06%  31          $21.9         0.06%
Vegetables--P
lain
Choice Beef     41          $1.9         0.03%  60          $12.7         0.04%  58          $14.6         0.04%
Mayonnaise &    42          $1.9         0.03%  34          $18.2         0.06%  34          $20.1         0.05%
Whipped
Dressing
Choice Beef     43          $1.9         0.03%  36          $17.7         0.06%  38          $19.6         0.05%
Adult Cereal    44          $1.9         0.03%  11          $29.4         0.09%  15          $31.2         0.08%
Butter          45          $1.9         0.03%  16          $27.4         0.09%  17          $29.3         0.08%
Margarine:      46          $1.8         0.03%  33          $18.5         0.06%  33          $20.4         0.05%
Tubs And
Bowls
Pourable Salad  47          $1.8         0.03%  39          $16.9         0.05%  39          $18.7         0.05%
Dressings
Sandwiches &    48          $1.8         0.03%  219          $4.9         0.02%  165          $6.7         0.02%
Handhelds
Strawberries    49          $1.7         0.03%  21          $24.5         0.08%  22          $26.1         0.07%
Candy Bags--    50          $1.6         0.02%  28          $22.4         0.07%  29          $24.1         0.06%
Chocolate
Convenient      51          $1.6         0.02%  324          $3.4         0.01%  240          $5.0         0.01%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Refrigerated    52          $1.6         0.02%  45          $16.1         0.05%  44          $17.7         0.05%
Coffee
Creamers
Frzn Chicken--  53          $1.6         0.02%  96           $8.8         0.03%  86          $10.4         0.03%
Wht Meat
Lunchment--Bol  54          $1.6         0.02%  84           $9.5         0.03%  78          $11.1         0.03%
ogna/Sausage
Fz Family       55          $1.6         0.02%  90           $9.0         0.03%  85          $10.6         0.03%
Style Entrees
Isotonic        56          $1.6         0.02%  123          $7.4         0.02%  108          $9.0         0.02%
Drinks Single
Serve
Choice Beef     57          $1.5         0.02%  80           $9.8         0.03%  76          $11.3         0.03%
Sw Gds: Donuts  58          $1.5         0.02%  62          $12.5         0.04%  61          $14.1         0.04%
Hot Dogs--Base  59          $1.5         0.02%  146          $6.6         0.02%  125          $8.1         0.02%
Meat
Peanut Butter   60          $1.4         0.02%  44          $16.1         0.05%  45          $17.6         0.05%
Sft Drnk Sngl   61          $1.4         0.02%  237          $4.5         0.01%  195          $6.0         0.02%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Tuna            62          $1.4         0.02%  54          $13.9         0.04%  55          $15.3         0.04%
Angus [Beef]    63          $1.4         0.02%  50          $15.2         0.05%  51          $16.6         0.04%
Cottage Cheese  64          $1.3         0.02%  31          $20.3         0.06%  32          $21.6         0.06%
Rts Soup:       65          $1.3         0.02%  41          $16.6         0.05%  42          $17.9         0.05%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Chicken Wings   66          $1.3         0.02%  405          $2.6         0.01%  310          $3.9         0.01%
Meat: Turkey    67          $1.2         0.02%  47          $15.9         0.05%  48          $17.1         0.04%
Bulk
Mainstream      68          $1.2         0.02%  142          $6.9         0.02%  126          $8.1         0.02%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Grapes Red      69          $1.2         0.02%  37          $17.4         0.06%  40          $18.6         0.05%
Macaroni &      70          $1.2         0.02%  277          $4.0         0.01%  231          $5.2         0.01%
Cheese Dnrs
Mexican Soft    71          $1.2         0.02%  115          $7.9         0.03%  106          $9.1         0.02%
Tortillas And
Wra
Frzn Breakfast  72          $1.2         0.02%  165          $6.1         0.02%  150          $7.2         0.02%
Sandwiches
Cream Cheese    73          $1.1         0.02%  55          $13.9         0.04%  56          $15.0         0.04%
Can Pasta       74          $1.1         0.02%  321          $3.4         0.01%  268          $4.6         0.01%
Sweet Goods--   75          $1.1         0.02%  93           $8.9         0.03%  90          $10.1         0.03%
Full Size
Meat: Ham Bulk  76          $1.1         0.02%  46          $15.9         0.05%  49          $17.0         0.04%
Bkfst Sausage-- 77          $1.1         0.02%  105          $8.3         0.03%  97           $9.5         0.02%
Fresh Rolls
Fz Skillet      78          $1.1         0.02%  83           $9.6         0.03%  82          $10.8         0.03%
Meals
Vegetable Oil   79          $1.1         0.02%  305          $3.6         0.01%  258          $4.7         0.01%
Frzn French     80          $1.1         0.02%  234          $4.6         0.01%  212          $5.7         0.01%
Fries
Sandwich        81          $1.1         0.02%  102          $8.4         0.03%  96           $9.5         0.03%
Cookies
Candy Bars      82          $1.1         0.02%  78           $9.9         0.03%  79          $11.0         0.03%
(Multi Pack)
Butter Spray    83          $1.1         0.02%  69          $10.9         0.03%  71          $12.0         0.03%
Cracker
Premium Bread   84          $1.1         0.02%  30          $21.2         0.07%  30          $22.3         0.06%
Aseptic Pack    85          $1.1         0.02%  420          $2.5         0.01%  343          $3.6         0.01%
Juice And
Drinks
Sticks/Enrobed  86          $1.1         0.02%  76          $10.2         0.03%  77          $11.3         0.03%
[Frozen
Novelties]
Sour Creams     87          $1.1         0.02%  71          $10.7         0.03%  72          $11.8         0.03%
Waffles/        88          $1.1         0.02%  111          $8.1         0.03%  102          $9.2         0.02%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Spring Water    89          $1.1         0.02%  73          $10.3         0.03%  75          $11.3         0.03%
Hamburger Buns  90          $1.1         0.02%  116          $7.9         0.02%  110          $8.9         0.02%
Mult Pk Bag     91          $1.0         0.02%  408          $2.6         0.01%  341          $3.6         0.01%
Snacks
Frzn Chicken--  92          $1.0         0.02%  654          $1.2         0.00%  479          $2.2         0.01%
Wings
Flavored Milk   93          $1.0         0.02%  178          $5.8         0.02%  161          $6.8         0.02%
Refrigerated    94          $1.0         0.02%  164          $6.2         0.02%  151          $7.2         0.02%
Biscuits
Grapes White    95          $1.0         0.02%  70          $10.8         0.03%  74          $11.8         0.03%
Dnr Sausage--   96          $1.0         0.02%  284          $3.9         0.01%  249          $4.9         0.01%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Pizza/Economy   97          $1.0         0.02%  357          $3.0         0.01%  305          $4.0         0.01%
Frzn Meat--     98          $1.0         0.01%  279          $3.9         0.01%  248          $4.9         0.01%
Beef
Pizza/          99          $1.0         0.01%  211          $5.1         0.02%  184          $6.1         0.02%
Traditional
Candy Bars      100         $1.0         0.01%  167          $6.0         0.02%  154          $7.0         0.02%
(Singles)
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $213.1         3.29%           $1,664.6         5.23%           $1,877.6         4.94%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-4: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Households with Children Present
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $33.9         0.52%  1          $190.0         0.60%  1          $223.9         0.59%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $28.4         0.43%  2          $128.5         0.41%  2          $156.9         0.41%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $17.5         0.27%  10          $51.4         0.16%  5           $68.9         0.18%
Kids Cereal     4          $14.0         0.21%  7           $53.4         0.17%  6           $67.4         0.18%
Shredded        5          $13.9         0.21%  3           $82.7         0.26%  3           $96.7         0.25%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      6          $12.4         0.19%  12          $49.7         0.16%  9           $62.2         0.16%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Primal [Beef]   7          $11.4         0.17%  13          $49.7         0.16%  10          $61.0         0.16%
Potato Chips    8          $11.3         0.17%  5           $55.3         0.18%  7           $66.6         0.17%
Lunchment--Del  9           $9.6         0.15%  8           $53.4         0.17%  8           $63.0         0.17%
i Fresh
Chicken Breast  10          $8.9         0.14%  4           $65.2         0.21%  4           $74.1         0.19%
Boneless
Infant Formula  11          $8.7         0.13%  258          $7.1         0.02%  127         $15.8         0.04%
Starter/
Solutio
Tortilla/Nacho  12          $8.5         0.13%  11          $50.4         0.16%  12          $58.9         0.15%
Chips
Eggs--Large     13          $8.5         0.13%  14          $49.1         0.16%  13          $57.6         0.15%
Mainstream      14          $8.3         0.13%  32          $31.1         0.10%  28          $39.4         0.10%
White Bread
Snacks/         15          $8.2         0.12%  41          $27.4         0.09%  34          $35.6         0.09%
Appetizers
Still Water     16          $7.8         0.12%  21          $37.7         0.12%  19          $45.5         0.12%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
American        17          $7.5         0.11%  36          $28.9         0.09%  33          $36.4         0.10%
Single Cheese
Dairy Case      18          $7.5         0.11%  6           $53.5         0.17%  11          $61.0         0.16%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Snack Cake--    19          $7.2         0.11%  47          $25.7         0.08%  41          $32.9         0.09%
Multi Pack
Enhanced [Pork  20          $7.2         0.11%  22          $36.4         0.12%  21          $43.6         0.11%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Fz Ss Prem      21          $7.1         0.11%  39          $27.9         0.09%  36          $35.0         0.09%
Traditional
Meals
Pizza/Premium   22          $6.9         0.11%  27          $34.2         0.11%  24          $41.1         0.11%
Fz Ss Economy   23          $6.9         0.10%  90          $16.7         0.05%  73          $23.5         0.06%
Meals All
All Family      24          $6.8         0.10%  15          $48.9         0.16%  15          $55.7         0.15%
Cereal
Unflavored Can  25          $6.8         0.10%  26          $34.3         0.11%  25          $41.0         0.11%
Coffee
Bacon--Trad     26          $6.8         0.10%  30          $32.1         0.10%  30          $38.8         0.10%
16oz Or Less
Convenient      27          $6.7         0.10%  58          $23.7         0.08%  43          $30.3         0.08%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Soft Drinks     28          $6.5         0.10%  63          $22.3         0.07%  53          $28.7         0.08%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Mainstream      29          $6.3         0.10%  24          $35.3         0.11%  22          $41.6         0.11%
Variety
Breads
Sandwiches &    30          $6.2         0.09%  79          $18.6         0.06%  67          $24.8         0.07%
Handhelds
Sft Drnk Mlt-   31          $6.2         0.09%  28          $33.7         0.11%  26          $39.9         0.10%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Natural Cheese  32          $6.2         0.09%  18          $42.9         0.14%  18          $49.1         0.13%
Chunks
Sugar           33          $6.1         0.09%  60          $23.3         0.07%  52          $29.4         0.08%
Potatoes        34          $6.0         0.09%  33          $30.7         0.10%  32          $36.7         0.10%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Bananas         35          $6.0         0.09%  16          $48.2         0.15%  16          $54.2         0.14%
Frzn Chicken--  36          $5.6         0.09%  54          $24.6         0.08%  45          $30.2         0.08%
Wht Meat
Ribs [Pork]     37          $5.6         0.08%  70          $20.7         0.07%  61          $26.3         0.07%
Premium [Ice    38          $5.5         0.08%  17          $46.9         0.15%  17          $52.4         0.14%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Isotonic        39          $5.5         0.08%  37          $28.3         0.09%  39          $33.8         0.09%
Drinks Single
Serve
Condensed Soup  40          $5.4         0.08%  29          $32.7         0.10%  31          $38.2         0.10%
Pourable Salad  41          $5.1         0.08%  35          $29.1         0.09%  37          $34.2         0.09%
Dressings
Sft Drnk Sngl   42          $4.9         0.07%  104         $15.3         0.05%  85          $20.2         0.05%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Choice Beef     43          $4.9         0.07%  77          $19.0         0.06%  71          $23.9         0.06%
Fz Family       44          $4.8         0.07%  80          $18.6         0.06%  74          $23.4         0.06%
Style Entrees
Select Beef     45          $4.8         0.07%  38          $28.3         0.09%  40          $33.0         0.09%
Fz Ss Prem      46          $4.7         0.07%  9           $52.3         0.17%  14          $57.0         0.15%
Nutritional
Meals
Traditional     47          $4.6         0.07%  50          $24.9         0.08%  50          $29.6         0.08%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Aseptic Pack    48          $4.6         0.07%  74          $19.4         0.06%  69          $24.0         0.06%
Juice And
Drinks
Choice Beef     49          $4.6         0.07%  49          $25.1         0.08%  49          $29.7         0.08%
Fz Bag          50          $4.5         0.07%  48          $25.4         0.08%  48          $29.9         0.08%
Vegetables--P
lain
Mayonnaise &    51          $4.4         0.07%  66          $22.0         0.07%  60          $26.5         0.07%
Whipped
Dressing
Refrigerated    52          $4.4         0.07%  31          $31.1         0.10%  35          $35.5         0.09%
Coffee
Creamers
Strawberries    53          $4.4         0.07%  19          $40.0         0.13%  20          $44.4         0.12%
Adult Cereal    54          $4.2         0.06%  25          $35.0         0.11%  29          $39.2         0.10%
Macaroni &      55          $4.2         0.06%  101         $15.5         0.05%  88          $19.7         0.05%
Cheese Dnrs
Mainstream      56          $4.2         0.06%  72          $19.8         0.06%  70          $24.0         0.06%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Hot Dogs--Base  57          $4.2         0.06%  134         $12.6         0.04%  115         $16.8         0.04%
Meat
Choice Beef     58          $4.0         0.06%  114         $14.4         0.05%  99          $18.5         0.05%
Can Pasta       59          $4.0         0.06%  133         $12.8         0.04%  113         $16.8         0.04%
Candy Bags--    60          $4.0         0.06%  34          $29.9         0.09%  38          $33.8         0.09%
Chocolate
Margarine:      61          $3.9         0.06%  78          $18.9         0.06%  78          $22.8         0.06%
Tubs And
Bowls
Peanut Butter   62          $3.8         0.06%  40          $27.8         0.09%  42          $31.6         0.08%
Butter          63          $3.7         0.06%  23          $35.8         0.11%  27          $39.5         0.10%
Meat: Turkey    64          $3.7         0.06%  20          $37.8         0.12%  23          $41.5         0.11%
Bulk
Mult Pk Bag     65          $3.7         0.06%  132         $12.9         0.04%  118         $16.6         0.04%
Snacks
Frzn French     66          $3.6         0.06%  138         $12.5         0.04%  123         $16.1         0.04%
Fries
Mexican Soft    67          $3.6         0.06%  59          $23.4         0.07%  58          $27.0         0.07%
Tortillas And
Wra
Sw Gds: Donuts  68          $3.6         0.05%  91          $16.7         0.05%  84          $20.2         0.05%
Pizza/Economy   69          $3.5         0.05%  158         $11.4         0.04%  136         $14.9         0.04%
Fruit Snacks    70          $3.5         0.05%  111         $14.5         0.05%  102         $18.0         0.05%
Tuna            71          $3.4         0.05%  73          $19.6         0.06%  77          $23.1         0.06%
Lunchment--Bol  72          $3.4         0.05%  156         $11.5         0.04%  135         $14.9         0.04%
ogna/Sausage
Value Forms/    73          $3.4         0.05%  139         $12.4         0.04%  128         $15.8         0.04%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Frzn Breakfast  74          $3.4         0.05%  122         $13.6         0.04%  110         $17.0         0.04%
Sandwiches
Cheese          75          $3.4         0.05%  44          $26.8         0.09%  46          $30.2         0.08%
Crackers
Frzn Meat--     76          $3.3         0.05%  151         $11.7         0.04%  133         $15.1         0.04%
Beef
Waffles/        77          $3.3         0.05%  62          $22.5         0.07%  65          $25.9         0.07%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Frzn Chicken--  78          $3.3         0.05%  470          $3.4         0.01%  308          $6.8         0.02%
Wings
Cream Cheese    79          $3.3         0.05%  45          $26.1         0.08%  51          $29.4         0.08%
Sandwich        80          $3.2         0.05%  83          $17.6         0.06%  83          $20.8         0.05%
Cookies
Pizza/          81          $3.2         0.05%  100         $15.7         0.05%  94          $18.9         0.05%
Traditional
Fz Skillet      82          $3.2         0.05%  103         $15.4         0.05%  97          $18.6         0.05%
Meals
Sour Creams     83          $3.2         0.05%  69          $21.3         0.07%  68          $24.5         0.06%
Cakes:          84          $3.2         0.05%  160         $11.3         0.04%  143         $14.6         0.04%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Angus [Beef]    85          $3.2         0.05%  61          $22.8         0.07%  64          $25.9         0.07%
Flavored Milk   86          $3.2         0.05%  93          $16.4         0.05%  90          $19.6         0.05%
Chicken Wings   87          $3.2         0.05%  372          $4.7         0.01%  276          $7.8         0.02%
Hamburger Buns  88          $3.0         0.05%  92          $16.6         0.05%  89          $19.6         0.05%
Rts Soup:       89          $3.0         0.05%  65          $22.0         0.07%  66          $25.1         0.07%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Vegetable Oil   90          $3.0         0.05%  269          $6.7         0.02%  221          $9.7         0.03%
Meat: Ham Bulk  91          $3.0         0.05%  43          $27.2         0.09%  44          $30.2         0.08%
String Cheese   92          $3.0         0.05%  51          $24.8         0.08%  55          $27.8         0.07%
Hot Dog Buns    93          $2.9         0.04%  115         $14.4         0.05%  106         $17.3         0.05%
Sweet Goods--   94          $2.9         0.04%  123         $13.5         0.04%  119         $16.4         0.04%
Full Size
Bagged Cheese   95          $2.9         0.04%  149         $11.9         0.04%  138         $14.8         0.04%
Snacks
Toaster         96          $2.9         0.04%  95          $16.1         0.05%  93          $19.0         0.05%
Pastries
Grapes Red      97          $2.8         0.04%  42          $27.3         0.09%  47          $30.2         0.08%
Candy Bars      98          $2.8         0.04%  159         $11.4         0.04%  148         $14.2         0.04%
(Singles)
(Including)
Salsa & Dips    99          $2.8         0.04%  150         $11.8         0.04%  142         $14.6         0.04%
Ramen Noodles/  100         $2.8         0.04%  274          $6.5         0.02%  229          $9.3         0.02%
Ramen Cups
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $585.8         8.90%           $2,937.8         9.32%           $3,523.7         9.25%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-5: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Households Without Children Present
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $50.6         0.77%  1          $322.1         1.02%  1          $372.7         0.98%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $44.1         0.67%  2          $234.1         0.74%  2          $278.3         0.73%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $28.4         0.43%  10          $94.8         0.30%  6          $123.1         0.32%
Shredded        4          $19.9         0.30%  3          $126.8         0.40%  3          $146.7         0.39%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      5          $18.7         0.28%  17          $81.5         0.26%  15         $100.2         0.26%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Kids Cereal     6          $18.6         0.28%  40          $54.6         0.17%  30          $73.2         0.19%
Primal [Beef]   7          $17.4         0.26%  15          $88.0         0.28%  12         $105.4         0.28%
Potato Chips    8          $17.3         0.26%  8           $98.4         0.31%  8          $115.8         0.30%
Lunchment--Del  9          $14.9         0.23%  12          $91.0         0.29%  11         $105.9         0.28%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     10         $14.2         0.22%  9           $98.4         0.31%  9          $112.7         0.30%
Chicken Breast  11         $13.3         0.20%  5          $110.1         0.35%  5          $123.5         0.32%
Boneless
Infant Formula  12         $13.1         0.20%  314         $11.2         0.04%  157         $24.3         0.06%
Starter/
Solutio
Fz Ss Prem      13         $12.6         0.19%  19          $77.2         0.24%  18          $89.7         0.24%
Traditional
Meals
Unflavored Can  14         $12.5         0.19%  14          $88.7         0.28%  14         $101.2         0.27%
Coffee
Mainstream      15         $12.5         0.19%  49          $49.8         0.16%  41          $62.3         0.16%
White Bread
Still Water     16         $12.3         0.19%  29          $64.1         0.20%  25          $76.4         0.20%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Tortilla/Nacho  17         $12.1         0.18%  22          $73.4         0.23%  19          $85.6         0.22%
Chips
Dairy Case      18         $12.1         0.18%  6          $107.2         0.34%  7          $119.3         0.31%
100% Pure
Juice--O
American        19         $11.6         0.18%  42          $52.8         0.17%  38          $64.4         0.17%
Single Cheese
Bacon--Trad     20         $11.2         0.17%  27          $64.6         0.20%  27          $75.8         0.20%
16oz Or Less
Enhanced [Pork  21         $11.1         0.17%  24          $68.3         0.22%  23          $79.4         0.21%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Snacks/         22         $10.7         0.16%  81          $32.0         0.10%  69          $42.7         0.11%
Appetizers
Snack Cake--    23         $10.6         0.16%  68          $36.4         0.12%  61          $47.1         0.12%
Multi Pack
Mainstream      24         $10.5         0.16%  25          $66.1         0.21%  24          $76.6         0.20%
Variety
Breads
Fz Ss Economy   25         $10.3         0.16%  94          $28.4         0.09%  75          $38.7         0.10%
Meals All
Natural Cheese  26         $10.2         0.15%  13          $89.8         0.28%  16         $100.0         0.26%
Chunks
Pizza/Premium   27         $10.1         0.15%  39          $55.5         0.18%  36          $65.6         0.17%
Soft Drinks     28         $10.0         0.15%  64          $38.7         0.12%  59          $48.7         0.13%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
All Family      29         $10.0         0.15%  16          $85.8         0.27%  17          $95.7         0.25%
Cereal
Sft Drnk Mlt-   30         $10.0         0.15%  21          $74.7         0.24%  20          $84.7         0.22%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Potatoes        31          $9.9         0.15%  30          $64.0         0.20%  28          $73.9         0.19%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Bananas         32          $9.9         0.15%  7          $100.3         0.32%  10         $110.1         0.29%
Sugar           33          $9.6         0.15%  55          $44.8         0.14%  50          $54.4         0.14%
Ribs [Pork]     34          $9.4         0.14%  60          $42.4         0.13%  53          $51.8         0.14%
Premium [Ice    35          $9.1         0.14%  11          $94.7         0.30%  13         $103.8         0.27%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Condensed Soup  36          $8.7         0.13%  26          $64.7         0.21%  29          $73.4         0.19%
Sandwiches &    37          $8.7         0.13%  128         $23.7         0.08%  94          $32.4         0.08%
Handhelds
Select Beef     38          $8.1         0.12%  33          $59.5         0.19%  33          $67.6         0.18%
Choice Beef     39          $8.1         0.12%  65          $38.3         0.12%  63          $46.4         0.12%
Fz Ss Prem      40          $8.0         0.12%  4          $117.8         0.37%  4          $125.7         0.33%
Nutritional
Meals
Choice Beef     41          $7.9         0.12%  38          $55.7         0.18%  39          $63.6         0.17%
Frzn Chicken--  42          $7.9         0.12%  70          $36.1         0.11%  66          $44.0         0.12%
Wht Meat
Pourable Salad  43          $7.9         0.12%  36          $56.5         0.18%  37          $64.4         0.17%
Dressings
Isotonic        44          $7.8         0.12%  66          $37.9         0.12%  64          $45.7         0.12%
Drinks Single
Serve
Convenient      45          $7.8         0.12%  186         $18.0         0.06%  139         $25.8         0.07%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Traditional     46          $7.7         0.12%  44          $51.5         0.16%  43          $59.2         0.16%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Fz Bag          47          $7.6         0.12%  37          $55.9         0.18%  40          $63.5         0.17%
Vegetables--P
lain
Mayonnaise &    48          $7.5         0.11%  45          $50.9         0.16%  44          $58.4         0.15%
Whipped
Dressing
Refrigerated    49          $7.1         0.11%  34          $58.8         0.19%  35          $65.9         0.17%
Coffee
Creamers
Fz Family       50          $7.0         0.11%  85          $31.3         0.10%  76          $38.3         0.10%
Style Entrees
Adult Cereal    51          $7.0         0.11%  18          $77.2         0.24%  21          $84.2         0.22%
Sft Drnk Sngl   52          $6.9         0.11%  122         $24.2         0.08%  101         $31.1         0.08%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Margarine:      53          $6.5         0.10%  57          $44.0         0.14%  56          $50.5         0.13%
Tubs And
Bowls
Strawberries    54          $6.5         0.10%  23          $69.9         0.22%  26          $76.4         0.20%
Butter          55          $6.5         0.10%  20          $76.9         0.24%  22          $83.3         0.22%
Hot Dogs--Base  56          $6.3         0.10%  164         $20.4         0.06%  125         $26.7         0.07%
Meat
Choice Beef     57          $6.3         0.10%  93          $28.5         0.09%  86          $34.8         0.09%
Candy Bags--    58          $6.2         0.09%  28          $64.3         0.20%  31          $70.5         0.19%
Chocolate
Mainstream      59          $5.9         0.09%  96          $28.2         0.09%  88          $34.1         0.09%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Lunchment--Bol  60          $5.9         0.09%  117         $24.6         0.08%  102         $30.5         0.08%
ogna/Sausage
Tuna            61          $5.9         0.09%  54          $45.0         0.14%  54          $50.9         0.13%
Macaroni &      62          $5.8         0.09%  175         $19.1         0.06%  148         $24.9         0.07%
Cheese Dnrs
Mexican Soft    63          $5.8         0.09%  63          $39.2         0.12%  65          $45.0         0.12%
Tortillas And
Wra
Chicken Wings   64          $5.8         0.09%  355         $10.0         0.03%  253         $15.8         0.04%
Peanut Butter   65          $5.7         0.09%  47          $50.3         0.16%  46          $55.9         0.15%
Sw Gds: Donuts  66          $5.6         0.09%  83          $31.9         0.10%  77          $37.5         0.10%
Meat: Turkey    67          $5.6         0.08%  31          $62.3         0.20%  32          $67.9         0.18%
Bulk
Aseptic Pack    68          $5.4         0.08%  242         $14.1         0.04%  202         $19.5         0.05%
Juice And
Drinks
Can Pasta       69          $5.4         0.08%  232         $14.8         0.05%  191         $20.2         0.05%
Frzn Chicken--  70          $5.2         0.08%  547          $5.6         0.02%  372         $10.8         0.03%
Wings
Frzn French     71          $5.2         0.08%  190         $17.8         0.06%  162         $23.0         0.06%
Fries
Rts Soup:       72          $5.2         0.08%  48          $50.1         0.16%  48          $55.3         0.15%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Angus [Beef]    73          $5.1         0.08%  58          $43.9         0.14%  58          $49.0         0.13%
Fz Skillet      74          $5.0         0.08%  80          $32.0         0.10%  79          $37.1         0.10%
Meals
Mult Pk Bag     75          $5.0         0.08%  263         $13.1         0.04%  220         $18.1         0.05%
Snacks
Vegetable Oil   76          $5.0         0.08%  278         $12.5         0.04%  226         $17.5         0.05%
Frzn Breakfast  77          $4.9         0.07%  159         $20.6         0.07%  143         $25.5         0.07%
Sandwiches
Cream Cheese    78          $4.9         0.07%  52          $45.6         0.14%  55          $50.5         0.13%
Sour Creams     79          $4.8         0.07%  67          $37.9         0.12%  70          $42.7         0.11%
Pizza/Economy   80          $4.8         0.07%  256         $13.5         0.04%  217         $18.3         0.05%
Sandwich        81          $4.7         0.07%  105         $26.5         0.08%  100         $31.2         0.08%
Cookies
Frzn Meat--     82          $4.7         0.07%  209         $16.2         0.05%  184         $20.9         0.05%
Beef
Pizza/          83          $4.5         0.07%  150         $21.4         0.07%  138         $25.9         0.07%
Traditional
Chix: Frd 8pc/  84          $4.5         0.07%  73          $35.1         0.11%  73          $39.6         0.10%
Cut Up (Hot)
Meat: Ham Bulk  85          $4.5         0.07%  51          $47.9         0.15%  52          $52.4         0.14%
Hamburger Buns  86          $4.4         0.07%  101         $26.9         0.09%  97          $31.4         0.08%
Grapes Red      87          $4.4         0.07%  50          $48.5         0.15%  51          $52.9         0.14%
Spring Water    88          $4.4         0.07%  71          $36.1         0.11%  71          $40.5         0.11%
Cottage Cheese  89          $4.4         0.07%  46          $50.7         0.16%  49          $55.1         0.14%
Waffles/        90          $4.4         0.07%  109         $25.8         0.08%  105         $30.2         0.08%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Value Forms/    91          $4.4         0.07%  271         $12.7         0.04%  232         $17.1         0.04%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Candy Bars      92          $4.3         0.07%  97          $28.1         0.09%  93          $32.5         0.09%
(Multi Pack)
Cakes:          93          $4.3         0.07%  204         $16.7         0.05%  183         $21.0         0.06%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Hot Dog Buns    94          $4.3         0.07%  137         $22.9         0.07%  120         $27.2         0.07%
Salsa & Dips    95          $4.3         0.07%  163         $20.5         0.06%  151         $24.7         0.06%
Sweet Goods--   96          $4.3         0.07%  139         $22.9         0.07%  121         $27.2         0.07%
Full Size
Dnr Sausage--   97          $4.3         0.07%  248         $13.9         0.04%  219         $18.2         0.05%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Bkfst Sausage-- 98          $4.3         0.06%  113         $25.2         0.08%  111         $29.4         0.08%
Fresh Rolls
Cheese          99          $4.2         0.06%  87          $30.0         0.10%  87          $34.2         0.09%
Crackers
Bagged Cheese   100         $4.2         0.06%  177         $18.8         0.06%  161         $23.1         0.06%
Snacks
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $894.8        13.60%           $5,251.7        16.66%           $6,146.5        16.13%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-6: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in the Midwest
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $64.3         0.98%  1          $237.1         0.75%  1          $301.4         0.79%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $60.9         0.93%  2          $175.6         0.56%  2          $236.5         0.62%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Primal [Beef]   3          $34.5         0.52%  4          $101.5         0.32%  3          $136.0         0.36%
Lean [Beef]     4          $32.9         0.50%  28          $43.8         0.14%  12          $76.7         0.20%
Shredded        5          $28.5         0.43%  3          $102.0         0.32%  4          $130.4         0.34%
Cheese
Kids Cereal     6          $26.3         0.40%  18          $51.4         0.16%  11          $77.7         0.20%
Sft Drnk 2      7          $26.3         0.40%  8           $67.4         0.21%  6           $93.7         0.25%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    8          $23.0         0.35%  5           $76.5         0.24%  5           $99.5         0.26%
Snacks/         9          $19.5         0.30%  43          $33.6         0.11%  31          $53.0         0.14%
Appetizers
Infant Formula  10         $18.9         0.29%  180         $12.1         0.04%  68          $31.1         0.08%
Starter/
Solutio
Lunchment--Del  11         $17.9         0.27%  10          $60.7         0.19%  10          $78.6         0.21%
i Fresh
Mainstream      12         $17.4         0.26%  35          $38.8         0.12%  28          $56.1         0.15%
White Bread
Enhanced [Pork  13         $17.2         0.26%  16          $54.2         0.17%  16          $71.4         0.19%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
American        14         $17.1         0.26%  30          $43.2         0.14%  22          $60.3         0.16%
Single Cheese
Tortilla/Nacho  15         $16.2         0.25%  14          $56.2         0.18%  15          $72.4         0.19%
Chips
Unflavored Can  16         $16.1         0.24%  12          $60.0         0.19%  13          $76.1         0.20%
Coffee
Fz Ss Economy   17         $15.7         0.24%  68          $25.0         0.08%  45          $40.7         0.11%
Meals All
Soft Drinks     18         $15.5         0.24%  38          $36.7         0.12%  34          $52.3         0.14%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Snack Cake--    19         $15.4         0.23%  42          $33.6         0.11%  38          $49.0         0.13%
Multi Pack
Chicken Breast  20         $15.4         0.23%  7           $68.8         0.22%  7           $84.2         0.22%
Boneless
Fz Ss Prem      21         $15.2         0.23%  22          $46.5         0.15%  21          $61.7         0.16%
Traditional
Meals
Bacon--Trad     22         $14.5         0.22%  32          $42.7         0.14%  25          $57.2         0.15%
16oz Or Less
Eggs--Large     23         $14.2         0.22%  15          $55.8         0.18%  18          $70.0         0.18%
Dairy Case      24         $13.6         0.21%  9           $65.7         0.21%  9           $79.3         0.21%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Still Water     25         $13.5         0.20%  29          $43.5         0.14%  27          $57.0         0.15%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Convenient      26         $13.0         0.20%  82          $20.7         0.07%  61          $33.7         0.09%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Potatoes        27         $13.0         0.20%  31          $42.9         0.14%  29          $55.9         0.15%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Pizza/Premium   28         $12.9         0.20%  37          $37.1         0.12%  36          $50.0         0.13%
All Family      29         $12.6         0.19%  11          $60.1         0.19%  14          $72.7         0.19%
Cereal
Sft Drnk Mlt-   30         $12.5         0.19%  19          $50.1         0.16%  19          $62.6         0.16%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Sandwiches &    31         $12.4         0.19%  88          $20.2         0.06%  65          $32.6         0.09%
Handhelds
Frzn Chicken--  32         $12.4         0.19%  48          $31.9         0.10%  41          $44.3         0.12%
Wht Meat
Ribs [Pork]     33         $12.3         0.19%  58          $27.8         0.09%  47          $40.1         0.11%
Mainstream      34         $11.8         0.18%  23          $45.3         0.14%  26          $57.1         0.15%
Variety
Breads
Sugar           35         $11.7         0.18%  56          $27.9         0.09%  49          $39.6         0.10%
Choice Beef     36         $11.3         0.17%  57          $27.9         0.09%  50          $39.2         0.10%
Condensed Soup  37         $11.2         0.17%  21          $46.8         0.15%  23          $58.0         0.15%
Traditional     38         $10.8         0.16%  26          $44.2         0.14%  30          $55.0         0.14%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Bananas         39         $10.7         0.16%  13          $59.9         0.19%  17          $70.6         0.19%
Pourable Salad  40         $10.6         0.16%  36          $38.6         0.12%  37          $49.2         0.13%
Dressings
Fz Family       41          $9.7         0.15%  74          $22.9         0.07%  66          $32.6         0.09%
Style Entrees
Macaroni &      42          $9.7         0.15%  97          $19.0         0.06%  74          $28.7         0.08%
Cheese Dnrs
Choice Beef     43          $9.6         0.15%  44          $33.0         0.10%  43          $42.5         0.11%
Natural Cheese  44          $9.5         0.14%  20          $48.3         0.15%  24          $57.7         0.15%
Chunks
Mainstream      45          $9.4         0.14%  60          $27.2         0.09%  56          $36.6         0.10%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Margarine:      46          $9.1         0.14%  51          $29.9         0.09%  51          $39.0         0.10%
Tubs And
Bowls
Hot Dogs--Base  47          $9.1         0.14%  95          $19.5         0.06%  75          $28.6         0.08%
Meat
Can Pasta       48          $9.0         0.14%  117         $16.1         0.05%  95          $25.1         0.07%
Mayonnaise &    49          $9.0         0.14%  54          $28.7         0.09%  54          $37.7         0.10%
Whipped
Dressing
Fz Ss Prem      50          $8.6         0.13%  6           $72.5         0.23%  8           $81.1         0.21%
Nutritional
Meals
Strawberries    51          $8.6         0.13%  17          $53.1         0.17%  20          $61.7         0.16%
Sft Drnk Sngl   52          $8.3         0.13%  127         $15.4         0.05%  100         $23.7         0.06%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Meat: Turkey    53          $8.1         0.12%  27          $43.9         0.14%  35          $52.0         0.14%
Bulk
Lunchment--Bol  54          $8.1         0.12%  93          $19.7         0.06%  78          $27.8         0.07%
ogna/Sausage
Aseptic Pack    55          $7.9         0.12%  124         $15.6         0.05%  101         $23.6         0.06%
Juice And
Drinks
Isotonic        56          $7.9         0.12%  59          $27.6         0.09%  58          $35.4         0.09%
Drinks Single
Serve
Fz Bag          57          $7.8         0.12%  45          $32.7         0.10%  46          $40.6         0.11%
Vegetables--P
lain
Select Beef     58          $7.7         0.12%  100         $18.5         0.06%  89          $26.2         0.07%
Frzn French     59          $7.6         0.12%  128         $15.3         0.05%  104         $23.0         0.06%
Fries
Adult Cereal    60          $7.6         0.12%  24          $45.1         0.14%  32          $52.7         0.14%
Pizza/Economy   61          $7.6         0.12%  113         $16.6         0.05%  96          $24.2         0.06%
Sw Gds: Donuts  62          $7.6         0.11%  66          $25.4         0.08%  64          $32.9         0.09%
Frzn Chicken--  63          $7.5         0.11%  467          $4.2         0.01%  248         $11.7         0.03%
Wings
Flavored Milk   64          $7.5         0.11%  75          $22.7         0.07%  72          $30.3         0.08%
Premium [Ice    65          $7.5         0.11%  25          $45.1         0.14%  33          $52.6         0.14%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Candy Bags--    66          $7.3         0.11%  34          $39.3         0.12%  40          $46.6         0.12%
Chocolate
Peanut Butter   67          $7.1         0.11%  40          $34.5         0.11%  44          $41.6         0.11%
Sweet Goods--   68          $7.1         0.11%  81          $20.9         0.07%  77          $28.0         0.07%
Full Size
Meat: Ham Bulk  69          $7.0         0.11%  39          $36.5         0.12%  42          $43.4         0.11%
Refrigerated    70          $7.0         0.11%  49          $31.2         0.10%  53          $38.2         0.10%
Coffee
Creamers
Bkfst Sausage-- 71          $6.6         0.10%  92          $19.7         0.06%  86          $26.4         0.07%
Fresh Rolls
Tuna            72          $6.6         0.10%  62          $26.4         0.08%  63          $33.0         0.09%
Value Forms     73          $6.6         0.10%  157         $13.3         0.04%  126         $19.9         0.05%
Frz Chick/
18oz & Larger
Cakes:          74          $6.5         0.10%  147         $14.1         0.04%  119         $20.6         0.05%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Pizza/          75          $6.5         0.10%  96          $19.2         0.06%  93          $25.7         0.07%
Traditional
Cream Cheese    76          $6.4         0.10%  47          $32.0         0.10%  52          $38.4         0.10%
Fruit Snacks    77          $6.4         0.10%  167         $13.0         0.04%  129         $19.4         0.05%
Vegetable Oil   78          $6.4         0.10%  265          $8.5         0.03%  189         $14.9         0.04%
Frzn Breakfast  79          $6.4         0.10%  145         $14.3         0.05%  118         $20.7         0.05%
Sandwiches
Frzn Meat--     80          $6.3         0.10%  164         $13.1         0.04%  130         $19.4         0.05%
Beef
Sandwich        81          $6.2         0.09%  89          $20.1         0.06%  85          $26.4         0.07%
Cookies
Hamburger Buns  82          $6.2         0.09%  76          $22.4         0.07%  76          $28.6         0.08%
Fz Skillet      83          $6.2         0.09%  83          $20.7         0.07%  82          $26.9         0.07%
Meals
Chicken Wings   84          $6.1         0.09%  368          $5.9         0.02%  240         $12.0         0.03%
Sour Creams     85          $6.1         0.09%  71          $24.3         0.08%  71          $30.4         0.08%
Cottage Cheese  86          $6.1         0.09%  41          $33.8         0.11%  48          $39.9         0.10%
Butter          87          $6.0         0.09%  33          $41.9         0.13%  39          $47.9         0.13%
Dnr Sausage--   88          $6.0         0.09%  103         $17.8         0.06%  99          $23.8         0.06%
Links Fresh
Cheese          89          $5.9         0.09%  65          $25.5         0.08%  67          $31.4         0.08%
Crackers
Rts Soup:       90          $5.8         0.09%  50          $30.3         0.10%  57          $36.1         0.09%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Hot Dog Buns    91          $5.7         0.09%  102         $17.9         0.06%  102         $23.5         0.06%
Waffles/        92          $5.6         0.09%  85          $20.5         0.07%  90          $26.1         0.07%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Mult Pk Bag     93          $5.6         0.09%  234          $9.9         0.03%  178         $15.5         0.04%
Snacks
Candy Bars      94          $5.6         0.08%  91          $20.0         0.06%  94          $25.6         0.07%
(Multi Pack)
Toaster         95          $5.5         0.08%  121         $15.8         0.05%  113         $21.3         0.06%
Pastries
Salsa & Dips    96          $5.4         0.08%  151         $13.9         0.04%  131         $19.2         0.05%
Angus [Beef]    97          $5.3         0.08%  55          $28.0         0.09%  62          $33.4         0.09%
Dnr Sausage--   98          $5.3         0.08%  182         $12.0         0.04%  155         $17.4         0.05%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Tray Pack/Choc  99          $5.2         0.08%  125         $15.6         0.05%  116         $20.8         0.05%
Chip Cookies
Grapes White    100         $5.2         0.08%  80          $21.3         0.07%  84          $26.5         0.07%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100               $1,174.1        17.84%           $3,685.6        11.70%           $4,859.7        12.76%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-7: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in the South
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $66.4         1.01%  1          $305.9         0.97%  1          $372.3         0.98%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $63.3         0.96%  2          $229.6         0.73%  2          $292.8         0.77%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $38.6         0.59%  15          $75.2         0.24%  8          $113.8         0.30%
Kids Cereal     4          $29.8         0.45%  23          $63.5         0.20%  15          $93.3         0.24%
Sft Drnk 2      5          $26.2         0.40%  9           $91.0         0.29%  7          $117.2         0.31%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Primal [Beef]   6          $25.7         0.39%  6          $100.9         0.32%  5          $126.6         0.33%
Shredded        7          $25.6         0.39%  3          $121.8         0.39%  3          $147.4         0.39%
Cheese
Potato Chips    8          $23.5         0.36%  12          $87.7         0.28%  10         $111.2         0.29%
Lunchment--Del  9          $22.8         0.35%  7           $95.8         0.30%  6          $118.6         0.31%
i Fresh
Mainstream      10         $21.3         0.32%  24          $62.7         0.20%  21          $84.0         0.22%
White Bread
Still Water     11         $20.1         0.31%  16          $74.1         0.24%  14          $94.2         0.25%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Snack Cake--    12         $19.8         0.30%  37          $48.3         0.15%  32          $68.1         0.18%
Multi Pack
Eggs--Large     13         $18.8         0.29%  11          $88.4         0.28%  12         $107.2         0.28%
American        14         $17.9         0.27%  32          $56.0         0.18%  27          $73.9         0.19%
Single Cheese
Chicken Breast  15         $17.5         0.27%  4          $109.1         0.35%  4          $126.6         0.33%
Boneless
Sugar           16         $17.4         0.26%  41          $46.5         0.15%  35          $63.9         0.17%
Sft Drnk Mlt-   17         $17.2         0.26%  10          $89.0         0.28%  13         $106.2         0.28%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Fz Ss Prem      18         $16.7         0.25%  27          $59.9         0.19%  24          $76.6         0.20%
Traditional
Meals
Infant Formula  19         $16.5         0.25%  247         $13.1         0.04%  108         $29.5         0.08%
Starter/
Solutio
Tortilla/Nacho  20         $16.1         0.24%  19          $71.5         0.23%  18          $87.6         0.23%
Chips
Dairy Case      21         $15.9         0.24%  8           $92.7         0.29%  11         $108.6         0.29%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Pizza/Premium   22         $15.9         0.24%  29          $59.0         0.19%  26          $74.9         0.20%
Fz Ss Economy   23         $15.2         0.23%  84          $27.9         0.09%  59          $43.1         0.11%
Meals All
Snacks/         24         $15.2         0.23%  59          $35.7         0.11%  47          $50.9         0.13%
Appetizers
Soft Drinks     25         $15.2         0.23%  58          $36.1         0.11%  46          $51.2         0.13%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Bacon--Trad     26         $14.8         0.23%  30          $58.3         0.18%  29          $73.1         0.19%
16oz Or Less
Mainstream      27         $14.6         0.22%  18          $72.1         0.23%  19          $86.8         0.23%
Variety
Breads
Sandwiches &    28         $14.6         0.22%  87          $27.1         0.09%  63          $41.7         0.11%
Handhelds
Ribs [Pork]     29         $14.1         0.21%  51          $40.4         0.13%  41          $54.5         0.14%
Convenient      30         $14.1         0.21%  80          $28.6         0.09%  60          $42.7         0.11%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Enhanced [Pork  31         $14.0         0.21%  21          $66.0         0.21%  23          $80.0         0.21%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Potatoes        32         $13.8         0.21%  26          $61.4         0.19%  25          $75.3         0.20%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Unflavored Can  33         $13.4         0.20%  17          $73.0         0.23%  20          $86.3         0.23%
Coffee
Chicken Wings   34         $13.4         0.20%  224         $14.2         0.05%  119         $27.6         0.07%
Mult Pk Bag     35         $12.2         0.19%  137         $20.4         0.06%  87          $32.6         0.09%
Snacks
Fz Bag          36         $12.2         0.19%  33          $54.9         0.17%  33          $67.1         0.18%
Vegetables--P
lain
Sft Drnk Sngl   37         $12.2         0.18%  85          $27.5         0.09%  66          $39.7         0.10%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Premium [Ice    38         $12.1         0.18%  13          $79.1         0.25%  16          $91.3         0.24%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Frzn Chicken--  39         $12.1         0.18%  338          $9.0         0.03%  173         $21.1         0.06%
Wings
Bananas         40         $11.6         0.18%  14          $78.9         0.25%  17          $90.5         0.24%
All Family      41         $11.3         0.17%  20          $70.1         0.22%  22          $81.4         0.21%
Cereal
Pourable Salad  42         $11.1         0.17%  38          $48.1         0.15%  36          $59.2         0.16%
Dressings
Hot Dogs--Base  43         $11.0         0.17%  106         $23.9         0.08%  80          $34.9         0.09%
Meat
Condensed Soup  44         $10.9         0.17%  31          $56.2         0.18%  34          $67.1         0.18%
Fz Family       45         $10.5         0.16%  69          $32.1         0.10%  61          $42.6         0.11%
Style Entrees
Isotonic        46         $10.2         0.16%  49          $40.6         0.13%  48          $50.8         0.13%
Drinks Single
Serve
Frzn Chicken--  47         $10.2         0.16%  55          $37.3         0.12%  53          $47.5         0.12%
Wht Meat
Vegetable Oil   48         $10.1         0.15%  204         $15.4         0.05%  132         $25.5         0.07%
Mayonnaise &    49         $10.1         0.15%  46          $43.1         0.14%  43          $53.2         0.14%
Whipped
Dressing
Aseptic Pack    50          $9.9         0.15%  115         $22.7         0.07%  88          $32.5         0.09%
Juice And
Drinks
Frzn Breakfast  51          $9.5         0.14%  83          $27.9         0.09%  70          $37.4         0.10%
Sandwiches
Macaroni &      52          $9.4         0.14%  121         $21.8         0.07%  98          $31.3         0.08%
Cheese Dnrs
Fz Ss Prem      53          $9.2         0.14%  5          $102.2         0.32%  9          $111.5         0.29%
Nutritional
Meals
Frzn French     54          $9.2         0.14%  127         $21.2         0.07%  103         $30.4         0.08%
Fries
Choice Beef     55          $8.9         0.14%  56          $37.2         0.12%  55          $46.1         0.12%
Lunchment--Bol  56          $8.9         0.14%  110         $23.5         0.07%  89          $32.4         0.09%
ogna/Sausage
Natural Cheese  57          $8.9         0.14%  28          $59.2         0.19%  31          $68.1         0.18%
Chunks
Can Pasta       58          $8.8         0.13%  156         $18.7         0.06%  121         $27.5         0.07%
Adult Cereal    59          $8.5         0.13%  22          $64.7         0.21%  28          $73.2         0.19%
Traditional     60          $8.5         0.13%  50          $40.5         0.13%  49          $49.0         0.13%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Mainstream      61          $8.4         0.13%  81          $28.5         0.09%  74          $36.9         0.10%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Dnr Sausage--   62          $8.3         0.13%  199         $15.7         0.05%  144         $24.1         0.06%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Chicken Drums   63          $8.3         0.13%  249         $12.9         0.04%  172         $21.2         0.06%
Margarine:      64          $8.1         0.12%  63          $33.4         0.11%  64          $41.5         0.11%
Tubs And
Bowls
Tuna            65          $8.0         0.12%  48          $40.9         0.13%  50          $48.9         0.13%
Pizza/Economy   66          $7.9         0.12%  181         $16.4         0.05%  142         $24.3         0.06%
Strawberries    67          $7.8         0.12%  25          $62.0         0.20%  30          $69.9         0.18%
Angus [Beef]    68          $7.8         0.12%  40          $46.9         0.15%  40          $54.7         0.14%
Shrimp--Raw     69          $7.6         0.12%  70          $31.8         0.10%  68          $39.4         0.10%
Value Forms/    70          $7.5         0.11%  179         $16.5         0.05%  145 $        24.0         0.06%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Select Beef     71          $7.5         0.11%  36          $51.3         0.16%  37          $58.8         0.15%
Fz Skillet      72          $7.4         0.11%  76          $29.7         0.09%  72          $37.1         0.10%
Meals
Cakes:          73          $7.3         0.11%  142         $19.7         0.06%  122         $27.1         0.07%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Bacon--Trad     74          $7.2         0.11%  108         $23.7         0.08%  100         $30.9         0.08%
Greater Than
16oz
Pizza/          75          $7.2         0.11%  91          $26.2         0.08%  84          $33.4         0.09%
Traditional
Refrigerated    76          $7.1         0.11%  114         $22.8         0.07%  106         $29.9         0.08%
Biscuits
Sw Gds: Donuts  77          $7.0         0.11%  107         $23.8         0.08%  101         $30.8         0.08%
Frzn Meat--     78          $7.0         0.11%  185         $16.3         0.05%  151         $23.3         0.06%
Beef
Salsa & Dips    79          $7.0         0.11%  122         $21.7         0.07%  114         $28.7         0.08%
Fruit Snacks    80          $7.0         0.11%  194         $16.0         0.05%  154         $23.0         0.06%
Candy Bags--    81          $6.9         0.11%  42          $46.5         0.15%  42          $53.4         0.14%
Chocolate
Peanut Butter   82          $6.7         0.10%  43          $45.2         0.14%  45          $51.9         0.14%
Sandwich        83          $6.7         0.10%  100         $24.9         0.08%  93          $31.6         0.08%
Cookies
Ramen Noodles/  84          $6.6         0.10%  327          $9.5         0.03%  243         $16.2         0.04%
Ramen Cups
Waffles/        85          $6.6         0.10%  82          $27.9         0.09%  81          $34.5         0.09%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Hot Dog Buns    86          $6.3         0.10%  116         $22.5         0.07%  113         $28.9         0.08%
Candy Bars      87          $6.2         0.09%  96          $25.4         0.08%  95          $31.6         0.08%
(Multi Pack)
Bagged Cheese   88          $6.2         0.09%  147         $19.4         0.06%  133         $25.5         0.07%
Snacks
Prepared        89          $6.1         0.09%  125         $21.5         0.07%  118         $27.6         0.07%
Beans--Baked
W/Pork
Loaf Cheese     90          $6.1         0.09%  145         $19.5         0.06%  130         $25.6         0.07%
Meat: Turkey    91          $6.0         0.09%  34          $52.7         0.17%  38          $58.8         0.15%
Bulk
Tray Pack/Choc  92          $6.0         0.09%  141         $19.9         0.06%  129         $26.0         0.07%
Chip Cookies
Hamburger Buns  93          $6.0         0.09%  99          $25.1         0.08%  99          $31.1         0.08%
Green Beans:    94          $6.0         0.09%  102         $24.8         0.08%  102         $30.8         0.08%
Fs/Whl/Cut
Grapes White    95          $6.0         0.09%  75          $29.7         0.09%  79          $35.6         0.09%
Spring Water    96          $6.0         0.09%  64          $32.9         0.10%  69          $38.8         0.10%
Rts Soup:       97          $5.9         0.09%  54          $38.6         0.12%  57          $44.5         0.12%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Butter Spray    98          $5.9         0.09%  88          $26.2         0.08%  91          $32.1         0.08%
Cracker
Instore Cut     99          $5.9         0.09%  57          $36.6         0.12%  62          $42.5         0.11%
Fruit
Toaster         100         $5.8         0.09%  134         $20.5         0.07%  125         $26.4         0.07%
Pastries
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100               $1,268.9        19.28%           $4,783.8        15.18%           $6,052.7        15.89%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-8: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in the West
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $60.4         0.92%  1          $310.8         0.99%  1          $371.2         0.97%
White Only
Lean [Beef]     2          $40.9         0.62%  3          $138.9         0.44%  3          $179.8         0.47%
Soft Drinks 12/ 3          $40.5         0.62%  2          $196.0         0.62%  2          $236.5         0.62%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Kids Cereal     4          $22.0         0.33%  22          $71.5         0.23%  17          $93.5         0.25%
Shredded        5          $20.7         0.31%  4          $118.2         0.38%  4          $138.9         0.36%
Cheese
Eggs--Large     6          $19.1         0.29%  8          $107.4         0.34%  6          $126.5         0.33%
Infant Formula  7          $18.8         0.29%  167         $20.1         0.06%  75          $38.9         0.10%
Starter/
Solutio
Sft Drnk 2      8          $18.4         0.28%  21          $71.8         0.23%  18          $90.2         0.24%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    9          $17.9         0.27%  13          $89.0         0.28%  11         $106.9         0.28%
Natural Cheese  10         $16.9         0.26%  7          $108.6         0.34%  7          $125.6         0.33%
Chunks
Chicken Breast  11         $16.7         0.25%  5          $115.0         0.36%  5          $131.7         0.35%
Boneless
Still Water     12         $15.2         0.23%  24          $70.1         0.22%  23          $85.3         0.22%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Lunchment--Del  13         $15.2         0.23%  14          $86.0         0.27%  13         $101.2         0.27%
i Fresh
Tortilla/Nacho  14         $15.1         0.23%  17          $81.3         0.26%  16          $96.4         0.25%
Chips
Mexican Soft    15         $15.1         0.23%  23          $71.5         0.23%  21          $86.6         0.23%
Tortillas And
Wra
Dairy Case      16         $14.0         0.21%  6          $110.7         0.35%  8          $124.7         0.33%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Select Beef     17         $12.6         0.19%  19          $73.9         0.23%  22          $86.5         0.23%
Isotonic        18         $12.4         0.19%  39          $51.4         0.16%  38          $63.7         0.17%
Drinks Single
Serve
All Family      19         $12.3         0.19%  15          $84.7         0.27%  15          $97.0         0.25%
Cereal
Mainstream      20         $12.0         0.18%  37          $55.8         0.18%  36          $67.8         0.18%
Variety
Breads
Fz Ss Prem      21         $11.9         0.18%  27          $69.1         0.22%  25          $81.0         0.21%
Traditional
Meals
Bananas         22         $11.9         0.18%  9          $103.9         0.33%  9          $115.8         0.30%
Unflavored Can  23         $11.9         0.18%  29          $65.0         0.21%  27          $76.9         0.20%
Coffee
Premium [Ice    24         $11.6         0.18%  10         $101.7         0.32%  10         $113.3         0.30%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Refrigerated    25         $11.5         0.17%  18          $75.9         0.24%  20          $87.4         0.23%
Coffee
Creamers
Bacon--Trad     26         $11.4         0.17%  36          $56.6         0.18%  34          $68.1         0.18%
16oz Or Less
Pizza/Premium   27         $10.9         0.17%  35          $57.2         0.18%  35          $68.1         0.18%
Enhanced [Pork  28         $10.3         0.16%  49          $47.8         0.15%  42          $58.1         0.15%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Fz Ss Economy   29         $10.0         0.15%  104         $27.8         0.09%  83          $37.8         0.10%
Meals All
Snacks/         30         $10.0         0.15%  85          $31.2         0.10%  70          $41.1         0.11%
Appetizers
Choice Beef     31          $9.9         0.15%  28          $66.5         0.21%  28          $76.5         0.20%
Mainstream      32          $9.3         0.14%  71          $35.3         0.11%  64          $44.6         0.12%
White Bread
American        33          $9.0         0.14%  66          $37.4         0.12%  62          $46.5         0.12%
Single Cheese
Soft Drinks     34          $9.0         0.14%  77          $33.6         0.11%  67          $42.6         0.11%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Potatoes        35          $9.0         0.14%  44          $50.1         0.16%  40          $59.1         0.16%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Adult Cereal    36          $8.8         0.13%  20          $72.8         0.23%  24          $81.6         0.21%
Sandwiches &    37          $8.8         0.13%  113         $26.3         0.08%  92          $35.1         0.09%
Handhelds
Ribs [Pork]     38          $8.6         0.13%  62          $38.5         0.12%  59          $47.1         0.12%
Avocado         39          $8.4         0.13%  26          $69.5         0.22%  26          $77.9         0.20%
Choice Beef     40          $8.2         0.13%  102         $28.4         0.09%  85          $36.6         0.10%
Mayonnaise &    41          $8.2         0.12%  50          $47.2         0.15%  45          $55.4         0.15%
Whipped
Dressing
Sandwiches--(C  42          $8.1         0.12%  54          $44.1         0.14%  51          $52.2         0.14%
old)
Butter          43          $8.0         0.12%  16          $81.6         0.26%  19          $89.6         0.24%
Premium Bread   44          $7.9         0.12%  12          $89.1         0.28%  14          $97.0         0.25%
Sugar           45          $7.8         0.12%  64          $38.3         0.12%  63          $46.1         0.12%
Condensed Soup  46          $7.6         0.12%  42          $50.6         0.16%  41          $58.2         0.15%
Frzn Chicken--  47          $7.4         0.11%  90          $30.6         0.10%  81          $38.0         0.10%
Wht Meat
Fz Family       48          $7.4         0.11%  100         $28.5         0.09%  87          $35.9         0.09%
Style Entrees
Sft Drnk Sngl   49          $7.3         0.11%  101         $28.5         0.09%  88          $35.8         0.09%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Candy Bags--    50          $7.3         0.11%  33          $61.8         0.20%  32          $69.0         0.18%
Chocolate
Pourable Salad  51          $7.3         0.11%  38          $52.8         0.17%  39          $60.1         0.16%
Dressings
Convenient      52          $7.1         0.11%  160         $20.5         0.06%  126         $27.6         0.07%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Strawberries    53          $7.0         0.11%  31          $63.3         0.20%  31          $70.3         0.18%
Fz Ss Prem      54          $6.9         0.10%  11          $96.9         0.31%  12         $103.7         0.27%
Nutritional
Meals
Sw Gds: Donuts  55          $6.7         0.10%  79          $33.1         0.11%  74          $39.8         0.10%
Peanut Butter   56          $6.6         0.10%  48          $48.1         0.15%  46          $54.7         0.14%
Tuna            57          $6.5         0.10%  59          $42.6         0.14%  57          $49.2         0.13%
Snack Cake--    58          $6.5         0.10%  168         $19.8         0.06%  141         $26.3         0.07%
Multi Pack
Aseptic Pack    59          $6.4         0.10%  174         $18.8         0.06%  152         $25.3         0.07%
Juice And
Drinks
Traditional     60          $6.3         0.10%  75          $34.1         0.11%  73          $40.4         0.11%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Margarine:      61          $6.2         0.09%  65          $37.5         0.12%  65          $43.8         0.11%
Tubs And
Bowls
Sour Creams     62          $6.2         0.09%  60          $41.7         0.13%  58          $47.9         0.13%
String Cheese   63          $6.2         0.09%  55          $43.8         0.14%  54          $50.0         0.13%
Candy Bars      64          $6.2         0.09%  103         $28.1         0.09%  95          $34.2         0.09%
(Singles)
(Including)
Bagged Cheese   65          $6.1         0.09%  166         $20.2         0.06%  139         $26.4         0.07%
Snacks
Cream Cheese    66          $6.1         0.09%  46          $48.4         0.15%  47          $54.5         0.14%
Dairy Case      67          $6.0         0.09%  132         $23.5         0.07%  115         $29.5         0.08%
Juice Drnk
Under 10
Rts Soup:       68          $5.9         0.09%  40          $51.0         0.16%  43          $56.9         0.15%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Fz Bag          69          $5.7         0.09%  53          $44.3         0.14%  55          $50.0         0.13%
Vegetables--P
lain
Frzn Meat--     70          $5.7         0.09%  199         $16.9         0.05%  168         $22.6         0.06%
Beef
Tea Sweetened   71          $5.7         0.09%  89          $30.6         0.10%  86          $36.3         0.10%
Chix:           72          $5.6         0.09%  30          $64.7         0.21%  30          $70.3         0.18%
Rotisserie
(Hot)
Burritos        73          $5.4         0.08%  286         $12.2         0.04%  220         $17.6         0.05%
Spring Water    74          $5.3         0.08%  52          $44.9         0.14%  53          $50.3         0.13%
Ramen Noodles/  75          $5.3         0.08%  268         $12.8         0.04%  217         $18.1         0.05%
Ramen Cups
Macaroni &      76          $5.2         0.08%  173         $18.8         0.06%  156         $24.0         0.06%
Cheese Dnrs
Natural Cheese  77          $5.2         0.08%  41          $51.0         0.16%  44          $56.2         0.15%
Slices
Fz Skillet      78          $5.2         0.08%  94          $29.0         0.09%  96          $34.1         0.09%
Meals
Waffles/        79          $5.2         0.08%  95          $28.9         0.09%  97          $34.1         0.09%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Mainstream      80          $5.1         0.08%  117         $25.3         0.08%  113         $30.4         0.08%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Meat: Turkey    81          $5.1         0.08%  32          $63.0         0.20%  33          $68.1         0.18%
Bulk
Cheese          82          $5.1         0.08%  78          $33.1         0.11%  79          $38.2         0.10%
Crackers
Grapes Red      83          $5.1         0.08%  51          $46.6         0.15%  52          $51.6         0.14%
Sandwich        84          $5.1         0.08%  110         $26.7         0.08%  107         $31.8         0.08%
Cookies
Shrimp--Cooked  85          $5.1         0.08%  124         $24.5         0.08%  114         $29.5         0.08%
Whole Chicken   86          $5.0         0.08%  107         $27.3         0.09%  104         $32.3         0.08%
(Roasters/
Fryer)
Shrimp--Raw     87          $5.0         0.08%  109         $27.2         0.09%  106         $32.2         0.08%
Hot Dogs--Base  88          $4.9         0.08%  255         $13.5         0.04%  213         $18.4         0.05%
Meat
Cottage Cheese  89          $4.9         0.07%  45          $48.8         0.15%  49          $53.7         0.14%
Oranges Navels  90          $4.9         0.07%  68          $36.8         0.12%  69          $41.6         0.11%
All
Chewing Gum     91          $4.8         0.07%  80          $33.0         0.10%  84          $37.8         0.10%
Lunchment--Bol  92          $4.8         0.07%  190         $17.7         0.06%  170         $22.5         0.06%
ogna/Sausage
Apple Juice &   93          $4.7         0.07%  188         $18.0         0.06%  167         $22.7         0.06%
Cider (Over
50%)
Super Premium   94          $4.7         0.07%  47          $48.3         0.15%  50          $53.1         0.14%
Pints [Ice
Cream &
Sherbert]
Salsa & Dips    95          $4.7         0.07%  152         $21.4         0.07%  143         $26.2         0.07%
Cakes:          96          $4.7         0.07%  206         $16.5         0.05%  184         $21.2         0.06%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Yogurt/Ss       97          $4.7         0.07%  70          $36.3         0.12%  71          $41.0         0.11%
Regular
Value Forms/    98          $4.6         0.07%  270         $12.8         0.04%  226         $17.3         0.05%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Energy Drink--  99          $4.5         0.07%  108         $27.3         0.09%  108         $31.8         0.08%
Single Serve
(N)
Non-Carb Water  100         $4.5         0.07%  88          $30.7         0.09%  90          $35.1         0.09%
Flvr--Drnk/
Mnr
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $971.3        14.76%           $5,340.7        16.93%           $6,312.0        16.56%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-9: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in Large Metropolitan Counties
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1         $102.1         1.55%  1          $484.1         1.54%  1          $586.2         1.54%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $84.7         1.29%  2          $346.6         1.10%  2          $431.3         1.13%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $58.3         0.89%  11         $142.4         0.45%  5          $200.7         0.53%
Kids Cereal     4          $44.8         0.68%  18         $110.5         0.35%  14         $155.3         0.41%
Shredded        5          $41.0         0.62%  3          $197.3         0.63%  3          $238.2         0.63%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      6          $39.6         0.60%  13         $135.9         0.43%  10         $175.5         0.46%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    7          $35.3         0.54%  9          $145.9         0.46%  8          $181.2         0.48%
Lunchment--Del  8          $30.4         0.46%  12         $140.6         0.45%  11         $171.0         0.45%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     9          $29.6         0.45%  8          $147.8         0.47%  9          $177.3         0.47%
Primal [Beef]   10         $29.6         0.45%  19         $109.9         0.35%  18         $139.5         0.37%
Infant Formula  11         $29.1         0.44%  198         $26.5         0.08%  88          $55.6         0.15%
Starter/
Solution
Still Water     12         $28.9         0.44%  17         $119.0         0.38%  16         $147.9         0.39%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Chicken Breast  13         $27.5         0.42%  4          $178.4         0.57%  4          $205.9         0.54%
Boneless
Dairy Case      14         $26.7         0.41%  6          $168.2         0.53%  6          $194.9         0.51%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Tortilla/Nacho  15         $25.7         0.39%  15         $122.3         0.39%  15         $148.0         0.39%
Chips
Fz Ss Prem      16         $25.6         0.39%  23         $108.0         0.34%  20         $133.5         0.35%
Traditional
Meals
Snacks/         17         $24.7         0.38%  65          $61.0         0.19%  45          $85.7         0.22%
Appetizers
Mainstream      18         $24.3         0.37%  49          $73.5         0.23%  39          $97.8         0.26%
White Bread
American        19         $23.7         0.36%  43          $77.3         0.25%  34         $101.0         0.27%
Single Cheese
Mainstream      20         $23.2         0.35%  25         $102.4         0.32%  22         $125.7         0.33%
Variety
Breads
Fz Ss Economy   21         $22.6         0.34%  91          $46.0         0.15%  70          $68.7         0.18%
Meals All
Bacon--Trad     22         $22.5         0.34%  31          $90.3         0.29%  28         $112.9         0.30%
16oz Or Less
Snack Cake--    23         $22.3         0.34%  72          $55.8         0.18%  59          $78.1         0.21%
Multi Pack
Pizza/Premium   24         $21.7         0.33%  29          $91.8         0.29%  26         $113.5         0.30%
Unflavored Can  25         $20.3         0.31%  22         $108.3         0.34%  21         $128.7         0.34%
Coffee
Sugar           26         $20.1         0.31%  62          $62.1         0.20%  54          $82.1         0.22%
Bananas         27         $19.9         0.30%  7          $148.3         0.47%  12         $168.2         0.44%
Enhanced [Pork  28         $19.8         0.30%  33          $86.6         0.27%  31         $106.5         0.28%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
All Family      29         $19.8         0.30%  14         $124.8         0.40%  17         $144.6         0.38%
Cereal
Premium [Ice    30         $19.3         0.29%  10         $144.6         0.46%  13         $163.9         0.43%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Sandwiches &    31         $19.2         0.29%  95          $43.3         0.14%  78          $62.5         0.16%
Handhelds
Ribs [Pork]     32         $19.1         0.29%  64          $61.4         0.19%  56          $80.6         0.21%
Convenient      33         $18.7         0.28%  103         $41.8         0.13%  82          $60.5         0.16%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Natural Cheese  34         $18.6         0.28%  16         $120.3         0.38%  19         $138.9         0.36%
Chunks
Potatoes        35         $18.5         0.28%  36          $85.2         0.27%  32         $103.7         0.27%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Isotonic        36         $17.7         0.27%  47          $73.7         0.23%  43          $91.4         0.24%
Drinks Single
Serve
Soft Drinks     37         $17.5         0.27%  75          $54.2         0.17%  64          $71.6         0.19%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Frzn Chicken--  38         $16.9         0.26%  73          $55.6         0.18%  63          $72.5         0.19%
Wht Meat
Sft Drnk Mlt-   39         $16.3         0.25%  30          $90.4         0.29%  29         $106.7         0.28%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Pourable Salad  40         $16.2         0.25%  39          $82.7         0.26%  37          $98.9         0.26%
Dressings
Choice Beef     41         $16.1         0.24%  40          $81.9         0.26%  38          $98.0         0.26%
Fz Family       42         $15.5         0.24%  82          $49.6         0.16%  74          $65.1         0.17%
Style Entrees
Condensed Soup  43         $15.4         0.23%  38          $84.7         0.27%  35         $100.2         0.26%
Fz Bag          44         $15.1         0.23%  42          $77.6         0.25%  42          $92.7         0.24%
Vegetables--P
lain
Frzn Chicken--  45         $15.1         0.23%  444         $11.1         0.04%  242         $26.3         0.07%
Wings
Mayonnaise &    46         $14.9         0.23%  55          $68.0         0.22%  50          $82.9         0.22%
Whipped
Dressing
Select Beef     47         $14.9         0.23%  34          $86.5         0.27%  33         $101.4         0.27%
Fz Ss Prem      48         $14.6         0.22%  5          $172.2         0.55%  7          $186.7         0.49%
Nutritional
Meals
Adult Cereal    49         $14.4         0.22%  20         $109.6         0.35%  23         $124.0         0.33%
Sft Drnk Sngl   50         $14.4         0.22%  107         $40.1         0.13%  92          $54.5         0.14%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Aseptic Pack    51         $14.3         0.22%  122         $36.3         0.12%  100         $50.6         0.13%
Juice And
Drinks
Chicken Wings   52         $14.0         0.21%  282         $18.6         0.06%  190         $32.6         0.09%
Traditional     53         $13.6         0.21%  58          $63.3         0.20%  62          $76.9         0.20%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Mult Pk Bag     54         $13.5         0.21%  182         $28.3         0.09%  134         $41.8         0.11%
Snacks
Refrigerated    55         $13.5         0.20%  27          $93.2         0.30%  30         $106.6         0.28%
Coffee
Creamers
Mexican Soft    56         $13.4         0.20%  53          $69.5         0.22%  51          $82.9         0.22%
Tortillas And
Wra
Strawberries    57         $13.4         0.20%  21         $109.1         0.35%  24         $122.5         0.32%
Hot Dogs--Base  58         $13.1         0.20%  174         $29.5         0.09%  130         $42.5         0.11%
Meat
Mainstream      59         $13.0         0.20%  86          $48.2         0.15%  80          $61.2         0.16%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Macaroni &      60         $12.8         0.19%  136         $34.4         0.11%  109         $47.1         0.12%
Cheese Dnrs
Choice Beef     61         $12.6         0.19%  114         $38.4         0.12%  99          $51.0         0.13%
Margarine:      62         $12.6         0.19%  68          $58.4         0.19%  65          $71.0         0.19%
Tubs And
Bowls
Tuna            63         $12.2         0.19%  56          $68.0         0.22%  57          $80.2         0.21%
Meat: Turkey    64         $12.1         0.18%  24         $105.2         0.33%  25         $117.4         0.31%
Bulk
Vegetable Oil   65         $11.7         0.18%  256         $20.5         0.06%  194         $32.2         0.08%
Frzn French     66         $11.4         0.17%  180         $28.5         0.09%  147         $39.8         0.10%
Fries
Lunchment--Bol  67         $11.3         0.17%  152         $32.9         0.10%  121         $44.2         0.12%
ogna/Sausage
Candy Bags--    68         $11.3         0.17%  37          $84.8         0.27%  41          $96.0         0.25%
Chocolate
Can Pasta       69         $11.3         0.17%  204         $26.0         0.08%  163         $37.3         0.10%
Fz Skillet      70         $11.2         0.17%  84          $48.9         0.16%  85          $60.1         0.16%
Meals
Sw Gds: Donuts  71         $11.1         0.17%  99          $43.0         0.14%  93          $54.1         0.14%
Butter          72         $11.1         0.17%  26         $102.0         0.32%  27         $113.1         0.30%
Peanut Butter   73         $11.0         0.17%  45          $74.1         0.23%  46          $85.0         0.22%
Frzn Meat--     74         $10.7         0.16%  196         $26.6         0.08%  162         $37.3         0.10%
Beef
Frzn Breakfast  75         $10.7         0.16%  143         $33.6         0.11%  120         $44.3         0.12%
Sandwiches
Cakes:          76         $10.7         0.16%  169         $30.1         0.10%  140         $40.8         0.11%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Waffles/        77         $10.4         0.16%  81          $50.0         0.16%  83          $60.5         0.16%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Spring Water    78         $10.4         0.16%  57          $67.7         0.21%  60          $78.0         0.20%
Value Forms/    79         $10.2         0.16%  212         $24.9         0.08%  177         $35.1         0.09%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Sandwiches--(C  80         $10.2         0.16%  92          $46.0         0.15%  87          $56.2         0.15%
old)
Dairy Case      81         $10.2         0.15%  158         $31.8         0.10%  131         $42.0         0.11%
Juice Drnk
Under 10
Dnr Sausage--   82         $10.2         0.15%  232         $23.0         0.07%  186         $33.2         0.09%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Sandwich        83         $10.1         0.15%  102         $42.0         0.13%  97          $52.1         0.14%
Cookies
Pizza/Economy   84         $10.0         0.15%  234         $22.9         0.07%  188         $32.9         0.09%
Chicken Drums   85         $10.0         0.15%  276         $18.9         0.06%  225         $28.9         0.08%
Rts Soup:       86          $9.9         0.15%  50          $73.4         0.23%  48          $83.4         0.22%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Ramen Noodles/  87          $9.8         0.15%  302         $17.2         0.05%  237         $27.0         0.07%
Ramen Cups
Cream Cheese    88          $9.8         0.15%  54          $68.9         0.22%  58          $78.7         0.21%
Sour Creams     89          $9.7         0.15%  70          $56.7         0.18%  72          $66.4         0.17%
Bagged Cheese   90          $9.6         0.15%  167         $30.8         0.10%  144         $40.4         0.11%
Snacks
Fruit Snacks    91          $9.6         0.15%  211         $25.1         0.08%  181         $34.6         0.09%
Salsa & Dips    92          $9.5         0.14%  139         $34.0         0.11%  124         $43.5         0.11%
Ground Turkey   93          $9.4         0.14%  74          $55.3         0.18%  75          $64.7         0.17%
Pizza/          94          $9.3         0.14%  128         $35.3         0.11%  117         $44.7         0.12%
Traditional
Sweet Goods--   95          $9.3         0.14%  119         $36.5         0.12%  113         $45.7         0.12%
Full Size
Candy Bars      96          $9.2         0.14%  155         $32.3         0.10%  136         $41.5         0.11%
(Singles)
(Including)
Hot Dog Buns    97          $9.2         0.14%  118         $36.7         0.12%  112         $46.0         0.12%
Cheese          98          $9.2         0.14%  71          $55.9         0.18%  73          $65.1         0.17%
Crackers
Shrimp--Raw     99          $9.2         0.14%  104         $41.3         0.13%  101         $50.5         0.13%
Grapes Red      100         $9.2         0.14%  51          $72.9         0.23%  55          $82.1         0.22%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100               $1,843.6        28.02%           $7,796.5        24.74%           $9,640.1        25.31%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-10: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in Smaller Metropolitan Counties
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $62.4         0.95%  1          $264.0         0.84%  1          $326.5         0.86%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $52.7         0.80%  2          $176.7         0.56%  2          $229.4         0.60%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $38.9         0.59%  5           $80.9         0.26%  4          $119.7         0.31%
Kids Cereal     4          $24.8         0.38%  20          $55.9         0.18%  13          $80.7         0.21%
Shredded        5          $24.6         0.37%  3          $104.4         0.33%  3          $129.1         0.34%
Cheese
Primal [Beef]   6          $23.2         0.35%  8           $76.1         0.24%  6           $99.3         0.26%
Sft Drnk 2      7          $23.2         0.35%  12          $70.0         0.22%  8           $93.1         0.24%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    8          $20.9         0.32%  7           $76.3         0.24%  7           $97.3         0.26%
Infant Formula  9          $18.7         0.28%  180         $13.8         0.04%  73          $32.5         0.09%
Starter/
Solutio
Lunchment--Del  10         $18.4         0.28%  11          $74.4         0.24%  9           $92.8         0.24%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     11         $16.4         0.25%  9           $74.8         0.24%  10          $91.2         0.24%
Mainstream      12         $16.1         0.24%  33          $42.8         0.14%  29          $58.9         0.15%
White Bread
Chicken Breast  13         $15.9         0.24%  4           $84.6         0.27%  5          $100.5         0.26%
Boneless
Tortilla/Nacho  14         $15.8         0.24%  16          $63.2         0.20%  16          $79.0         0.21%
Chips
Enhanced [Pork  15         $14.7         0.22%  21          $54.7         0.17%  20          $69.4         0.18%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
American        16         $14.5         0.22%  35          $41.3         0.13%  33          $55.8         0.15%
Single Cheese
Snacks/         17         $14.2         0.22%  66          $28.6         0.09%  48          $42.8         0.11%
Appetizers
Unflavored Can  18         $14.2         0.22%  17          $61.8         0.20%  18          $75.9         0.20%
Coffee
Soft Drinks     19         $14.0         0.21%  49          $35.1         0.11%  38          $49.1         0.13%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Still Water     20         $13.9         0.21%  28          $47.9         0.15%  24          $61.8         0.16%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Fz Ss Prem      21         $13.6         0.21%  25          $50.3         0.16%  22          $64.0         0.17%
Traditional
Meals
Fz Ss Economy   22         $13.4         0.20%  76          $25.0         0.08%  59          $38.3         0.10%
Meals All
Bacon--Trad     23         $13.2         0.20%  30          $46.6         0.15%  26          $59.8         0.16%
16oz Or Less
Snack Cake--    24         $13.0         0.20%  61          $30.5         0.10%  46          $43.5         0.11%
Multi Pack
Pizza/Premium   25         $12.8         0.19%  32          $44.8         0.14%  31          $57.6         0.15%
Dairy Case      26         $12.7         0.19%  10          $74.5         0.24%  11          $87.2         0.23%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Potatoes        27         $12.0         0.18%  29          $47.4         0.15%  28          $59.4         0.16%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Sugar           28         $11.9         0.18%  50          $35.0         0.11%  42          $47.0         0.12%
Natural Cheese  29         $11.9         0.18%  14          $68.4         0.22%  14          $80.3         0.21%
Chunks
All Family      30         $11.8         0.18%  15          $66.4         0.21%  17          $78.2         0.21%
Cereal
Sandwiches &    31         $11.7         0.18%  89          $21.8         0.07%  70          $33.5         0.09%
Handhelds
Sft Drnk Mlt-   32         $11.7         0.18%  19          $57.3         0.18%  21          $68.9         0.18%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Ribs [Pork]     33         $11.4         0.17%  57          $31.2         0.10%  50          $42.6         0.11%
Mainstream      34         $11.2         0.17%  24          $50.9         0.16%  23          $62.2         0.16%
Variety
Breads
Convenient      35         $11.1         0.17%  103         $20.1         0.06%  77          $31.2         0.08%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Bananas         36         $10.4         0.16%  13          $69.3         0.22%  15          $79.7         0.21%
Condensed Soup  37         $10.0         0.15%  27          $48.8         0.15%  30          $58.7         0.15%
Frzn Chicken--  38          $9.6         0.15%  58          $31.1         0.10%  51          $40.7         0.11%
Wht Meat
Choice Beef     39          $9.5         0.14%  36          $40.9         0.13%  36          $50.4         0.13%
Pourable Salad  40          $9.3         0.14%  37          $40.9         0.13%  37          $50.2         0.13%
Dressings
Select Beef     41          $9.3         0.14%  34          $41.5         0.13%  35          $50.8         0.13%
Sft Drnk Sngl   42          $9.3         0.14%  87          $22.6         0.07%  76          $31.9         0.08%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Isotonic        43          $9.2         0.14%  53          $33.6         0.11%  49          $42.7         0.11%
Drinks Single
Serve
Premium [Ice    44          $8.9         0.14%  18          $61.5         0.19%  19          $70.4         0.18%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Fz Family       45          $8.8         0.13%  77          $24.8         0.08%  69          $33.6         0.09%
Style Entrees
Mayonnaise &    46          $8.8         0.13%  45          $36.0         0.11%  45          $44.8         0.12%
Whipped
Dressing
Traditional     47          $8.7         0.13%  41          $39.7         0.13%  39          $48.4         0.13%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Hot Dogs--Base  48          $8.3         0.13%  121         $18.0         0.06%  92          $26.3         0.07%
Meat
Choice Beef     49          $8.2         0.13%  79          $23.8         0.08%  74          $32.1         0.08%
Macaroni &      50          $8.2         0.12%  118         $18.1         0.06%  93          $26.3         0.07%
Cheese Dnrs
Fz Bag          51          $7.8         0.12%  42          $39.6         0.13%  41          $47.4         0.12%
Vegetables--P
lain
Refrigerated    52          $7.7         0.12%  39          $40.6         0.13%  40          $48.3         0.13%
Coffee
Creamers
Margarine:      53          $7.7         0.12%  63          $30.0         0.10%  61          $37.6         0.10%
Tubs And
Bowls
Adult Cereal    54          $7.7         0.12%  22          $54.1         0.17%  25          $61.7         0.16%
Can Pasta       55          $7.6         0.12%  157         $15.3         0.05%  114         $22.9         0.06%
Mexican Soft    56          $7.6         0.12%  56          $31.9         0.10%  56          $39.5         0.10%
Tortillas And
Wra
Fz Ss Prem      57          $7.6         0.12%  6           $76.8         0.24%  12          $84.4         0.22%
Nutritional
Meals
Aseptic Pack    58          $7.3         0.11%  155         $15.3         0.05%  118         $22.6         0.06%
Juice And
Drinks
Mainstream      59          $7.3         0.11%  80          $23.8         0.08%  78          $31.1         0.08%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Candy Bags--    60          $7.3         0.11%  31          $46.3         0.15%  34          $53.5         0.14%
Chocolate
Strawberries    61          $7.2         0.11%  26          $50.2         0.16%  32          $57.4         0.15%
Lunchment--Bol  62          $7.2         0.11%  115         $18.6         0.06%  97          $25.8         0.07%
ogna/Sausage
Sw Gds: Donuts  63          $7.1         0.11%  70          $27.0         0.09%  66          $34.1         0.09%
Pizza/Economy   64          $7.0         0.11%  151         $15.7         0.05%  117         $22.7         0.06%
Peanut Butter   65          $6.6         0.10%  43          $39.0         0.12%  44          $45.7         0.12%
Frzn French     66          $6.5         0.10%  159         $15.2         0.05%  125         $21.7         0.06%
Fries
Vegetable Oil   67          $6.5         0.10%  246         $10.4         0.03%  184         $16.9         0.04%
Tuna            68          $6.5         0.10%  60          $30.7         0.10%  63          $37.2         0.10%
Chicken Wings   69          $6.4         0.10%  338          $7.6         0.02%  223         $14.1         0.04%
Butter          70          $6.3         0.09%  23          $53.3         0.17%  27          $59.5         0.16%
Frzn Meat--     71          $6.1         0.09%  177         $14.2         0.04%  142         $20.3         0.05%
Beef
Mult Pk Bag     72          $6.1         0.09%  231         $11.1         0.04%  177         $17.1         0.04%
Snacks
Value Forms/    73          $6.0         0.09%  197         $12.7         0.04%  158         $18.7         0.05%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Frzn Breakfast  74          $6.0         0.09%  147         $15.8         0.05%  123         $21.8         0.06%
Sandwiches
Pizza/          75          $5.9         0.09%  101         $20.2         0.06%  94          $26.1         0.07%
Traditional
Fruit Snacks    76          $5.9         0.09%  189         $13.3         0.04%  154         $19.2         0.05%
Frzn Chicken--  77          $5.9         0.09%  479          $4.7         0.01%  289         $10.6         0.03%
Wings
Fz Skillet      78          $5.7         0.09%  85          $23.0         0.07%  83          $28.7         0.08%
Meals
Sandwich        79          $5.7         0.09%  93          $21.4         0.07%  86          $27.1         0.07%
Cookies
Sour Creams     80          $5.7         0.09%  69          $28.0         0.09%  68          $33.7         0.09%
Cakes:          81          $5.7         0.09%  178         $14.1         0.04%  147         $19.8         0.05%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Rts Soup:       82          $5.6         0.09%  51          $34.7         0.11%  53          $40.3         0.11%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Chicken Drums   83          $5.5         0.08%  277          $9.0         0.03%  215         $14.6         0.04%
Bagged Cheese   84          $5.4         0.08%  161         $15.0         0.05%  141         $20.5         0.05%
Snacks
Cream Cheese    85          $5.4         0.08%  52          $33.8         0.11%  57          $39.2         0.10%
Salsa & Dips    86          $5.4         0.08%  139         $16.5         0.05%  121         $21.9         0.06%
Flavored Milk   87          $5.4         0.08%  116         $18.5         0.06%  107         $23.9         0.06%
Ramen Noodles/  88          $5.3         0.08%  312          $8.1         0.03%  233         $13.5         0.04%
Ramen Cups
Cheese          89          $5.3         0.08%  74          $25.8         0.08%  79          $31.0         0.08%
Crackers
Hamburger Buns  90          $5.3         0.08%  92          $21.5         0.07%  90          $26.8         0.07%
Meat: Turkey    91          $5.3         0.08%  38          $40.9         0.13%  43          $46.1         0.12%
Bulk
Waffles/        92          $5.2         0.08%  99          $20.7         0.07%  96          $25.9         0.07%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Candy Bars      93          $5.2         0.08%  90          $21.7         0.07%  89          $26.9         0.07%
(Multi Pack)
Candy Bars      94          $5.1         0.08%  140         $16.5         0.05%  127         $21.6         0.06%
(Singles)
(Including)
Bkfst Sausage-- 95          $5.1         0.08%  105         $19.4         0.06%  103         $24.5         0.06%
Fresh Rolls
Angus [Beef]    96          $5.0         0.08%  65          $28.7         0.09%  67          $33.7         0.09%
Hot Dog Buns    97          $5.0         0.08%  119         $18.1         0.06%  112         $23.1         0.06%
Cottage Cheese  98          $5.0         0.08%  55          $33.0         0.10%  60          $38.0         0.10%
String Cheese   99          $4.9         0.07%  68          $28.1         0.09%  71          $33.0         0.09%
Sandwiches--(C  100         $4.9         0.07%  145         $16.0         0.05%  135       $20.9 0          .05%
old)
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100               $1,084.4        16.48%           $3,993.9        12.67%           $5,078.3        13.33%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-11: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Smaller Micropolitan Counties
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soft Drinks 12/ 1          $20.5         0.31%  2           $61.5         0.20%  2           $82.0         0.22%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Fluid Milk/     2          $20.2         0.31%  1           $82.6         0.26%  1          $102.9         0.27%
White Only
Lean [Beef]     3          $12.0         0.18%  4           $27.1         0.09%  4           $39.0         0.10%
Primal [Beef]   4           $7.5         0.11%  5           $27.0         0.09%  5           $34.5         0.09%
Shredded        5           $7.2         0.11%  3           $31.9         0.10%  3           $39.1         0.10%
Cheese
Kids Cereal     6           $6.8         0.10%  23          $16.0         0.05%  17          $22.8         0.06%
Sft Drnk 2      7           $6.4         0.10%  15          $19.6         0.06%  12          $26.0         0.07%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Soft Drinks     8           $6.3         0.10%  33          $13.7         0.04%  24          $20.0         0.05%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Potato Chips    9           $6.3         0.10%  6           $24.3         0.08%  6           $30.5         0.08%
Mainstream      10          $5.6         0.08%  27          $15.7         0.05%  20          $21.3         0.06%
White Bread
Lunchment--Del  11          $5.4         0.08%  10          $21.7         0.07%  8           $27.2         0.07%
i Fresh
Enhanced [Pork  12          $5.4         0.08%  11          $21.1         0.07%  11          $26.5         0.07%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Unflavored Can  13          $5.1         0.08%  9           $21.8         0.07%  10          $26.9         0.07%
Coffee
Infant Formula  14          $5.0         0.08%  190          $4.0         0.01%  78           $9.0         0.02%
Starter/
Solutio
Chicken Breast  15          $4.8         0.07%  7           $23.8         0.08%  7           $28.7         0.08%
Boneless
Snack Cake--    16          $4.8         0.07%  41          $11.9         0.04%  36          $16.6         0.04%
Multi Pack
Eggs--Large     17          $4.7         0.07%  8           $22.4         0.07%  9           $27.1         0.07%
Still Water     18          $4.7         0.07%  21          $16.4         0.05%  21          $21.0         0.06%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Tortilla/Nacho  19          $4.6         0.07%  19          $18.4         0.06%  16          $23.0         0.06%
Chips
American        20          $4.5         0.07%  31          $14.0         0.04%  28          $18.5         0.05%
Single Cheese
Sft Drnk Mlt-   21          $4.5         0.07%  14          $20.1         0.06%  13          $24.5         0.06%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Snacks/         22          $4.4         0.07%  65           $8.6         0.03%  47          $13.0         0.03%
Appetizers
Potatoes        23          $4.0         0.06%  20          $16.9         0.05%  22          $20.9         0.05%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Pizza/Premium   24          $4.0         0.06%  35          $13.0         0.04%  34          $17.0         0.04%
Fz Ss Economy   25          $3.9         0.06%  71           $7.8         0.02%  56          $11.7         0.03%
Meals All
Sandwiches &    26          $3.8         0.06%  85           $6.8         0.02%  65          $10.7         0.03%
Handhelds
Bacon--Trad     27          $3.8         0.06%  24          $15.9         0.05%  25          $19.7         0.05%
16oz Or Less
Sugar           28          $3.8         0.06%  39          $12.0         0.04%  37          $15.8         0.04%
Fz Ss Prem      29          $3.7         0.06%  32          $13.7         0.04%  31          $17.4         0.05%
Traditional
Meals
Natural Cheese  30          $3.6         0.06%  12          $20.8         0.07%  14          $24.5         0.06%
Chunks
Ribs [Pork]     31          $3.6         0.06%  45          $11.3         0.04%  41          $14.9         0.04%
Convenient      32          $3.5         0.05%  95           $6.3         0.02%  74           $9.8         0.03%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
All Family      33          $3.5         0.05%  17          $18.8         0.06%  19          $22.3         0.06%
Cereal
Condensed Soup  34          $3.3         0.05%  22          $16.1         0.05%  26          $19.4         0.05%
Dairy Case      35          $3.2         0.05%  13          $20.7         0.07%  15          $23.9         0.06%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Select Beef     36          $3.2         0.05%  34          $13.6         0.04%  35          $16.8         0.04%
Sft Drnk Sngl   37          $3.2         0.05%  86           $6.7         0.02%  73           $9.8         0.03%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Mainstream      38          $3.1         0.05%  28          $15.7         0.05%  27          $18.8         0.05%
Variety
Breads
Bananas         39          $3.0         0.05%  16          $19.6         0.06%  18          $22.6         0.06%
Isotonic        40          $2.9         0.04%  53          $10.0         0.03%  50          $12.9         0.03%
Drinks Single
Serve
Hot Dogs--Base  41          $2.8         0.04%  78           $7.2         0.02%  68          $10.1         0.03%
Meat
Frzn Chicken--  42          $2.8         0.04%  50          $10.5         0.03%  46          $13.3         0.04%
Wht Meat
Pourable Salad  43          $2.8         0.04%  37          $12.4         0.04%  38          $15.2         0.04%
Dressings
Mayonnaise &    44          $2.7         0.04%  42          $11.8         0.04%  42          $14.5         0.04%
Whipped
Dressing
Macaroni &      45          $2.7         0.04%  107          $5.8         0.02%  88           $8.4         0.02%
Cheese Dnrs
Can Pasta       46          $2.7         0.04%  129          $5.1         0.02%  94           $7.8         0.02%
Fz Family       47          $2.7         0.04%  77           $7.2         0.02%  71           $9.9         0.03%
Style Entrees
Traditional     48          $2.6         0.04%  38          $12.3         0.04%  40          $14.9         0.04%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Lunchment--Bol  49          $2.5         0.04%  80           $7.2         0.02%  75           $9.7         0.03%
ogna/Sausage
Margarine:      50          $2.5         0.04%  57           $9.8         0.03%  51          $12.2         0.03%
Tubs And
Bowls
Sw Gds: Donuts  51          $2.4         0.04%  59           $9.4         0.03%  55          $11.8         0.03%
Premium [Ice    52          $2.4         0.04%  25          $15.8         0.05%  29          $18.2         0.05%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Angus [Beef]    53          $2.4         0.04%  40          $12.0         0.04%  43          $14.3         0.04%
Choice Beef     54          $2.3         0.03%  72           $7.6         0.02%  72           $9.9         0.03%
Fz Bag          55          $2.3         0.03%  43          $11.8         0.04%  44          $14.0         0.04%
Vegetables--P
lain
Refrigerated    56          $2.3         0.03%  46          $10.7         0.03%  48          $13.0         0.03%
Coffee
Creamers
Pizza/Economy   57          $2.3         0.03%  124          $5.2         0.02%  97           $7.5         0.02%
Choice Beef     58          $2.3         0.03%  48          $10.6         0.03%  49          $12.9         0.03%
Candy Bags--    59          $2.3         0.03%  36          $12.9         0.04%  39          $15.1         0.04%
Chocolate
Adult Cereal    60          $2.2         0.03%  30          $15.0         0.05%  33          $17.1         0.05%
Strawberries    61          $2.2         0.03%  29          $15.0         0.05%  32          $17.1         0.05%
Peanut Butter   62          $2.2         0.03%  44          $11.6         0.04%  45          $13.7         0.04%
Mexican Soft    63          $2.1         0.03%  64           $8.9         0.03%  59          $11.0         0.03%
Tortillas And
Wra
Mainstream      64          $2.1         0.03%  81           $7.1         0.02%  77           $9.2         0.02%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Fz Ss Prem      65          $2.1         0.03%  18          $18.6         0.06%  23          $20.7         0.05%
Nutritional
Meals
Aseptic Pack    66          $2.0         0.03%  163          $4.5         0.01%  121          $6.5         0.02%
Juice And
Drinks
Frzn French     67          $2.0         0.03%  128          $5.1         0.02%  108          $7.2         0.02%
Fries
Flavored Milk   68          $2.0         0.03%  96           $6.2         0.02%  91           $8.2         0.02%
Pizza/          69          $2.0         0.03%  89           $6.6         0.02%  86           $8.6         0.02%
Traditional
Tuna            70          $2.0         0.03%  62           $8.9         0.03%  64          $10.9         0.03%
Frzn Breakfast  71          $1.9         0.03%  132          $5.1         0.02%  112          $7.0         0.02%
Sandwiches
Hamburger Buns  72          $1.9         0.03%  68           $8.1         0.03%  69          $10.1         0.03%
Value Forms/    73          $1.9         0.03%  187          $4.0         0.01%  146          $5.9         0.02%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Vegetable Oil   74          $1.8         0.03%  214          $3.5         0.01%  168          $5.3         0.01%
Pails [Ice      75          $1.8         0.03%  131          $5.1         0.02%  114          $6.9         0.02%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Butter          76          $1.8         0.03%  26          $15.8         0.05%  30          $17.6         0.05%
Candy Bars      77          $1.7         0.03%  83           $6.9         0.02%  83           $8.7         0.02%
(Multi Pack)
Cakes:          78          $1.7         0.03%  154          $4.7         0.01%  126          $6.4         0.02%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Fruit Snacks    79          $1.7         0.03%  198          $3.9         0.01%  159          $5.6         0.01%
Cottage Cheese  80          $1.7         0.03%  52          $10.2         0.03%  54          $11.9         0.03%
Sandwich        81          $1.7         0.03%  91           $6.5         0.02%  90           $8.2         0.02%
Cookies
Salsa & Dips    82          $1.7         0.03%  133          $5.0         0.02%  116          $6.7         0.02%
Frzn Meat--     83          $1.7         0.03%  174          $4.3         0.01%  144          $6.0         0.02%
Beef
Mult Pk Bag     84          $1.7         0.03%  230          $3.2         0.01%  186          $4.9         0.01%
Snacks
Bkfst Sausage-- 85          $1.7         0.03%  76           $7.3         0.02%  80           $8.9         0.02%
Fresh Rolls
Refrigerated    86          $1.6         0.03%  116          $5.4         0.02%  111          $7.0         0.02%
Biscuits
Sour Creams     87          $1.6         0.02%  66           $8.3         0.03%  70          $10.0         0.03%
Rts Soup:       88          $1.6         0.02%  60           $9.4         0.03%  61          $11.0         0.03%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Bagged Cheese   89          $1.6         0.02%  143          $4.8         0.02%  129          $6.4         0.02%
Snacks
Cream Cheese    90          $1.6         0.02%  54          $10.0         0.03%  57          $11.6         0.03%
Skillet         91          $1.6         0.02%  245          $3.1         0.01%  198          $4.7         0.01%
Dinners
Cheese          92          $1.6         0.02%  84           $6.8         0.02%  89           $8.4         0.02%
Crackers
Chicken Wings   93          $1.5         0.02%  374          $2.0         0.01%  258          $3.5         0.01%
Angus [Beef]    94          $1.5         0.02%  148          $4.8         0.02%  133          $6.3         0.02%
String Cheese   95          $1.5         0.02%  75           $7.3         0.02%  81           $8.9         0.02%
Fz Skillet      96          $1.5         0.02%  99           $6.0         0.02%  98           $7.5         0.02%
Meals
Hot Dog Buns    97          $1.5         0.02%  110          $5.7         0.02%  104          $7.2         0.02%
Sweet Goods--   98          $1.5         0.02%  135          $5.0         0.02%  123          $6.5         0.02%
Full Size
Candy Bars      99          $1.5         0.02%  153          $4.7         0.01%  135          $6.2         0.02%
(Singles)
(Including)
Toaster         100         $1.5         0.02%  155          $4.7         0.01%  136          $6.2         0.02%
Pastries
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $339.6        $5.16%           $1,243.8        $3.95%           $1,583.4        $4.16%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5         $100%          $31,513.8         $100%          $38,094.2         $100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-12: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in Noncore Counties
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soft Drinks 12/ 1           $6.7         0.10%  2           $16.3         0.05%  2           $23.1         0.06%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Fluid Milk/     2           $6.4         0.10%  1           $23.0         0.07%  1           $29.4         0.08%
White Only
Lean [Beef]     3           $3.2         0.05%  4            $7.6         0.02%  3           $10.8         0.03%
Primal [Beef]   4           $2.1         0.03%  5            $6.8         0.02%  5            $8.9         0.02%
Shredded        5           $2.0         0.03%  3            $8.4         0.03%  4           $10.3         0.03%
Cheese
Soft Drinks     6           $2.0         0.03%  34           $3.5         0.01%  24           $5.5         0.01%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Mainstream      7           $1.9         0.03%  20           $4.8         0.02%  14           $6.7         0.02%
White Bread
Potato Chips    8           $1.9         0.03%  6            $6.7         0.02%  6            $8.6         0.02%
Kids Cereal     9           $1.8         0.03%  27           $4.0         0.01%  22           $5.8         0.02%
Sft Drnk 2      10          $1.7         0.03%  21           $4.7         0.01%  16           $6.4         0.02%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Unflavored Can  11          $1.7         0.03%  9            $6.1         0.02%  8            $7.8         0.02%
Coffee
Sft Drnk Mlt-   12          $1.6         0.02%  11           $5.8         0.02%  10           $7.5         0.02%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Lunchment--Del  13          $1.6         0.02%  12           $5.8         0.02%  11           $7.4         0.02%
i Fresh
Snack Cake--    14          $1.6         0.02%  36           $3.5         0.01%  27           $5.0         0.01%
Multi Pack
Enhanced [Pork  15          $1.5         0.02%  14           $5.5         0.02%  13           $7.1         0.02%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Eggs--Large     16          $1.4         0.02%  7            $6.6         0.02%  7            $8.0         0.02%
Infant Formula  17          $1.4         0.02%  186          $1.1         0.00%  81           $2.5         0.01%
Starter/
Solutio
American        18          $1.4         0.02%  29           $4.0         0.01%  25           $5.4         0.01%
Single Cheese
Chicken Breast  19          $1.3         0.02%  10           $6.1         0.02%  12           $7.4         0.02%
Boneless
Tortilla/Nacho  20          $1.3         0.02%  16           $5.1         0.02%  18           $6.4         0.02%
Chips
Potatoes        21          $1.3         0.02%  17           $5.0         0.02%  19           $6.2         0.02%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Still Water     22          $1.3         0.02%  23           $4.5         0.01%  23           $5.7         0.02%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Snacks/         23          $1.2         0.02%  67           $2.3         0.01%  49           $3.5         0.01%
Appetizers
Pizza/Premium   24          $1.2         0.02%  32           $3.7         0.01%  30           $4.9         0.01%
Bacon--Trad     25          $1.2         0.02%  19           $4.8         0.02%  20           $6.0         0.02%
16oz Or Less
Natural Cheese  26          $1.1         0.02%  8            $6.5         0.02%  9            $7.7         0.02%
Chunks
Sugar           27          $1.1         0.02%  35           $3.5         0.01%  34           $4.6         0.01%
Sandwiches &    28          $1.0         0.02%  96           $1.7         0.01%  71           $2.8         0.01%
Handhelds
All Family      29          $1.0         0.02%  18           $4.9         0.02%  21           $5.9         0.02%
Cereal
Fz Ss Economy   30          $1.0         0.02%  80           $2.0         0.01%  65           $3.0         0.01%
Meals All
Fz Ss Prem      31          $1.0         0.01%  38           $3.4         0.01%  36           $4.4         0.01%
Traditional
Meals
Convenient      32          $1.0         0.01%  111          $1.6         0.00%  79           $2.5         0.01%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Sft Drnk Sngl   33          $0.9         0.01%  77           $2.0         0.01%  67           $2.9         0.01%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Condensed Soup  34          $0.9         0.01%  28           $4.0         0.01%  29           $5.0         0.01%
Bananas         35          $0.9         0.01%  15           $5.5         0.02%  17           $6.4         0.02%
Dairy Case      36          $0.9         0.01%  13           $5.7         0.02%  15           $6.6         0.02%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Mainstream      37          $0.9         0.01%  24           $4.2         0.01%  26           $5.1         0.01%
Variety
Breads
Choice Beef     38          $0.9         0.01%  59           $2.7         0.01%  48           $3.5         0.01%
Hot Dogs--Base  39          $0.8         0.01%  74           $2.1         0.01%  66           $2.9         0.01%
Meat
Ribs [Pork]     40          $0.8         0.01%  48           $2.9         0.01%  43           $3.7         0.01%
Lunchment--Bol  41          $0.8         0.01%  71           $2.2         0.01%  62           $3.0         0.01%
ogna/Sausage
Mayonnaise &    42          $0.8         0.01%  41           $3.3         0.01%  40           $4.1         0.01%
Whipped
Dressing
Sw Gds: Donuts  43          $0.8         0.01%  49           $2.9         0.01%  45           $3.7         0.01%
Traditional     44          $0.8         0.01%  39           $3.4         0.01%  38           $4.2         0.01%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Pourable Salad  45          $0.8         0.01%  40           $3.4         0.01%  39           $4.1         0.01%
Dressings
Frzn Chicken--  46          $0.7         0.01%  60           $2.5         0.01%  56           $3.3         0.01%
Wht Meat
Margarine:      47          $0.7         0.01%  58           $2.7         0.01%  51           $3.4         0.01%
Tubs And
Bowls
Can Pasta       48          $0.7         0.01%  159          $1.3         0.00%  108          $2.0         0.01%
Candy Bags--    49          $0.7         0.01%  33           $3.6         0.01%  37           $4.3         0.01%
Chocolate
Macaroni &      50          $0.7         0.01%  121          $1.5         0.00%  93           $2.2         0.01%
Cheese Dnrs
Isotonic        51          $0.7         0.01%  66           $2.3         0.01%  64           $3.0         0.01%
Drinks Single
Serve
Fz Family       52          $0.7         0.01%  89           $1.8         0.01%  77           $2.5         0.01%
Style Entrees
Peanut Butter   53          $0.7         0.01%  44           $3.1         0.01%  42           $3.8         0.01%
Strawberries    54          $0.7         0.01%  25           $4.2         0.01%  31           $4.8         0.01%
Adult Cereal    55          $0.6         0.01%  31           $4.0         0.01%  33           $4.6         0.01%
Hamburger Buns  56          $0.6         0.01%  64           $2.4         0.01%  63           $3.0         0.01%
Pizza/          57          $0.6         0.01%  79           $2.0         0.01%  76           $2.6         0.01%
Traditional
Choice Beef     58          $0.6         0.01%  42           $3.2         0.01%  41           $3.9         0.01%
Premium [Ice    59          $0.6         0.01%  26           $4.1         0.01%  32           $4.7         0.01%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Flavored Milk   60          $0.6         0.01%  107          $1.6         0.01%  91           $2.2         0.01%
Refrigerated    61          $0.6         0.01%  56           $2.8         0.01%  53           $3.4         0.01%
Coffee
Creamers
Angus [Beef]    62          $0.6         0.01%  57           $2.7         0.01%  54           $3.3         0.01%
Pails [Ice      63          $0.6         0.01%  110          $1.6         0.00%  95           $2.2         0.01%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Mexican Soft    64          $0.6         0.01%  52           $2.8         0.01%  52           $3.4         0.01%
Tortillas And
Wra
Pizza/Economy   65          $0.6         0.01%  162          $1.3         0.00%  117          $1.9         0.00%
Cottage Cheese  66          $0.6         0.01%  45           $3.1         0.01%  46           $3.6         0.01%
Mainstream      67          $0.6         0.01%  84           $1.9         0.01%  83           $2.4         0.01%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Frzn French     68          $0.6         0.01%  123          $1.5         0.00%  107          $2.0         0.01%
Fries
Fz Bag          69          $0.5         0.01%  46           $3.0         0.01%  47           $3.5         0.01%
Vegetables--P
lain
Candy Bars      70          $0.5         0.01%  78           $2.0         0.01%  78           $2.5         0.01%
(Multi Pack)
Cakes:          71          $0.5         0.01%  149          $1.3         0.00%  116          $1.9         0.00%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Aseptic Pack    72          $0.5         0.01%  183          $1.1         0.00%  146          $1.6         0.00%
Juice And
Drinks
Refrigerated    73          $0.5         0.01%  104          $1.6         0.01%  99           $2.1         0.01%
Biscuits
Salsa & Dips    74          $0.5         0.01%  130          $1.4         0.00%  111          $1.9         0.01%
Value Forms/    75          $0.5         0.01%  192          $1.1         0.00%  158          $1.6         0.00%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Fz Ss Prem      76          $0.5         0.01%  30           $4.0         0.01%  35           $4.5         0.01%
Nutritional
Meals
Tuna            77          $0.5         0.01%  70           $2.2         0.01%  72           $2.8         0.01%
Sandwich        78          $0.5         0.01%  83           $1.9         0.01%  85           $2.4         0.01%
Cookies
Bkfst Sausage-- 79          $0.5         0.01%  73           $2.1         0.01%  75           $2.6         0.01%
Fresh Rolls
Butter          80          $0.5         0.01%  22           $4.5         0.01%  28           $5.0         0.01%
Frzn Breakfast  81          $0.5         0.01%  172          $1.2         0.00%  139          $1.7         0.00%
Sandwiches
Vegetable Oil   82          $0.5         0.01%  203          $1.0         0.00%  166          $1.5         0.00%
Sweet Goods--   83          $0.5         0.01%  129          $1.4         0.00%  114          $1.9         0.00%
Full Size
Hot Dog Buns    84          $0.5         0.01%  98           $1.7         0.01%  94           $2.2         0.01%
Candy Bars      85          $0.5         0.01%  119          $1.5         0.00%  110          $2.0         0.01%
(Singles)
(Including)
Bagged Cheese   86          $0.5         0.01%  147          $1.3         0.00%  127          $1.8         0.00%
Snacks
Sandwiches--(C  87          $0.5         0.01%  102          $1.6         0.01%  103          $2.1         0.01%
old)
Cream Cheese    88          $0.5         0.01%  54           $2.8         0.01%  57           $3.3         0.01%
Sour Creams     89          $0.5         0.01%  69           $2.3         0.01%  73           $2.7         0.01%
Select Beef     90          $0.5         0.01%  75           $2.0         0.01%  80           $2.5         0.01%
Frzn Meat--     91          $0.5         0.01%  166          $1.2         0.00%  136          $1.7         0.00%
Beef
Sticks/Enrobed  92          $0.5         0.01%  124          $1.5         0.00%  113          $1.9         0.01%
[Frozen
Novelties]
String Cheese   93          $0.4         0.01%  76           $2.0         0.01%  82           $2.5         0.01%
Fruit Snacks    94          $0.4         0.01%  222          $0.9         0.00%  185          $1.4         0.00%
Rts Soup:       95          $0.4         0.01%  63           $2.4         0.01%  68           $2.8         0.01%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Angus [Beef]    96          $0.4         0.01%  177          $1.1         0.00%  156          $1.6         0.00%
Cheese          97          $0.4         0.01%  93           $1.8         0.01%  92           $2.2         0.01%
Crackers
Meat: Ham Bulk  98          $0.4         0.01%  62           $2.4         0.01%  69           $2.8         0.01%
Meat: Turkey    99          $0.4         0.01%  51           $2.8         0.01%  58           $3.3         0.01%
Bulk
Tray Pack/Choc  100         $0.4         0.01%  133          $1.4         0.00%  119          $1.8         0.00%
Chip Cookies
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                  $99.1         1.57%             $341.8         1.08%             $440.9         1.23%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-13: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores with more than $12 Million in
Sales
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $38.9         0.59%  1          $229.9         0.73%  1          $268.8         0.71%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $32.4         0.49%  2          $162.4         0.52%  2          $194.8         0.51%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $22.2         0.34%  8           $74.1         0.24%  5           $96.4         0.25%
Shredded        4          $16.2         0.25%  3          $103.2         0.33%  3          $119.4         0.31%
Cheese
Kids Cereal     5          $15.5         0.23%  23          $52.1         0.17%  17          $67.5         0.18%
Sft Drnk 2      6          $13.3         0.20%  18          $56.1         0.18%  16          $69.4         0.18%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    7          $13.0         0.20%  10          $70.8         0.22%  9           $83.8         0.22%
Lunchment--Del  8          $11.6         0.18%  13          $69.9         0.22%  11          $81.5         0.21%
i Fresh
Chicken Breast  9          $11.4         0.17%  4           $89.3         0.28%  4          $100.7         0.26%
Boneless
Infant Formula  10         $11.1         0.17%  259         $10.4         0.03%  119         $21.5         0.06%
Starter/
Solutio
Eggs--Large     11         $10.8         0.16%  9           $73.1         0.23%  8           $83.9         0.22%
Primal [Beef]   12         $10.8         0.16%  24          $49.1         0.16%  23          $59.9         0.16%
Snacks/         13         $10.4         0.16%  63          $31.6         0.10%  47          $42.1         0.11%
Appetizers
Tortilla/Nacho  14          $9.9         0.15%  15          $62.4         0.20%  15          $72.3         0.19%
Chips
Dairy Case      15          $9.4         0.14%  6           $80.1         0.25%  6           $89.5         0.23%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Fz Ss Prem      16          $9.1         0.14%  26          $47.5         0.15%  25          $56.6         0.15%
Traditional
Meals
Unflavored Can  17          $9.1         0.14%  21          $54.4         0.17%  19          $63.4         0.17%
Coffee
Natural Cheese  18          $9.0         0.14%  12          $70.0         0.22%  12          $79.1         0.21%
Chunks
Still Water     19          $8.8         0.13%  30          $46.5         0.15%  28          $55.3         0.15%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Mainstream      20          $8.6         0.13%  56          $33.6         0.11%  46          $42.3         0.11%
White Bread
Enhanced [Pork  21          $8.6         0.13%  28          $47.3         0.15%  26          $55.9         0.15%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Bacon--Trad     22          $8.4         0.13%  34          $44.1         0.14%  29          $52.6         0.14%
16oz Or Less
All Family      23          $8.4         0.13%  14          $66.3         0.21%  14          $74.7         0.20%
Cereal
Pizza/Premium   24          $8.4         0.13%  29          $47.0         0.15%  27          $55.4         0.15%
American        25          $8.3         0.13%  51          $35.4         0.11%  44          $43.7         0.11%
Single Cheese
Fz Ss Economy   26          $8.1         0.12%  105         $21.1         0.07%  81          $29.2         0.08%
Meals All
Soft Drinks     27          $7.9         0.12%  67          $30.2         0.10%  58          $38.1         0.10%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Bananas         28          $7.8         0.12%  7           $74.4         0.24%  10          $82.2         0.22%
Snack Cake--    29          $7.4         0.11%  81          $25.3         0.08%  73          $32.7         0.09%
Multi Pack
Premium [Ice    30          $7.4         0.11%  11          $70.2         0.22%  13          $77.6         0.20%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Mainstream      31          $7.3         0.11%  32          $44.6         0.14%  32          $51.8         0.14%
Variety
Breads
Select Beef     32          $7.2         0.11%  37          $41.6         0.13%  36          $48.8         0.13%
Sandwiches &    33          $7.2         0.11%  107         $20.6         0.07%  89          $27.8         0.07%
Handhelds
Frzn Chicken--  34          $7.2         0.11%  65          $31.2         0.10%  57          $38.4         0.10%
Wht Meat
Potatoes        35          $7.2         0.11%  35          $42.4         0.13%  35          $49.6         0.13%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Ribs [Pork]     36          $6.8         0.10%  69          $29.4         0.09%  65          $36.2         0.10%
Sugar           37          $6.8         0.10%  64          $31.3         0.10%  59          $38.1         0.10%
Choice Beef     38          $6.7         0.10%  40          $41.1         0.13%  38          $47.8         0.13%
Convenient      39          $6.7         0.10%  114         $19.5         0.06%  98          $26.2         0.07%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Condensed Soup  40          $6.5         0.10%  33          $44.1         0.14%  34          $50.6         0.13%
Refrigerated    41          $6.4         0.10%  31          $46.0         0.15%  31          $52.3         0.14%
Coffee
Creamers
Isotonic        42          $6.2         0.09%  66          $30.9         0.10%  62          $37.1         0.10%
Drinks Single
Serve
Fz Family       43          $6.1         0.09%  85          $24.7         0.08%  77          $30.8         0.08%
Style Entrees
Pourable Salad  44          $6.0         0.09%  38          $41.5         0.13%  39          $47.6         0.12%
Dressings
Sft Drnk Mlt-   45          $5.9         0.09%  36          $42.2         0.13%  37          $48.1         0.13%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Fz Ss Prem      46          $5.9         0.09%  5           $82.0         0.26%  7           $87.9         0.23%
Nutritional
Meals
Sft Drnk Sngl   47          $5.8         0.09%  103         $21.3         0.07%  93          $27.1         0.07%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Mayonnaise &    48          $5.7         0.09%  54          $34.5         0.11%  54          $40.2         0.11%
Whipped
Dressing
Choice Beef     49          $5.7         0.09%  97          $22.6         0.07%  85          $28.3         0.07%
Adult Cereal    50          $5.6         0.08%  20          $55.1         0.17%  22          $60.7         0.16%
Strawberries    51          $5.4         0.08%  19          $55.9         0.18%  21          $61.3         0.16%
Meat: Turkey    52          $5.4         0.08%  17          $57.3         0.18%  20          $62.7         0.16%
Bulk
Mexican Soft    53          $5.4         0.08%  53          $35.2         0.11%  53          $40.6         0.11%
Tortillas And
Wra
Butter          54          $5.4         0.08%  16          $58.3         0.19%  18          $63.7         0.17%
Fz Bag          55          $5.2         0.08%  49          $36.6         0.12%  48          $41.8         0.11%
Vegetables--P
lain
Candy Bags--    56          $5.0         0.08%  27          $47.4         0.15%  30          $52.4         0.14%
Chocolate
Traditional     57          $5.0         0.08%  68          $29.4         0.09%  69          $34.4         0.09%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Margarine:      58          $5.0         0.08%  71          $29.2         0.09%  70          $34.2         0.09%
Tubs And
Bowls
Macaroni &      59          $4.9         0.07%  139         $17.4         0.06%  113         $22.3         0.06%
Cheese Dnrs
Peanut Butter   60          $4.8         0.07%  44          $39.1         0.12%  43          $43.9         0.12%
Aseptic Pack    61          $4.7         0.07%  168         $15.3         0.05%  136         $20.0         0.05%
Juice And
Drinks
Tuna            62          $4.7         0.07%  60          $33.0         0.10%  61          $37.6         0.10%
Mainstream      63          $4.6         0.07%  96          $22.9         0.07%  91          $27.5         0.07%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Hot Dogs--Base  64          $4.6         0.07%  188         $13.8         0.04%  159         $18.3         0.05%
Meat
Cream Cheese    65          $4.5         0.07%  48          $37.3         0.12%  49          $41.7         0.11%
Sw Gds: Donuts  66          $4.4         0.07%  92          $23.3         0.07%  90          $27.7         0.07%
Sushi--In       67          $4.3         0.07%  42          $40.4         0.13%  40          $44.7         0.12%
Store
Prepared
Premium Bread   68          $4.3         0.06%  22          $53.9         0.17%  24          $58.1         0.15%
Can Pasta       69          $4.3         0.06%  216         $12.4         0.04%  179         $16.7         0.04%
Frzn Meat--     70          $4.2         0.06%  182         $14.1         0.04%  160         $18.3         0.05%
Beef
Fz Skillet      71          $4.2         0.06%  87          $24.4         0.08%  84          $28.6         0.08%
Meals
Meat: Ham Bulk  72          $4.1         0.06%  43          $40.2         0.13%  41          $44.3         0.12%
Angus [Beef]    73          $4.1         0.06%  62          $31.9         0.10%  66          $35.9         0.09%
Cakes:          74          $4.0         0.06%  170         $15.1         0.05%  151         $19.1         0.05%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Sour Creams     75          $4.0         0.06%  72          $29.2         0.09%  71          $33.2         0.09%
Cheese          76          $4.0         0.06%  73          $29.0         0.09%  72          $33.0         0.09%
Crackers
Value Forms/    77          $4.0         0.06%  218         $12.3         0.04%  188         $16.3         0.04%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Frzn French     78          $4.0         0.06%  187         $13.8         0.04%  165         $17.8         0.05%
Fries
Rts Soup:       79          $3.9         0.06%  52          $35.2         0.11%  56          $39.2         0.10%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
String Cheese   80          $3.9         0.06%  58          $33.2         0.11%  63          $37.1         0.10%
Sandwiches--(C  81          $3.9         0.06%  98          $22.2         0.07%  99          $26.1         0.07%
old)
Instore Cut     82          $3.9         0.06%  55          $33.8         0.11%  60          $37.6         0.10%
Fruit
Lunchment--Bol  83          $3.9         0.06%  175         $14.6         0.05%  156         $18.5         0.05%
ogna/Sausage
Frzn Chicken--  84          $3.8         0.06%  585          $3.9         0.01%  395          $7.7         0.02%
Wings
Frzn Breakfast  85          $3.8         0.06%  161         $15.8         0.05%  142         $19.6         0.05%
Sandwiches
Waffles/        86          $3.8         0.06%  91          $23.3         0.07%  92          $27.1         0.07%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Pizza/Economy   87          $3.8         0.06%  226         $11.9         0.04%  200         $15.6         0.04%
Spring Water    88          $3.7         0.06%  77          $27.7         0.09%  75          $31.4         0.08%
Mult Pk Bag     89          $3.7         0.06%  222         $12.0         0.04%  198         $15.7         0.04%
Snacks
Grapes Red      90          $3.6         0.05%  46          $37.7         0.12%  51          $41.3         0.11%
Sandwich        91          $3.6         0.05%  110         $20.3         0.06%  107         $23.9         0.06%
Cookies
Candy Bars      92          $3.6         0.05%  144         $17.1         0.05%  131         $20.6         0.05%
(Singles)
(Including)
Fruit Snacks    93          $3.5         0.05%  209         $12.6         0.04%  189         $16.2         0.04%
Pizza/          94          $3.5         0.05%  134         $17.9         0.06%  120         $21.4         0.06%
Traditional
Flavored Milk   95          $3.5         0.05%  148         $16.8         0.05%  133         $20.3         0.05%
Sweet Goods--   96          $3.5         0.05%  162         $15.7         0.05%  150         $19.2         0.05%
Full Size
Vegetable Oil   97          $3.4         0.05%  306          $8.8         0.03%  248         $12.2         0.03%
Natural Cheese  98          $3.4         0.05%  50          $36.0         0.11%  55          $39.4         0.10%
Slices
Salsa & Dips    99          $3.4         0.05%  152         $16.5         0.05%  139         $19.9         0.05%
Avocado         100         $3.4         0.05%  47          $37.5         0.12%  52          $40.9         0.11%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $699.9        10.64%           $4,012.7        12.73%           $4,712.5        12.37%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-14: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores with $2 to $12 Million in Sales
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1         $151.9         2.31%  1          $622.5         1.98%  1          $774.4         2.03%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2         $131.9         2.00%  2          $437.9         1.39%  2          $569.9         1.50%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $90.0         1.37%  7          $183.4         0.58%  4          $273.4         0.72%
Kids Cereal     4          $62.6         0.95%  20         $134.2         0.43%  13         $196.7         0.52%
Shredded        5          $58.4         0.89%  3          $238.3         0.76%  3          $296.8         0.78%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      6          $57.5         0.87%  10         $173.7         0.55%  7          $231.2         0.61%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Primal [Beef]   7          $51.5         0.78%  12         $169.9         0.54%  9          $221.4         0.58%
Potato Chips    8          $51.3         0.78%  8          $182.1         0.58%  6          $233.4         0.61%
Lunchment--Del  9          $44.1         0.67%  11         $172.4         0.55%  11         $216.5         0.57%
i Fresh
Infant Formula  10         $43.0         0.65%  169         $34.9         0.11%  71          $77.9         0.20%
Starter/
Solutio
Eggs--Large     11         $41.3         0.63%  9          $178.2         0.57%  10         $219.5         0.58%
Still Water     12         $39.9         0.61%  19         $141.1         0.45%  16         $180.9         0.48%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Mainstream      13         $39.2         0.60%  32         $102.9         0.33%  27         $142.1         0.37%
White Bread
Chicken Breast  14         $38.1         0.58%  4          $203.4         0.65%  5          $241.5         0.63%
Boneless
Tortilla/Nacho  15         $37.4         0.57%  16         $146.3         0.46%  15         $183.7         0.48%
Chips
American        16         $35.7         0.54%  36         $101.0         0.32%  31         $136.7         0.36%
Single Cheese
Fz Ss Prem      17         $34.7         0.53%  23         $127.8         0.41%  21         $162.5         0.43%
Traditional
Meals
Snack Cake--    18         $34.1         0.52%  57          $76.2         0.24%  43         $110.4         0.29%
Multi Pack
Dairy Case      19         $34.1         0.52%  6          $188.7         0.60%  8          $222.9         0.58%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Snacks/         20         $34.1         0.52%  66          $68.7         0.22%  50         $102.8         0.27%
Appetizers
Enhanced [Pork  21         $32.9         0.50%  26         $120.4         0.38%  24         $153.2         0.40%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Fz Ss Economy   22         $32.8         0.50%  76          $59.5         0.19%  58          $92.3         0.24%
Meals All
Bacon--Trad     23         $32.2         0.49%  28         $113.2         0.36%  26         $145.4         0.38%
16oz Or Less
Unflavored Can  24         $32.2         0.49%  18         $143.4         0.46%  19         $175.6         0.46%
Coffee
Soft Drinks     25         $31.7         0.48%  58          $76.0         0.24%  46         $107.7         0.28%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Pizza/Premium   26         $31.2         0.47%  31         $106.2         0.34%  30         $137.4         0.36%
Mainstream      27         $31.1         0.47%  22         $128.4         0.41%  22         $159.5         0.42%
Variety
Breads
Sugar           28         $30.1         0.46%  51          $81.2         0.26%  42         $111.3         0.29%
Sandwiches &    29         $28.6         0.43%  88          $52.9         0.17%  67          $81.5         0.21%
Handhelds
Potatoes        30         $28.5         0.43%  29         $111.8         0.35%  28         $140.3         0.37%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Ribs [Pork]     31         $28.2         0.43%  54          $77.3         0.25%  48         $105.4         0.28%
Sft Drnk Mlt-   32         $28.0         0.43%  21         $131.2         0.42%  23         $159.2         0.42%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
All Family      33         $27.7         0.42%  15         $148.4         0.47%  18         $176.1         0.46%
Cereal
Convenient      34         $27.5         0.42%  95          $50.1         0.16%  72          $77.6         0.20%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Bananas         35         $26.3         0.40%  13         $168.0         0.53%  14         $194.4         0.51%
Natural Cheese  36         $26.2         0.40%  17         $145.8         0.46%  20         $172.0         0.45%
Chunks
Isotonic        37         $24.2         0.37%  45          $88.5         0.28%  41         $112.7         0.30%
Drinks Single
Serve
Premium [Ice    38         $23.9         0.36%  14         $155.6         0.49%  17         $179.5         0.47%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Condensed Soup  39         $23.2         0.35%  30         $109.2         0.35%  32         $132.4         0.35%
Pourable Salad  40         $22.9         0.35%  39          $97.8         0.31%  35         $120.7         0.32%
Dressings
Frzn Chicken--  41         $22.8         0.35%  67          $68.4         0.22%  59          $91.2         0.24%
Wht Meat
Sft Drnk Sngl   42         $22.0         0.33%  96          $49.9         0.16%  81          $71.9         0.19%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Choice Beef     43         $21.7         0.33%  40          $95.4         0.30%  37         $117.1         0.31%
Fz Family       44         $21.5         0.33%  79          $58.8         0.19%  69          $80.3         0.21%
Style Entrees
Mayonnaise &    45         $21.5         0.33%  48          $84.4         0.27%  47         $105.9         0.28%
Whipped
Dressing
Select Beef     46         $20.6         0.31%  34         $102.0         0.32%  34         $122.6         0.32%
Traditional     47         $20.6         0.31%  43          $89.1         0.28%  44         $109.7         0.29%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Fz Bag          48         $20.5         0.31%  41          $95.2         0.30%  40         $115.7         0.30%
Vegetables--P
lain
Hot Dogs--Base  49         $20.5         0.31%  121         $42.9         0.14%  93          $63.3         0.17%
Meat
Aseptic Pack    50         $19.5         0.30%  131         $41.7         0.13%  99          $61.3         0.16%
Juice And
Drinks
Macaroni &      51         $19.4         0.29%  127         $42.2         0.13%  97          $61.6         0.16%
Cheese Dnrs
Adult Cereal    52         $19.3         0.29%  24         $127.3         0.40%  25         $146.7         0.38%
Chicken Wings   53         $18.9         0.29%  274         $22.1         0.07%  176         $41.0         0.11%
Fz Ss Prem      54         $18.8         0.29%  5          $189.5         0.60%  12         $208.2         0.55%
Nutritional
Meals
Margarine:      55         $18.4         0.28%  64          $71.5         0.23%  61          $89.9         0.24%
Tubs And
Bowls
Frzn Chicken--  56         $18.3         0.28%  425         $13.4         0.04%  240         $31.8         0.08%
Wings
Mainstream      57         $18.3         0.28%  80          $58.0         0.18%  76          $76.3         0.20%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Choice Beef     58         $18.3         0.28%  97          $49.7         0.16%  86          $68.0         0.18%
Mexican Soft    59         $18.3         0.28%  53          $77.8         0.25%  53          $96.1         0.25%
Tortillas And
Wra
Strawberries    60         $18.0         0.27%  25         $122.4         0.39%  29         $140.3         0.37%
Mult Pk Bag     61         $17.9         0.27%  194         $31.3         0.10%  143         $49.3         0.13%
Snacks
Can Pasta       62         $17.9         0.27%  165         $35.2         0.11%  120         $53.1         0.14%
Lunchment--Bol  63         $17.9         0.27%  105         $46.2         0.15%  91          $64.1         0.17%
ogna/Sausage
Refrigerated    64         $17.7         0.27%  35         $101.2         0.32%  36         $118.9         0.31%
Coffee
Creamers
Vegetable Oil   65         $17.1         0.26%  237         $26.5         0.08%  167         $43.6         0.11%
Sw Gds: Donuts  66         $16.9         0.26%  78          $58.9         0.19%  78          $75.8         0.20%
Frzn French     67         $16.5         0.25%  157         $36.4         0.12%  121         $52.9         0.14%
Fries
Tuna            68         $16.5         0.25%  56          $76.8         0.24%  56          $93.3         0.24%
Candy Bags--    69         $16.4         0.25%  37         $100.0         0.32%  38         $116.5         0.31%
Chocolate
Pizza/Economy   70         $16.0         0.24%  180         $33.1         0.11%  144         $49.2         0.13%
Peanut Butter   71         $15.6         0.24%  44          $88.6         0.28%  49         $104.2         0.27%
Frzn Breakfast  72         $15.3         0.23%  139         $39.9         0.13%  112         $55.2         0.14%
Sandwiches
Frzn Meat--     73         $14.7         0.22%  190         $32.1         0.10%  154         $46.8         0.12%
Beef
Value Forms/    74         $14.7         0.22%  201         $30.2         0.10%  160         $44.9         0.12%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Cakes:          75         $14.6         0.22%  167         $35.1         0.11%  139         $49.8         0.13%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Fz Skillet      76         $14.5         0.22%  82          $54.9         0.17%  85          $69.4         0.18%
Meals
Sandwich        77         $14.4         0.22%  92          $51.4         0.16%  88          $65.8         0.17%
Cookies
Chicken Drums   78         $14.3         0.22%  251         $23.7         0.08%  197         $38.1         0.10%
Pizza/          79         $14.3         0.22%  106         $46.1         0.15%  101         $60.4         0.16%
Traditional
Butter          80         $14.2         0.22%  27         $117.1         0.37%  33         $131.3         0.34%
Fruit Snacks    81         $14.1         0.21%  200         $30.5         0.10%  163         $44.6         0.12%
Meat: Turkey    82         $13.9         0.21%  33         $102.3         0.32%  39         $116.1         0.30%
Bulk
Bagged Cheese   83         $13.8         0.21%  146         $38.3         0.12%  125         $52.1         0.14%
Snacks
Salsa & Dips    84         $13.7         0.21%  136         $40.4         0.13%  118         $54.0         0.14%
Ramen Noodles/  85         $13.7         0.21%  293         $20.5         0.07%  225         $34.2         0.09%
Ramen Cups
Rts Soup:       86         $13.7         0.21%  47          $84.6         0.27%  52          $98.2         0.26%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Waffles/        87         $13.5         0.21%  85          $54.0         0.17%  87          $67.5         0.18%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Sour Creams     88         $13.5         0.20%  69          $65.9         0.21%  70          $79.4         0.21%
Dnr Sausage--   89         $13.3         0.20%  233         $26.7         0.08%  184         $40.0         0.11%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Angus [Beef]    90         $13.1         0.20%  63          $71.9         0.23%  66          $84.9         0.22%
Hot Dog Buns    91         $13.0         0.20%  111         $45.1         0.14%  105         $58.1         0.15%
Sandwiches--(C  92         $13.0         0.20%  108         $45.4         0.14%  104         $58.4         0.15%
old)
Dairy Case      93         $12.9         0.20%  170         $34.8         0.11%  151         $47.6         0.13%
Juice Drnk
Under 10
Hamburger Buns  94         $12.8         0.20%  94          $50.1         0.16%  94          $63.0         0.17%
Candy Bars      95         $12.8         0.19%  149         $37.8         0.12%  132         $50.6         0.13%
(Singles)
(Including)
Cream Cheese    96         $12.8         0.19%  52          $78.1         0.25%  60          $90.9         0.24%
Candy Bars      97         $12.5         0.19%  93          $50.4         0.16%  95          $62.9         0.17%
(Multi Pack)
Cheese          98         $12.5         0.19%  74          $61.2         0.19%  79          $73.7         0.19%
Crackers
Spring Water    99         $12.5         0.19%  68          $67.9         0.22%  68          $80.3         0.21%
Flavored Milk   100        $12.4         0.19%  124         $42.5         0.13%  114         $54.9         0.14%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100               $2,658.3        40.40%           $9,463.7        30.03%          $12,122.1        31.82%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-15: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores with less than $2 Million in
Sales
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1           $0.4         0.01%  1            $1.4         0.00%  1            $1.8         0.00%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2           $0.3         0.01%  2            $0.8         0.00%  2            $1.2         0.00%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Primal [Beef]   3           $0.2         0.00%  3            $0.7         0.00%  3            $0.9         0.00%
Lean [Beef]     4           $0.2         0.00%  6            $0.4         0.00%  5            $0.5         0.00%
Sft Drnk 2      5           $0.1         0.00%  7            $0.3         0.00%  7            $0.5         0.00%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Mainstream      6           $0.1         0.00%  11           $0.3         0.00%  9            $0.4         0.00%
White Bread
Soft Drinks     7           $0.1         0.00%  19           $0.2         0.00%  13           $0.3         0.00%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Potato Chips    8           $0.1         0.00%  5            $0.4         0.00%  6            $0.5         0.00%
Shredded        9           $0.1         0.00%  4            $0.4         0.00%  4            $0.5         0.00%
Cheese
Kids Cereal     10          $0.1         0.00%  28           $0.2         0.00%  20           $0.3         0.00%
Lunchment--Del  11          $0.1         0.00%  8            $0.3         0.00%  8            $0.4         0.00%
i Fresh
Snack Cake--    12          $0.1         0.00%  31           $0.2         0.00%  26           $0.3         0.00%
Multi Pack
American        13          $0.1         0.00%  16           $0.2         0.00%  14           $0.3         0.00%
Single Cheese
Enhanced [Pork  14          $0.1         0.00%  10           $0.3         0.00%  11           $0.3         0.00%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Tortilla/Nacho  15          $0.1         0.00%  12           $0.3         0.00%  12           $0.3         0.00%
Chips
Unflavored Can  16          $0.1         0.00%  15           $0.2         0.00%  16           $0.3         0.00%
Coffee
Eggs--Large     17          $0.1         0.00%  9            $0.3         0.00%  10           $0.3         0.00%
Potatoes        18          $0.1         0.00%  18           $0.2         0.00%  17           $0.3         0.00%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Still Water     19          $0.1         0.00%  20           $0.2         0.00%  19           $0.3         0.00%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Fz Ss Economy   20          $0.1         0.00%  57           $0.1         0.00%  45           $0.2         0.00%
Meals All
Sugar           21          $0.1         0.00%  32           $0.2         0.00%  31           $0.2         0.00%
Bacon--Trad     22          $0.1         0.00%  21           $0.2         0.00%  21           $0.3         0.00%
16oz Or Less
Convenient      23          $0.1         0.00%  66           $0.1         0.00%  52           $0.2         0.00%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Mainstream      24          $0.1         0.00%  13           $0.3         0.00%  15           $0.3         0.00%
Variety
Breads
Infant Formula  25          $0.1         0.00%  143          $0.1         0.00%  78           $0.1         0.00%
Starter/
Solutio
Sft Drnk Sngl   26          $0.1         0.00%  51           $0.1         0.00%  44           $0.2         0.00%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Sft Drnk Mlt-   27          $0.1         0.00%  27           $0.2         0.00%  27           $0.3         0.00%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Chicken Breast  28          $0.1         0.00%  14           $0.2         0.00%  18           $0.3         0.00%
Boneless
Hot Dogs--Base  29          $0.0         0.00%  46           $0.1         0.00%  36           $0.2         0.00%
Meat
Snacks/         30          $0.0         0.00%  70           $0.1         0.00%  60           $0.1         0.00%
Appetizers
Traditional     31          $0.0         0.00%  23           $0.2         0.00%  24           $0.3         0.00%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Pizza/Economy   32          $0.0         0.00%  55           $0.1         0.00%  49           $0.2         0.00%
Pizza/Premium   33          $0.0         0.00%  43           $0.1         0.00%  38           $0.2         0.00%
Condensed Soup  34          $0.0         0.00%  25           $0.2         0.00%  25           $0.3         0.00%
Lunchment--Bol  35          $0.0         0.00%  45           $0.1         0.00%  43           $0.2         0.00%
ogna/Sausage
Flavored Milk   36          $0.0         0.00%  64           $0.1         0.00%  57           $0.1         0.00%
All Family      37          $0.0         0.00%  22           $0.2         0.00%  23           $0.3         0.00%
Cereal
Sandwiches &    38          $0.0         0.00%  75           $0.1         0.00%  66           $0.1         0.00%
Handhelds
Hamburger Buns  39          $0.0         0.00%  38           $0.1         0.00%  34           $0.2         0.00%
Bananas         40          $0.0         0.00%  17           $0.2         0.00%  22           $0.3         0.00%
Pizza/          41          $0.0         0.00%  47           $0.1         0.00%  46           $0.2         0.00%
Traditional
Pails [Ice      42          $0.0         0.00%  59           $0.1         0.00%  55           $0.2         0.00%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Margarine:      43          $0.0         0.00%  42           $0.1         0.00%  39           $0.2         0.00%
Tubs And
Bowls
Natural Cheese  44          $0.0         0.00%  26           $0.2         0.00%  29           $0.2         0.00%
Chunks
Fz Ss Prem      45          $0.0         0.00%  41           $0.1         0.00%  41           $0.2         0.00%
Traditional
Meals
Macaroni &      46          $0.0         0.00%  88           $0.1         0.00%  74           $0.1         0.00%
Cheese Dnrs
Pourable Salad  47          $0.0         0.00%  35           $0.1         0.00%  35           $0.2         0.00%
Dressings
Choice Beef     48          $0.0         0.00%  53           $0.1         0.00%  54           $0.2         0.00%
Isotonic        49          $0.0         0.00%  44           $0.1         0.00%  48           $0.2         0.00%
Drinks Single
Serve
Strawberries    50          $0.0         0.00%  29           $0.2         0.00%  30           $0.2         0.00%
Can Pasta       51          $0.0         0.00%  118          $0.1         0.00%  97           $0.1         0.00%
Mayonnaise &    52          $0.0         0.00%  48           $0.1         0.00%  50           $0.2         0.00%
Whipped
Dressing
Ribs [Pork]     53          $0.0         0.00%  52           $0.1         0.00%  53           $0.2         0.00%
Candy Bags--    54          $0.0         0.00%  36           $0.1         0.00%  37           $0.2         0.00%
Chocolate
Cottage Cheese  55          $0.0         0.00%  37           $0.1         0.00%  42           $0.2         0.00%
Dairy Case      56          $0.0         0.00%  24           $0.2         0.00%  28           $0.2         0.00%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Mexican Soft    57          $0.0         0.00%  56           $0.1         0.00%  58           $0.1         0.00%
Tortillas And
Wra
Frzn French     58          $0.0         0.00%  93           $0.1         0.00%  80           $0.1         0.00%
Fries
Candy Bars      59          $0.0         0.00%  71           $0.1         0.00%  70           $0.1         0.00%
(Multi Pack)
Sweet Goods--   60          $0.0         0.00%  95           $0.1         0.00%  85           $0.1         0.00%
Full Size
Butts [Pork     61          $0.0         0.00%  80           $0.1         0.00%  76           $0.1         0.00%
Shoulder]
Frzn Chicken--  62          $0.0         0.00%  54           $0.1         0.00%  59           $0.1         0.00%
Wht Meat
Sandwich        63          $0.0         0.00%  63           $0.1         0.00%  63           $0.1         0.00%
Cookies
Mainstream      64          $0.0         0.00%  73           $0.1         0.00%  71           $0.1         0.00%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Fz Bag          65          $0.0         0.00%  34           $0.2         0.00%  40           $0.2         0.00%
Vegetables--P
lain
Bagged Cheese   66          $0.0         0.00%  90           $0.1         0.00%  79           $0.1         0.00%
Snacks
Choice Beef     67          $0.0         0.00%  40           $0.1         0.00%  47           $0.2         0.00%
Peanut Butter   68          $0.0         0.00%  50           $0.1         0.00%  56           $0.2         0.00%
Bkfst Sausage-- 69          $0.0         0.00%  61           $0.1         0.00%  62           $0.1         0.00%
Fresh Rolls
Adult Cereal    70          $0.0         0.00%  33           $0.2         0.00%  33           $0.2         0.00%
Loaf Cheese     71          $0.0         0.00%  67           $0.1         0.00%  67           $0.1         0.00%
Refrigerated    72          $0.0         0.00%  86           $0.1         0.00%  82           $0.1         0.00%
Biscuits
Vegetable Oil   73          $0.0         0.00%  131          $0.1         0.00%  108          $0.1         0.00%
Hot Dog Buns    74          $0.0         0.00%  79           $0.1         0.00%  77           $0.1         0.00%
Candy Bars      75          $0.0         0.00%  84           $0.1         0.00%  83           $0.1         0.00%
(Singles)
(Including)
Sour Creams     76          $0.0         0.00%  62           $0.1         0.00%  65           $0.1         0.00%
Sticks/Enrobed  77          $0.0         0.00%  99           $0.1         0.00%  92           $0.1         0.00%
[Frozen
Novelties]
Angus [Beef]    78          $0.0         0.00%  83           $0.1         0.00%  81           $0.1         0.00%
Tray Pack/Choc  79          $0.0         0.00%  85           $0.1         0.00%  84           $0.1         0.00%
Chip Cookies
Salsa & Dips    80          $0.0         0.00%  106          $0.1         0.00%  99           $0.1         0.00%
Skillet         81          $0.0         0.00%  142          $0.1         0.00%  120          $0.1         0.00%
Dinners
Aseptic Pack    82          $0.0         0.00%  154          $0.1         0.00%  126          $0.1         0.00%
Juice And
Drinks
Tuna            83          $0.0         0.00%  72           $0.1         0.00%  75           $0.1         0.00%
Sw Gds: Donuts  84          $0.0         0.00%  89           $0.1         0.00%  89           $0.1         0.00%
Head Lettuce    85          $0.0         0.00%  65           $0.1         0.00%  69           $0.1         0.00%
Fz Family       86          $0.0         0.00%  170          $0.0         0.00%  138          $0.1         0.00%
Style Entrees
Cubed Meats     87          $0.0         0.00%  97           $0.1         0.00%  94           $0.1         0.00%
[Beef]
Select Beef     88          $0.0         0.00%  91           $0.1         0.00%  91           $0.1         0.00%
Value Forms/    89          $0.0         0.00%  166          $0.0         0.00%  139          $0.1         0.00%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Fz Ss Prem      90          $0.0         0.00%  30           $0.2         0.00%  32           $0.2         0.00%
Nutritional
Meals
Variety Beans-- 91          $0.0         0.00%  77           $0.1         0.00%  87           $0.1         0.00%
Kidney/Pinto/
E
Cream Cheese    92          $0.0         0.00%  58           $0.1         0.00%  64           $0.1         0.00%
Dnr Sausage--   93          $0.0         0.00%  129          $0.1         0.00%  122          $0.1         0.00%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Lunchmeat--Cho  94          $0.0         0.00%  186          $0.0         0.00%  155          $0.1         0.00%
p/Form Pltry
& Ha
Frzn Meat--     95          $0.0         0.00%  194          $0.0         0.00%  162          $0.1         0.00%
Beef
Toaster         96          $0.0         0.00%  121          $0.1         0.00%  116          $0.1         0.00%
Pastries
Bacon--Trad     97          $0.0         0.00%  76           $0.1         0.00%  88           $0.1         0.00%
Greater Than
16oz
Corn Chips      98          $0.0         0.00%  108          $0.1         0.00%  105          $0.1         0.00%
Water Ice       99          $0.0         0.00%  220          $0.0         0.00%  182          $0.1         0.00%
[Frozen
Novelties]
Eggs--Medium    100         $0.0         0.00%  164          $0.0         0.00%  144          $0.1         0.00%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                   $4.9         0.07%              $16.8         0.05%              $21.7         0.06%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-16: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in Counties with Poverty Rates
Less than 10%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $12.2         0.18%  1          $105.5         0.33%  1          $117.6         0.31%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $10.3         0.16%  2           $74.1         0.24%  2           $84.4         0.22%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3           $6.3         0.10%  7           $32.5         0.10%  5           $38.9         0.10%
Shredded        4           $4.8         0.07%  3           $47.5         0.15%  3           $52.3         0.14%
Cheese
Kids Cereal     5           $4.3         0.06%  20          $24.1         0.08%  18          $28.3         0.07%
Sft Drnk 2      6           $3.9         0.06%  18          $25.3         0.08%  17          $29.2         0.08%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    7           $3.8         0.06%  9           $31.6         0.10%  7           $35.4         0.09%
Primal [Beef]   8           $3.6         0.05%  16          $27.7         0.09%  14          $31.3         0.08%
Chicken Breast  9           $3.4         0.05%  4           $39.9         0.13%  4           $43.3         0.11%
Boneless
Lunchment--Del  10          $3.3         0.05%  11          $29.7         0.09%  10          $33.0         0.09%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     11          $3.1         0.05%  8           $31.8         0.10%  9           $34.9         0.09%
Infant Formula  12          $3.1         0.05%  268          $4.3         0.01%  169          $7.4         0.02%
Starter/
Solutio
Snacks/         13          $3.0         0.05%  54          $14.2         0.05%  48          $17.3         0.05%
Appetizers
Tortilla/Nacho  14          $3.0         0.05%  13          $28.8         0.09%  12          $31.8         0.08%
Chips
Enhanced [Pork  15          $2.8         0.04%  21          $23.6         0.07%  20          $26.4         0.07%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Mainstream      16          $2.8         0.04%  40          $17.3         0.05%  36          $20.1         0.05%
White Bread
Unflavored Can  17          $2.8         0.04%  22          $23.4         0.07%  21          $26.1         0.07%
Coffee
Still Water     18          $2.7         0.04%  27          $21.6         0.07%  26          $24.2         0.06%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Soft Drinks     19          $2.6         0.04%  59          $13.8         0.04%  53          $16.3         0.04%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Pizza/Premium   20          $2.5         0.04%  28          $21.3         0.07%  27          $23.9         0.06%
Fz Ss Prem      21          $2.5         0.04%  32          $19.3         0.06%  30          $21.8         0.06%
Traditional
Meals
Dairy Case      22          $2.5         0.04%  6           $33.2         0.11%  6           $35.7         0.09%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Natural Cheese  23          $2.4         0.04%  15          $28.1         0.09%  15          $30.6         0.08%
Chunks
American        24          $2.4         0.04%  46          $16.3         0.05%  41          $18.7         0.05%
Single Cheese
All Family      25          $2.3         0.04%  14          $28.2         0.09%  16          $30.5         0.08%
Cereal
Bacon--Trad     26          $2.3         0.03%  35          $19.0         0.06%  35          $21.3         0.06%
16oz Or Less
Snack Cake--    27          $2.2         0.03%  70          $12.5         0.04%  64          $14.7         0.04%
Multi Pack
Select Beef     28          $2.2         0.03%  34          $19.2         0.06%  33          $21.4         0.06%
Bananas         29          $2.2         0.03%  10          $30.5         0.10%  11          $32.7         0.09%
Potatoes        30          $2.2         0.03%  33          $19.3         0.06%  32          $21.5         0.06%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Sft Drnk Mlt-   31          $2.2         0.03%  25          $22.5         0.07%  24          $24.6         0.06%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Fz Ss Economy   32          $2.2         0.03%  112          $8.7         0.03%  94          $10.8         0.03%
Meals All
Premium [Ice    33          $2.1         0.03%  12          $29.6         0.09%  13          $31.7         0.08%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Mainstream      34          $2.1         0.03%  26          $21.8         0.07%  28          $23.8         0.06%
Variety
Breads
Sft Drnk Sngl   35          $2.1         0.03%  90          $10.1         0.03%  81          $12.2         0.03%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Convenient      36          $2.1         0.03%  94           $9.7         0.03%  86          $11.8         0.03%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Sandwiches &    37          $2.0         0.03%  104          $9.0         0.03%  91          $11.0         0.03%
Handhelds
Sugar           38          $1.9         0.03%  61          $13.6         0.04%  55          $15.5         0.04%
Condensed Soup  39          $1.9         0.03%  31          $19.6         0.06%  31          $21.5         0.06%
Fz Family       40          $1.8         0.03%  83          $11.0         0.03%  77          $12.8         0.03%
Style Entrees
Ribs [Pork]     41          $1.8         0.03%  68          $12.9         0.04%  63          $14.7         0.04%
Isotonic        42          $1.7         0.03%  60          $13.8         0.04%  56          $15.5         0.04%
Drinks Single
Serve
Refrigerated    43          $1.7         0.03%  38          $18.3         0.06%  37          $20.0         0.05%
Coffee
Creamers
Pourable Salad  44          $1.7         0.03%  39          $18.0         0.06%  38          $19.7         0.05%
Dressings
Fz Ss Prem      45          $1.7         0.03%  5           $33.6         0.11%  8           $35.3         0.09%
Nutritional
Meals
Frzn Chicken--  46          $1.7         0.03%  74          $12.2         0.04%  69          $13.9         0.04%
Wht Meat
Strawberries    47          $1.7         0.03%  17          $26.3         0.08%  19          $27.9         0.07%
Mayonnaise &    48          $1.6         0.02%  52          $14.6         0.05%  54          $16.1         0.04%
Whipped
Dressing
Mexican Soft    49          $1.6         0.02%  51          $14.8         0.05%  51          $16.4         0.04%
Tortillas And
Wra
Candy Bags--    50          $1.5         0.02%  30          $20.3         0.06%  29          $21.9         0.06%
Chocolate
Adult Cereal    51          $1.5         0.02%  24          $22.8         0.07%  25          $24.3         0.06%
Choice Beef     52          $1.5         0.02%  63          $13.5         0.04%  60          $15.1         0.04%
Sw Gds: Donuts  53          $1.5         0.02%  77          $11.7         0.04%  76          $13.2         0.03%
Traditional     54          $1.5         0.02%  56          $13.9         0.04%  58          $15.3         0.04%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Meat: Turkey    55          $1.4         0.02%  19          $24.3         0.08%  22          $25.7         0.07%
Bulk
Aseptic Pack    56          $1.4         0.02%  136          $7.8         0.02%  115          $9.2         0.02%
Juice And
Drinks
Fz Bag          57          $1.4         0.02%  47          $16.0         0.05%  46          $17.4         0.05%
Vegetables--P
lain
Butter          58          $1.4         0.02%  23          $23.3         0.07%  23          $24.7         0.06%
Margarine:      59          $1.4         0.02%  75          $12.1         0.04%  72          $13.5         0.04%
Tubs And
Bowls
Hot Dogs--Base  60          $1.4         0.02%  174          $6.5         0.02%  149          $7.9         0.02%
Meat
Can Pasta       61          $1.4         0.02%  193          $6.1         0.02%  166          $7.4         0.02%
Macaroni &      62          $1.4         0.02%  133          $7.9         0.02%  114          $9.2         0.02%
Cheese Dnrs
Choice Beef     63          $1.4         0.02%  107          $8.9         0.03%  100         $10.2         0.03%
Pizza/Economy   64          $1.4         0.02%  191          $6.1         0.02%  164          $7.5         0.02%
Peanut Butter   65          $1.3         0.02%  45          $16.4         0.05%  45          $17.7         0.05%
Mainstream      66          $1.3         0.02%  88          $10.4         0.03%  88          $11.7         0.03%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Pizza/          67          $1.3         0.02%  98           $9.3         0.03%  95          $10.6         0.03%
Traditional
Tuna            68          $1.3         0.02%  64          $13.3         0.04%  65          $14.6         0.04%
Value Forms/    69          $1.2         0.02%  209          $5.8         0.02%  181          $7.0         0.02%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Angus           70          $1.2         0.02%  62          $13.6         0.04%  62          $14.8         0.04%
Meat: Ham Bulk  71          $1.2         0.02%  36          $18.4         0.06%  39          $19.6         0.05%
Frzn Breakfast  72          $1.2         0.02%  135          $7.8         0.02%  122          $9.0         0.02%
Sandwiches
Cream Cheese    73          $1.2         0.02%  49          $15.5         0.05%  50          $16.7         0.04%
Cheese          74          $1.2         0.02%  66          $13.1         0.04%  67          $14.2         0.04%
Crackers
Fz Skillet      75          $1.2         0.02%  89          $10.3         0.03%  90          $11.5         0.03%
Meals
String Cheese   76          $1.2         0.02%  53          $14.3         0.05%  57          $15.4         0.04%
Fruit Snacks    77          $1.2         0.02%  170          $6.6         0.02%  152          $7.8         0.02%
Frzn Meat--     78          $1.1         0.02%  184          $6.3         0.02%  168          $7.4         0.02%
Beef
Frzn French     79          $1.1         0.02%  173          $6.5         0.02%  159          $7.7         0.02%
Fries
Instore Cut     80          $1.1         0.02%  57          $13.8         0.04%  61          $14.9         0.04%
Fruit
Waffles/        81          $1.1         0.02%  84          $10.9         0.03%  83          $12.0         0.03%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Sandwiches--(C  82          $1.1         0.02%  140          $7.7         0.02%  130          $8.8         0.02%
old)
Sour Creams     83          $1.1         0.02%  73          $12.4         0.04%  73          $13.5         0.04%
Cakes:          84          $1.1         0.02%  164          $6.7         0.02%  150          $7.8         0.02%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Avocado         85          $1.1         0.02%  48          $15.7         0.05%  49          $16.8         0.04%
Rts Soup:       86          $1.1         0.02%  55          $14.2         0.05%  59          $15.3         0.04%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Salsa & Dips    87          $1.1         0.02%  132          $7.9         0.02%  124          $9.0         0.02%
Flavored Milk   88          $1.1         0.02%  145          $7.5         0.02%  137          $8.5         0.02%
Grapes Red      89          $1.1         0.02%  42          $17.0         0.05%  43          $18.0         0.05%
Candy Bars      90          $1.1         0.02%  152          $7.1         0.02%  142          $8.2         0.02%
(Singles)
(Including)
Lunchment--Bol  91          $1.1         0.02%  179          $6.4         0.02%  167          $7.4         0.02%
ogna/Sausage
Sandwich        92          $1.0         0.02%  99           $9.3         0.03%  98          $10.4         0.03%
Cookies
Bkfst Sausage-- 93          $1.0         0.02%  109          $8.8         0.03%  105          $9.9         0.03%
Fresh Rolls
Spring Water    94          $1.0         0.02%  82          $11.0         0.03%  82          $12.0         0.03%
Chix: Frd 8pc/  95          $1.0         0.02%  85          $10.8         0.03%  84          $11.8         0.03%
Cut Up (Hot)
Bagged Cheese   96          $1.0         0.02%  176          $6.4         0.02%  165          $7.4         0.02%
Snacks
Natural Cheese  97          $1.0         0.02%  50          $15.3         0.05%  52          $16.4         0.04%
Slices
Hamburger Buns  98          $1.0         0.02%  102          $9.1         0.03%  103         $10.1         0.03%
Sweet Goods--   99          $1.0         0.01%  175          $6.5         0.02%  163          $7.5         0.02%
Full Size
Yogurt/Kids     100         $1.0         0.01%  165          $6.7         0.02%  155          $7.7         0.02%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $204.3         3.10%           $1,763.9         5.60%           $1,968.2         5.17%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-17: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in Counties with Poverty Rates
of 10% to 20%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1         $147.5         2.24%  1          $651.2         2.07%  1          $798.7         2.10%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2         $123.8         1.88%  2          $456.0         1.45%  2          $579.8         1.52%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $85.1         1.29%  7          $199.9         0.63%  4          $285.0         0.75%
Kids Cereal     4          $59.3         0.90%  20         $141.9         0.45%  13         $201.2         0.53%
Shredded        5          $57.3         0.87%  3          $255.8         0.81%  3          $313.1         0.82%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      6          $54.3         0.83%  13         $175.5         0.56%  9          $229.8         0.60%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    7          $49.2         0.75%  8          $192.5         0.61%  6          $241.8         0.63%
Primal [Beef]   8          $44.4         0.68%  17         $156.1         0.50%  15         $200.6         0.53%
Infant Formula  9          $42.1         0.64%  179         $35.8         0.11%  79          $77.9         0.20%
Starter/
Solutio
Lunchment--Del  10         $42.1         0.64%  11         $183.1         0.58%  11         $225.2         0.59%
i Fresh
Eggs--Large     11         $40.0         0.61%  9          $191.2         0.61%  8          $231.2         0.61%
Chicken Breast  12         $38.5         0.58%  4          $221.7         0.70%  5          $260.2         0.68%
Boneless
Still Water     13         $37.9         0.58%  19         $146.8         0.47%  19         $184.8         0.48%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Tortilla/Nacho  14         $36.3         0.55%  16         $157.8         0.50%  17         $194.1         0.51%
Chips
Mainstream      15         $35.0         0.53%  42         $100.2         0.32%  35         $135.3         0.36%
White Bread
Snacks/         16         $34.2         0.52%  67          $75.2         0.24%  49         $109.4         0.29%
Appetizers
Fz Ss Prem      17         $33.7         0.51%  22         $136.9         0.43%  21         $170.6         0.45%
Traditional
Meals
Dairy Case      18         $33.7         0.51%  6          $206.7         0.66%  7          $240.4         0.63%
100% Pure
Juice--O
American        19         $32.8         0.50%  41         $102.4         0.32%  36         $135.2         0.35%
Single Cheese
Unflavored Can  20         $31.4         0.48%  18         $149.8         0.48%  20         $181.2         0.48%
Coffee
Enhanced [Pork  21         $31.1         0.47%  27         $122.2         0.39%  24         $153.3         0.40%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Fz Ss Economy   22         $31.1         0.47%  80          $62.1         0.20%  65          $93.1         0.24%
Meals All
Bacon--Trad     23         $31.0         0.47%  29         $119.4         0.38%  26         $150.3         0.39%
16oz Or Less
Pizza/Premium   24         $30.2         0.46%  34         $115.3         0.37%  29         $145.5         0.38%
Snack Cake--    25         $30.2         0.46%  70          $74.2         0.24%  54         $104.4         0.27%
Multi Pack
Mainstream      26         $29.7         0.45%  25         $130.8         0.42%  22         $160.5         0.42%
Variety
Breads
Soft Drinks     27         $29.0         0.44%  62          $79.6         0.25%  50         $108.6         0.29%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Natural Cheese  28         $28.2         0.43%  14         $167.0         0.53%  16         $195.1         0.51%
Chunks
All Family      29         $28.0         0.43%  15         $163.5         0.52%  18         $191.6         0.50%
Cereal
Sugar           30         $27.3         0.42%  58          $84.4         0.27%  46         $111.8         0.29%
Sandwiches &    31         $27.0         0.41%  93          $56.0         0.18%  73          $83.0         0.22%
Handhelds
Potatoes        32         $26.8         0.41%  32         $116.0         0.37%  30         $142.8         0.37%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Bananas         33         $26.6         0.40%  10         $187.2         0.59%  12         $213.7         0.56%
Ribs [Pork]     34         $25.8         0.39%  60          $80.9         0.26%  53         $106.7         0.28%
Convenient      35         $25.2         0.38%  106         $51.5         0.16%  82          $76.7         0.20%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Premium [Ice    36         $24.8         0.38%  12         $176.1         0.56%  14         $200.9         0.53%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Isotonic        37         $24.2         0.37%  45          $93.9         0.30%  42         $118.1         0.31%
Drinks Single
Serve
Sft Drnk Mlt-   38         $24.0         0.36%  26         $123.5         0.39%  28         $147.5         0.39%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Select Beef     39         $23.8         0.36%  30         $117.5         0.37%  31         $141.3         0.37%
Frzn Chicken--  40         $22.7         0.35%  69          $74.8         0.24%  61          $97.5         0.26%
Wht Meat
Condensed Soup  41         $22.5         0.34%  33         $115.5         0.37%  32         $138.0         0.36%
Pourable Salad  42         $21.7         0.33%  39         $105.6         0.34%  39         $127.3         0.33%
Dressings
Choice Beef     43         $21.3         0.32%  38         $106.3         0.34%  38         $127.6         0.33%
Fz Family       44         $21.2         0.32%  78          $63.1         0.20%  72          $84.3         0.22%
Style Entrees
Sft Drnk Sngl   45         $20.9         0.32%  99          $53.5         0.17%  85          $74.4         0.20%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Mayonnaise &    46         $20.9         0.32%  49          $90.9         0.29%  45         $111.8         0.29%
Whipped
Dressing
Mexican Soft    47         $19.8         0.30%  50          $90.3         0.29%  48         $110.1         0.29%
Tortillas And
Wra
Refrigerated    48         $19.5         0.30%  31         $116.6         0.37%  33         $136.1         0.36%
Coffee
Creamers
Adult Cereal    49         $19.3         0.29%  21         $139.5         0.44%  23         $158.8         0.42%
Traditional     50         $19.2         0.29%  52          $88.6         0.28%  51         $107.8         0.28%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Fz Ss Prem      51         $19.1         0.29%  5          $208.6         0.66%  10         $227.7         0.60%
Nutritional
Meals
Fz Bag          52         $19.0         0.29%  43          $98.9         0.31%  43         $117.9         0.31%
Vegetables--P
lain
Aseptic Pack    53         $18.6         0.28%  137         $43.3         0.14%  107         $61.9         0.16%
Juice And
Drinks
Choice Beef     54         $18.4         0.28%  97          $53.6         0.17%  89          $72.1         0.19%
Hot Dogs--Base  55         $18.4         0.28%  145         $42.1         0.13%  111         $60.5         0.16%
Meat
Macaroni &      56         $18.2         0.28%  129         $44.6         0.14%  103         $62.8         0.16%
Cheese Dnrs
Margarine:      57         $18.1         0.27%  63          $77.4         0.25%  64          $95.5         0.25%
Tubs And
Bowls
Strawberries    58         $17.8         0.27%  24         $132.8         0.42%  25         $150.6         0.40%
Mainstream      59         $17.4         0.26%  85          $60.8         0.19%  78          $78.2         0.21%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Candy Bags--    60         $16.7         0.25%  36         $112.6         0.36%  37         $129.3         0.34%
Chocolate
Can Pasta       61         $16.5         0.25%  185         $35.3         0.11%  144         $51.8         0.14%
Frzn Chicken--  62         $16.4         0.25%  469         $13.0         0.04%  268         $29.4         0.08%
Wings
Tuna            63         $16.4         0.25%  59          $84.4         0.27%  58         $100.8         0.26%
Sw Gds: Donuts  64         $16.2         0.25%  84          $61.0         0.19%  80          $77.2         0.20%
Peanut Butter   65         $15.8         0.24%  44          $96.9         0.31%  44         $112.7         0.30%
Lunchment--Bol  66         $15.7         0.24%  124         $45.6         0.14%  108         $61.3         0.16%
ogna/Sausage
Mult Pk Bag     67         $15.4         0.23%  205         $32.4         0.10%  161         $47.8         0.13%
Snacks
Butter          68         $15.3         0.23%  23         $134.9         0.43%  27         $150.1         0.39%
Meat: Turkey    69         $15.1         0.23%  28         $120.3         0.38%  34         $135.4         0.36%
Bulk
Frzn French     70         $15.1         0.23%  177         $37.0         0.12%  141         $52.1         0.14%
Fries
Vegetable Oil   71         $14.9         0.23%  250         $26.7         0.08%  193         $41.6         0.11%
Pizza/Economy   72         $14.6         0.22%  195         $33.3         0.11%  159         $48.0         0.13%
Frzn Meat--     73         $14.6         0.22%  188         $35.0         0.11%  154         $49.6         0.13%
Beef
Fz Skillet      74         $14.5         0.22%  87          $60.4         0.19%  84          $74.9         0.20%
Meals
Value Forms/    75         $14.2         0.22%  214         $31.9         0.10%  168         $46.2         0.12%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Frzn Breakfast  76         $14.1         0.21%  154         $41.0         0.13%  128         $55.0         0.14%
Sandwiches
Cakes:          77         $14.1         0.21%  172         $37.9         0.12%  143         $52.0         0.14%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Chicken Wings   78         $14.0         0.21%  319         $20.8         0.07%  238         $34.8         0.09%
Sandwiches--(C  79         $13.9         0.21%  94          $56.0         0.18%  92          $69.9         0.18%
old)
Sandwich        80         $13.8         0.21%  95          $54.6         0.17%  94          $68.4         0.18%
Cookies
Sour Creams     81         $13.7         0.21%  71          $73.2         0.23%  71          $86.9         0.23%
Rts Soup:       82         $13.7         0.21%  47          $93.1         0.30%  52         $106.8         0.28%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Pizza/          83         $13.6         0.21%  118         $47.2         0.15%  109         $60.8         0.16%
Traditional
Cream Cheese    84         $13.5         0.21%  53          $88.0         0.28%  57         $101.6         0.27%
Waffles/        85         $13.4         0.20%  89          $58.6         0.19%  88          $72.1         0.19%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Fruit Snacks    86         $13.4         0.20%  209         $32.1         0.10%  172         $45.5         0.12%
Bagged Cheese   87         $13.3         0.20%  158         $40.0         0.13%  136         $53.2         0.14%
Snacks
Angus [Beef]    88         $13.1         0.20%  64          $77.0         0.24%  67          $90.2         0.24%
Ramen Noodles/  89         $12.9         0.20%  298         $22.0         0.07%  237         $34.8         0.09%
Ramen Cups
Salsa & Dips    90         $12.8         0.20%  140         $42.7         0.14%  124         $55.5         0.15%
Cheese          91         $12.8         0.19%  74          $67.9         0.22%  77          $80.7         0.21%
Crackers
Candy Bars      92         $12.8         0.19%  139         $42.9         0.14%  123         $55.7         0.15%
(Singles)
(Including)
Dairy Case      93         $12.6         0.19%  170         $38.2         0.12%  149         $50.7         0.13%
Juice Drnk
Under 10
Spring Water    94         $12.5         0.19%  65          $76.3         0.24%  68          $88.8         0.23%
Chicken Drums   95         $12.4         0.19%  276         $23.9         0.08%  226         $36.3         0.10%
Hot Dog Buns    96         $12.3         0.19%  119         $47.0         0.15%  113         $59.3         0.16%
Sweet Goods--   97         $12.3         0.19%  128         $44.9         0.14%  118         $57.2         0.15%
Full Size
Hamburger Buns  98         $12.2         0.19%  104         $52.5         0.17%  98          $64.8         0.17%
Grapes Red      99         $12.1         0.18%  48          $91.9         0.29%  55         $104.0         0.27%
Flavored Milk   100        $12.1         0.18%  130         $44.6         0.14%  120         $56.7         0.15%
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100               $2,551.7        38.78%          $10,139.2        32.17%          $12,690.9        33.31%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

Exhibit E-18: Top 100 Subcommodities for SNAP Households by Expenditure: Stores in Counties with Poverty Rates
Greater than 20%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP Household  Expenditures          Non-SNAP Household         Total Household  Expenditures
--------------------------------           Expenditures          --------------------------------
Subcommodity                                  ---------------------------------
Rank     $ in        % of                $ in         % of       Rank     $ in         % of
millions  Expenditures   Rank   millions   Expenditures          millions   Expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fluid Milk/     1          $31.5         0.48%  1           $97.0         0.31%  1          $128.5         0.34%
White Only
Soft Drinks 12/ 2          $30.5         0.46%  2           $71.0         0.23%  2          $101.6         0.27%
18 & 15pk Can
Car
Lean [Beef]     3          $21.0         0.32%  13          $25.4         0.08%  5           $46.4         0.12%
Kids Cereal     4          $14.6         0.22%  21          $20.4         0.06%  13          $35.0         0.09%
Primal [Beef]   5          $14.4         0.22%  4           $35.9         0.11%  4           $50.3         0.13%
Shredded        6          $12.7         0.19%  3           $38.6         0.12%  3           $51.3         0.13%
Cheese
Sft Drnk 2      7          $12.6         0.19%  8           $29.3         0.09%  6           $42.0         0.11%
Liter Btl
Carb Incl
Potato Chips    8          $11.3         0.17%  10          $29.1         0.09%  7           $40.4         0.11%
Lunchment--Del  9          $10.5         0.16%  6           $29.8         0.09%  8           $40.2         0.11%
i Fresh
Mainstream      10         $10.1         0.15%  26          $19.3         0.06%  19          $29.4         0.08%
White Bread
Snack Cake--    11          $9.2         0.14%  38          $15.1         0.05%  30          $24.2         0.06%
Multi Pack
Eggs--Large     12          $9.0         0.14%  11          $28.6         0.09%  10          $37.6         0.10%
Infant Formula  13          $9.0         0.14%  172          $5.2         0.02%  61          $14.2         0.04%
Starter/
Solutio
American        14          $8.8         0.13%  31          $17.9         0.06%  24          $26.8         0.07%
Single Cheese
Still Water     15          $8.1         0.12%  24          $19.3         0.06%  21          $27.5         0.07%
Drnking/Mnrl
Water
Soft Drinks     16          $8.1         0.12%  46          $13.1         0.04%  39          $21.2         0.06%
20pk & 24pk
Can Carb
Tortilla/Nacho  17          $8.1         0.12%  17          $22.4         0.07%  16          $30.5         0.08%
Chips
Sft Drnk Mlt-   18          $7.9         0.12%  12          $27.7         0.09%  12          $35.6         0.09%
Pk Btl Carb
(Excp)
Fz Ss Economy   19          $7.7         0.12%  64          $10.0         0.03%  48          $17.7         0.05%
Meals All
Sugar           20          $7.7         0.12%  41          $14.6         0.05%  36          $22.3         0.06%
Fz Ss Prem      21          $7.7         0.12%  27          $19.3         0.06%  23          $26.9         0.07%
Traditional
Meals
Chicken Breast  22          $7.6         0.12%  5           $31.3         0.10%  9           $39.0         0.10%
Boneless
Chicken Wings   23          $7.6         0.12%  181          $5.1         0.02%  72          $12.7         0.03%
Enhanced [Pork  24          $7.6         0.11%  18          $22.2         0.07%  18          $29.7         0.08%
Boneless Loin/
Rib]
Bacon--Trad     25          $7.5         0.11%  28          $19.2         0.06%  25          $26.7         0.07%
16oz Or Less
Ribs [Pork]     26          $7.4         0.11%  47          $12.9         0.04%  41          $20.3         0.05%
Dairy Case      27          $7.4         0.11%  9           $29.1         0.09%  11          $36.5         0.10%
100% Pure
Juice--O
Snacks/         28          $7.4         0.11%  60          $11.0         0.03%  44          $18.4         0.05%
Appetizers
Unflavored Can  29          $7.2         0.11%  15          $24.9         0.08%  15          $32.1         0.08%
Coffee
Convenient      30          $7.0         0.11%  86           $8.5         0.03%  53          $15.5         0.04%
Meals--Kids
Meal C
Pizza/Premium   31          $6.9         0.10%  35          $16.7         0.05%  32          $23.6         0.06%
Sandwiches &    32          $6.9         0.10%  82           $8.6         0.03%  56          $15.4         0.04%
Handhelds
Potatoes        33          $6.7         0.10%  29          $19.2         0.06%  26          $25.9         0.07%
Russet (Bulk
& Bag)
Mainstream      34          $6.6         0.10%  20          $20.7         0.07%  22          $27.3         0.07%
Variety
Breads
All Family      35          $5.8         0.09%  16          $23.2         0.07%  20          $29.0         0.08%
Cereal
Frzn Chicken--  36          $5.6         0.09%  49          $12.8         0.04%  42          $18.4         0.05%
Wht Meat
Choice Beef     37          $5.6         0.09%  34          $16.8         0.05%  34          $22.5         0.06%
Pourable Salad  38          $5.6         0.09%  37          $15.8         0.05%  37          $21.4         0.06%
Dressings
Bananas         39          $5.5         0.08%  14          $24.9         0.08%  17          $30.4         0.08%
Fz Bag          40          $5.3         0.08%  33          $17.0         0.05%  35          $22.3         0.06%
Vegetables--P
lain
Hot Dogs--Base  41          $5.3         0.08%  89           $8.2         0.03%  67          $13.5         0.04%
Meat
Mult Pk Bag     42          $5.3         0.08%  178          $5.1         0.02%  101         $10.4         0.03%
Snacks
Condensed Soup  43          $5.3         0.08%  30          $18.5         0.06%  31          $23.8         0.06%
Frzn Chicken--  44          $5.2         0.08%  356          $2.6         0.01%  156          $7.8         0.02%
Wings
Lunchment--Bol  45          $5.0         0.08%  79           $8.9         0.03%  65          $14.0         0.04%
ogna/Sausage
Traditional     46          $5.0         0.08%  36          $16.3         0.05%  38          $21.3         0.06%
[Ice Cream &
Sherbert]
Sft Drnk Sngl   47          $4.8         0.07%  99           $7.8         0.02%  73          $12.6         0.03%
Srv Btl Carb
(Ex)
Vegetable Oil   48          $4.8         0.07%  193          $4.9         0.02%  113          $9.7         0.03%
Macaroni &      49          $4.8         0.07%  110          $7.2         0.02%  77          $11.9         0.03%
Cheese Dnrs
Mayonnaise &    50          $4.7         0.07%  43          $13.6         0.04%  43          $18.4         0.05%
Whipped
Dressing
Natural Cheese  51          $4.7         0.07%  19          $21.0         0.07%  27          $25.7         0.07%
Chunks
Fz Family       52          $4.6         0.07%  70           $9.4         0.03%  64          $14.0         0.04%
Style Entrees
Isotonic        53          $4.6         0.07%  56          $11.9         0.04%  49          $16.4         0.04%
Drinks Single
Serve
Can Pasta       54          $4.4         0.07%  135          $6.3         0.02%  96          $10.7         0.03%
Mainstream      55          $4.3         0.07%  67           $9.7         0.03%  63          $14.0         0.04%
[Pasta &
Pizza Sauce]
Premium [Ice    56          $4.3         0.07%  22          $20.3         0.06%  28          $24.6         0.06%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Frzn French     57          $4.3         0.06%  118          $6.8         0.02%  90          $11.0         0.03%
Fries
Choice Beef     58          $4.2         0.06%  65          $10.0         0.03%  62          $14.2         0.04%
Aseptic Pack    59          $4.2         0.06%  144          $6.1         0.02%  102         $10.3         0.03%
Juice And
Drinks
Chicken Drums   60          $4.1         0.06%  231          $4.2         0.01%  140          $8.4         0.02%
Dnr Sausage--   61          $4.1         0.06%  209          $4.7         0.01%  130          $8.8         0.02%
Links Pork
Ckd/S
Adult Cereal    62          $4.0         0.06%  23          $20.3         0.06%  29          $24.3         0.06%
Strawberries    63          $4.0         0.06%  25          $19.3         0.06%  33          $23.3         0.06%
Margarine:      64          $4.0         0.06%  57          $11.3         0.04%  57          $15.3         0.04%
Tubs And
Bowls
Fz Ss Prem      65          $4.0         0.06%  7           $29.4         0.09%  14          $33.4         0.09%
Nutritional
Meals
Frzn Breakfast  66          $3.9         0.06%  116          $6.9         0.02%  95          $10.8         0.03%
Sandwiches
Pizza/Economy   67          $3.8         0.06%  160          $5.7         0.02%  119          $9.5         0.02%
Sw Gds: Donuts  68          $3.7         0.06%  69           $9.5         0.03%  68          $13.2         0.03%
Tuna            69          $3.5         0.05%  54          $12.2         0.04%  51          $15.7         0.04%
Cakes:          70          $3.4         0.05%  162          $5.6         0.02%  125          $9.1         0.02%
Birthday/
Celebration
Sh
Bacon--Trad     71          $3.4         0.05%  117          $6.8         0.02%  103         $10.3         0.03%
Greater Than
16oz
Peanut Butter   72          $3.3         0.05%  42          $14.5         0.05%  46          $17.8         0.05%
Candy Bags--    73          $3.3         0.05%  40          $14.6         0.05%  45          $17.9         0.05%
Chocolate
Sandwich        74          $3.2         0.05%  98           $7.9         0.02%  89          $11.0         0.03%
Cookies
Salsa & Dips    75          $3.2         0.05%  130          $6.4         0.02%  115          $9.6         0.03%
Frzn Meat--     76          $3.2         0.05%  185          $5.0         0.02%  143          $8.2         0.02%
Beef
Bkfst Sausage-- 77          $3.2         0.05%  87           $8.5         0.03%  81          $11.7         0.03%
Fresh Rolls
Value Forms/    78          $3.2         0.05%  192          $4.9         0.02%  145          $8.1         0.02%
18oz And
Larger
[Chicken]
Fz Skillet      79          $3.1         0.05%  81           $8.6         0.03%  80          $11.7         0.03%
Meals
Refrigerated    80          $3.1         0.05%  121          $6.7         0.02%  109          $9.8         0.03%
Biscuits
Fruit Snacks    81          $3.1         0.05%  218          $4.5         0.01%  162          $7.5         0.02%
Hot Dog Buns    82          $3.0         0.05%  104          $7.5         0.02%  100         $10.5         0.03%
Ramen Noodles/  83          $3.0         0.05%  330          $2.9         0.01%  213          $5.9         0.02%
Ramen Cups
Hamburger Buns  84          $3.0         0.05%  83           $8.5         0.03%  82          $11.5         0.03%
Tray Pack/Choc  85          $3.0         0.05%  124          $6.6         0.02%  116          $9.6         0.03%
Chip Cookies
Pizza/          86          $3.0         0.05%  101          $7.6         0.02%  99          $10.6         0.03%
Traditional
Candy Bars      87          $2.9         0.04%  91           $8.1         0.03%  88          $11.1         0.03%
(Multi Pack)
Pails [Ice      88          $2.9         0.04%  194          $4.9         0.02%  153          $7.9         0.02%
Cream &
Sherbert]
Grapes White    89          $2.9         0.04%  72           $9.3         0.03%  76          $12.2         0.03%
Refrigerated    90          $2.9         0.04%  53          $12.3         0.04%  58          $15.2         0.04%
Coffee
Creamers
Butter          91          $2.9         0.04%  32          $17.5         0.06%  40          $20.4         0.05%
Shrimp--Cooked  92          $2.9         0.04%  161          $5.6         0.02%  135          $8.5         0.02%
Rts Soup:       93          $2.9         0.04%  51          $12.6         0.04%  55          $15.5         0.04%
Chunky/
Homestyle/Et
Bagged Cheese   94          $2.8         0.04%  163          $5.6         0.02%  138          $8.4         0.02%
Snacks
Butter Spray    95          $2.8         0.04%  85           $8.5         0.03%  83          $11.4         0.03%
Cracker
Angus [Beef]    96          $2.8         0.04%  45          $13.1         0.04%  50          $15.9         0.04%
Flavored Milk   97          $2.8         0.04%  107          $7.4         0.02%  105         $10.2         0.03%
Waffles/        98          $2.8         0.04%  97           $7.9         0.03%  97          $10.7         0.03%
Pancakes/
French Toast
Dnr Sausage--   99          $2.8         0.04%  150          $5.9         0.02%  133          $8.7         0.02%
Pork Rope Ckd/
Sm
Traditional     100         $2.8         0.04%  109          $7.2         0.02%  107         $10.0         0.03%
Spices
-------------------------       ----------------------------------------------------------
Top 100                 $610.2         9.27%           $1,500.2         4.76%           $2,110.3         5.54%
Subcommodit
ies
=========================       ==========================================================
Total               $6,580.5          100%          $31,513.8          100%          $38,094.2          100%
Expenditu
res
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Foods Typically Purchased by SNAP Households, IMPAQ International, LLC, 2016.
Note: Columns may not sum to total shown due to rounding.
* Top 100 subcommodities based on SNAP household expenditures.

______

Submitted Policy Brief by Feeding Texas
Policy Brief: Maintaining Choices for SNAP Recipients
Feeding Texas
Our View: SNAP restrictions are an ineffective and costly
strategy to improve recipient health. Our nation would be
better served by educating and empowering recipients to make
better choices, not restricting those choices.
Obesity: A Problem for All, but Improving
Obesity and diet-related disease affect Americans of all income
levels and backgrounds. SNAP consumers face additional barriers to
healthy eating, including limited geographic access to affordable,
healthy food; tight food budgets overall; and inadequate SNAP
allotments. SNAP recipients sometimes manage this shortfall by buying
less-nutritious foods that can adversely affect their health.
Despite these challenges, the most recent USDA report on SNAP
purchases found no major differences in the expenditures of SNAP and
non-SNAP households. Put simply, SNAP consumers shop like Americans do
as a whole.
And Americans as a whole are eating better. Soda consumption, the
behavior most often targeted for SNAP restrictions, is at a thirty-year
low in America. And while dietary quality remains poor, American diets
have steadily improved in recent years.
SNAP Restrictions Can Not Force Dietary Change
A recent, peer-reviewed study (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
27653735) in the medical journal JAMA demonstrated how simply
restricting SNAP purchases would not improve recipients' diets.
Participants in this study reported a slight reduction in calories
consumed but no change in overall diet quality.
An associated meta-study (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
26647851) concluded that restricting SNAP participants from spending
their benefits on soda only had a ``small to moderate'' impact, because
recipients substituted their own money to purchase soda.
SNAP Restrictions Are Neither Free, nor Freeing
There are significant costs to SNAP purchase restrictions that
would be borne by participants, businesses and the program itself.
Participants
Americans of all income levels view the government restricting food
choices as an intrusion into their autonomy to decide what is best for
their families. Because SNAP restrictions unfairly single out low-
income Americans for a problem that affects all Americans, they
increase the stigma associated with SNAP participation. Increased
stigma could actually reduce health outcomes, as it would lead some
families to forgo nutrition assistance rather than put their dinner
table under Federal scrutiny.
Businesses
Restricting SNAP purchases would constitute an unfunded Federal
mandate on business. SNAP retailers would likely bear the cost of re-
training cashiers, creating signage, reprogramming computers and
implementing rules associated with this broad change.
Because SNAP serves a diverse group of Americans with a wide range
of dietary needs, it would be impossible to restrict SNAP benefits to
an easy-to-control, ``affirmative list'' of approved foods like that
found in the WIC program. More likely, restrictions would be
implemented as a short list of restricted foods, forcing retailers to
evaluate each product on their shelves, as well as thousands of new
products each year against rules made in Washington.
Program Efficiency & Effectiveness
Implementation of EBT technology has made SNAP efficient and cost-
effective for retailers and government. The introduction of purchase
restrictions at checkout would complicate SNAP transactions and
undermine these gains.
Unless SNAP restrictions were accompanied by an increase in overall
benefits, they would also result in a de facto benefit cut by forcing
recipients to purchase alternative foods that cost more. In this way,
restrictions could result in decreased purchasing power for SNAP
recipients, resulting in less food on the family table and a less
effective hunger-fighting program.
There is a Better Way
Our nation would be better served pursuing policies that seek to
educate and empower clients to make better choices, not restrict those
choices.
Congress could achieve these aims in two ways:

1.  Make SNAP benefits reflect the actual costs of eating healthy.
The Institute of Medicine has recommended (https://
www.nap.edu/catalog/13485/supplemental-nutrition-
assistance-program-examining-the-evidence-to-define-
benefit) increasing SNAP benefit levels to more accurately
reflect the costs involved in eating a healthy diet. Absent
a broad increase in benefits, research suggests that
funding ``double-dollar incentive'' programs may also
improve participants' consumption patterns

2.  Promote well-evaluated, outcomes-driven nutrition education.
Programming directed by Feeding Texas and our local food
banks has demonstrated that health interventions and
nutrition education strategies funded through SNAP-Ed can
effectively promote healthy eating and improve dietary
health. These strategies are especially effective when
paired with the distribution of free produce, which helps
participants to bridge the transition to healthier habits.
We call this combined approach ``Feeding with Impact
(https://www.feedingtexas.org/product/2017/02/Feeding-with-
Impact-Factsheet/).''
______

Submitted Statement by Secretaries' Innovation Group
The Secretaries' Innovation Group (SIG) is a network of state human
services secretaries who have program responsibility for the state SNAP
program, among many others. These SIG member secretaries serve under
Republican governors from states which make up 46% of the country. In
November 2014 the members of the Secretaries' Innovation Group issued a
statement from which these recommendations derive.
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), which is
known as Food Stamps, has quadrupled in cost since 2001. A common sense
approach is needed to allow states the ability to ensure welfare
benefits are being used appropriately. Despite intense opposition,
states have made significant strides in some areas to tackle wasteful
expenditures, fraud and abuse in the system, and with the help of
reform-minded voices in Congress and a new Administration, states will
be able to go much further.
Recommendations
The program which is intended as a nutritional supplement should
restrict the purchase of soda, candy and other unhealthy products.

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program is intended to
subsidize nutrition for needy families. Too many recipients are
utilizing their benefit to purchase items that are \1/3\ of adults and
17% of youth in the United States are obese, according to the Journal
of the American Medical Association.\1\ According to a Health Affairs
study, the medical costs associated with obesity are an estimated $147
billion in 2008.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1832542.
\2\ http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/28/5/
w822.full.pdf+html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One option to balance SNAP purchases toward healthier choices is to
allow SNAP purchases to mirror allowable purchases in the Women,
Infants and Children (WIC) program. A second alternative is to restrict
the purchase of products with zero nutritional value such as candy,
energy drinks and other sugar-sweetened drinks. A third alternative is
to establish a pilot project with up to ten states for a one-time
waiver that would allow for some nutrition controls on SNAP purchases.
These pilot waivers would require an evaluation of measurable outcomes.

Make key SNAP purchase data available to states.

Micro-level transaction data which shows how SNAP benefits are
being spent is not available to the states. However this data would
provide an objective, measurable picture of where reforms are needed to
ensure the program is effective in providing essential nutrition for
those in need. SIG recommends FNS and SNAP-EBT vendors (i.e., Xerox) to
capture all SNAP transaction-level data and make it available to
states. Transparency is important to inform program officials,
legislators and the public on what changes are needed in the program to
ensure its effectiveness as a supplementary nutrition program.

Convenience stores need more stringent requirements to participate
in SNAP.

The ``convenience store'' category of EBT retailers is of
particular concern (e.g., gas stations, food marts, party stores). The
majority of EBT trafficking occurs in these venues. These
establishments typically do not stock the type of eligible food
products that satisfy the original intent of the SNAP program. EBT
redemptions often exceed eligible food inventory at these locations. We
recommend increasing the minimum eligible food inventory requirements
of the four major food groups to be stocked for sale at convenience
store category retailers. An alternative option is to require EBT
retailers to submit food inventory records on a frequency basis
(quarterly or semi-annually) in order to reconcile with EBT redemptions
which could serve as a deterrent to trafficking redemptions.
______

Submitted Letter by David B. Allison, Ph.D., Distinguished Quetelet
Endowed Professor; Associate Dean for Research & Science; Director,
Office of Energetics; Director, Nutrition & Obesity Research Center,
Department of Nutrition Sciences, School of Health Professions,
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Tuesday, February 14, 2017

Hon. K. Michael Conaway,
Chairman,
House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

Thank you for inviting me to testify before the House Committee on
Agriculture for your February 16, 2017 meeting.
I regret that I will be unable to join you at that meeting, but
instead wanted to offer you some thoughts, information, and materials
that may be helpful to you and the Committee in your deliberations. I
reference several articles below and include them, as well as my
current CV,* as enclosed attachments to this e-mail.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The document referred to is retained in Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Before proceeding further, I wish to emphasize that the opinions
below are my own and I am not speaking on behalf of my university or
any other organization.
I. The Challenge in Predicting Intervention Effects
Some individuals may assert that if society implements a particular
policy, scientists can predict that it will have a particular effect on
obesity levels. In the vast majority of cases, at present, such
statements are unwarranted. This is so for two reasons.
First, human physiology and even more so human behavior are complex
and insufficiently understood to permit confident conclusions about how
even the average person will respond to some intervention, let alone to
predict with confidence how any one individual will respond, without
performing an experiment to actually observe the effects. That is why
scientists do randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to test the effects
of things. If you look at this website (http://
www.obesityandenergetics.org/) under the category ``Contrary or Null
Findings,'' in each weekly entry, you will see many examples of this
unpredictability of intervention effects. That does not mean that
scientists have no ability to predict effects, but rather that our
ability is rather limited.
Second, some will posit that if it is known that an intervention
affects energy (calorie) intake or expenditure by a particular amount,
then one can calculate the expected weight or obesity change that will
result from such an intervention using validated mathematical models
(for such a claim, see: http://www.ajpmonline.org/article/S0749-
3797(13)00269-9/abstract). The problem with such reasoning is that
these calculations assume that people take no compensatory action,
i.e., that they do not change their food intake, physical patterns, or
any other factors that influence weight in response to the proposed
intervention. However, much evidence indicates that people do take such
compensatory actions (see: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4516704/). As a result, interventions generally have far lesser
impact on body weight than one might initially predict.
II. Myths & Presumptions in Nutrition and Obesity.
Many academics or nutrition or obesity experts may assert that a
particular thing is known to be true about nutrition or obesity. In
some cases, they will be correct. However, experience shows that in
many cases, propositions asserted to be true by such experts turn out
to be either false or unsupported presumptions. Therefore, when any
assertions are made, the complete scientific evidence supporting those
assertions should be requested. Two papers which discuss the commonness
of mistaken beliefs about nutrition or obesity are these:

Casazza, K., Fontaine, K.R., Astrup, A., Birch, L., Brown,
A.W., Bohan Brown, M.M., Durant, N., Dutton, G., Foster, E.M.,
Heymsfield, S.B., McIver, K., Mehta, T., Menachemi, N., Newby,
P.K., Pate, R., Rolls, B. J., Sen, B., Smith, D. L., Thomas,
D., & Allison, D. B. (2013). Myths, Presumptions, and Facts
about Obesity. New England Journal of Medicine, Jan. 31;
368(5): 446-54. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa1208051. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23363498.

Allison D.B., Assaganya-Riera J., Burlingame B., Brown A.,
Le Coutre J., Dickson S.L., Van Eden W., Garssen J.,
Hontecillas R., Khoo C.S., Knorr D., Kussmann M., Magiestretti
P.J., Mehta T., Meule Adrian, Rychlik M., & Vogele C. (2015).
Goals in Nutrition Science 2015-2020. Frontiers in Nutrition,
Sep 2015 2:26. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2015.00026. http://
journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnut.2015.00026/
abstract.
III. Separating the Moral, Social, and Legal Issues from the Scientific
Issues
It is important not to conflate the moral, social, and legal issues
with the scientific issues in policy questions around nutrition and
weight. The scientific information can inform the policy decision, but
generally cannot determine the best policy decision, because moral,
social, and legal factors are also involved. In some cases, moral,
social, or legal factors may be overwhelming and may appropriately
drive a decision largely independently of data.
You have asked me about the wisdom of restriction on purchases of
certain food items with SNAP benefits.
Some persons might offer reasonable arguments for such restriction
which rely minimally on data. Here the values of beneficence (wanting
to help people) and responsible stewardship of taxpayer dollars
predominate. Such persons could argue that certain foods (e.g.,
confections, pastries, sugar-sweetened beverages) are luxuries which
are unnecessary for life or health and without which most persons'
health would be no worse and possibly better. Given that, it can be
argued that: (a) It is in the best interests of SNAP participants
(i.e., beneficence) to not consume these items; and (b) It is
questionable for the government to spend tax-payer money on items which
are at best unnecessary and at worst harmful. By these arguments, one
could, with little need to rely on specific data, argue for such
exclusions.
Alternatively, other persons might offer reasonable arguments
against such restriction which rely minimally on data. Here the values
of autonomy (allowing people to make their own choices about their
lives) and equity (not disadvantaging lower-income persons further and
unduly hampering their access to goods others can partake of)
predominate. Some might argue that these are important values and
people should have a right to decide how to spend their resources on
food and which food choices to make, however nutritionally sound or
unsound those choices are.
The choice between the two perspectives above is largely not one
that hinges on data, but rather on the differential value one places on
beneficence and responsible stewardship of taxpayer dollars vs autonomy
and equity. These are, of course, not the only values or factors that
can be brought to bear on these questions. See:

Brown, A. & Allison, D.B. (2013). Unintended consequences of
obesity-targeted health policy. Virtual Mentor. 2013 Apr. 1;
15(4):339-46. doi: 10.1001/virtualmentor.2013.15.4.pfor2-1304.
http://journalofethics.ama-assn.org/2013/04/pfor2-1304.html.
IV. Standards of Evidence for Scientific Conclusions vs. Policy
Decisions
A frequent question is ``what is the standard of evidence for
effectiveness of a policy needed to justify a decision to enact a
policy?'' The answer is that there is no single standard that applies
in all contexts and this is a matter of social and legal judgment, not
scientific judgement. In contrast, there are standards (albeit with
some judgement still involved) for drawing scientific conclusions about
the effects of interventions or policies. I raise this important
distinction because this distinction is sometimes blurred by those who
feel strongly that it is reasonable to move forward with a decision to
take some action. Such individuals sometimes seem to feel compelled to
dispute a data-based conclusion that evidence is insufficient to show
the proposed action will have its desired effects. However,
definitiveness in a decision to act despite uncertainty about drawing a
conclusion, poses no contradiction. These ideas are discussed more
fully in these two papers.

Allison, D.B. (2011). Evidence, Discourse, and Values in
Obesity-Oriented Policy: Menu-Labeling as a Conversation
Starter. International Journal of Obesity, Apr.; 35(4): 464-71.
http://www.nature.com/ijo/journal/v35/n4/full/ijo201128a.html.

Richardson, M.B. Williams, M.S., Fontaine, K.R., & Allison,
D.B. (in press). The development of scientific evidence for
health policies for obesity: why and how. International Journal
of Obesity.
V. Information on Sugar Sweetened Beverages and Weight
You have specifically asked me about the effects of sugar-sweetened
beverages (SSBs) on weight. Two papers I have written on this topic
are:

Kaiser, K.A., Shikany, J.M., Keating, K.D. & Allison, D.B.
(2013). Will reducing sugar-sweetened beverage consumption
reduce obesity? Evidence supporting conjecture is strong, but
evidence when testing effect is weak. Obesity Reviews, Aug.;
14(8): 620-33. doi: 10.1111/obr.12048. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3929296/.

Allison, D.B. (2014). Liquid calories, energy compensation,
and weight: what we know and what we still need to learn.
Invited Commentary. British Journal of Nutrition, Feb.;
111(3):384-6. doi: 10.1017/S0007114513003309. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4973863/.
VI. Biases and Emotion
The topics you are addressing are ones where many strong interests
are at play. These interests include selfless interests in benefitting
members of our country, economic interests, and personal interests.
Consideration of this fact is important for at least two reasons:

A. Some will try to discredit the statements of individuals who
have some connection to commerce involving food or agriculture,\1\
based on claims that they are biased. In considering this, persons
interested in reason and rationality should:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For the record, I disclose that I have received funds from
multiple for-profit, not-for-profit, and government organizations with
interests in nutrition and obesity, including commodity groups and
food, beverage, and restaurant companies.

1.  First and foremost note that in Science, three things matter: (a)
The data; (b) The methods by which the data were collected
which give them their probative value; and (c) The logic by
which the data are connected to conclusions. Everything
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
else is a distraction.

2.  The claim that research produced by those with financial
connections to food and agricultural commerce are biased
has not been demonstrated. See:

http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/
articleabstract/
2517951.

https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2017/01/the-
limits-of-
sugarguidelines/512045/.

http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/
0162243912456271.

3.  Trying to overturn arguments or discredit individuals based on
their personal characteristics is argumentum ad hominem. It
is logically invalid, uncivil, and unethical. See:

http://www.nature.com/ijo/journal/v38/n5/full/
ijo201432a.html.

http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-obesity-
society-encourages-
science-industry-collaborations-to-support-obesity-
science-public-health-
252453321.html.

http://utminers.utep.edu/omwilliamson/ENGL1311/
fallacies.htm.

B. Interests other than financial connections to for-profit groups
can create biases. Therefore,the scientific bases of everyone's
statements need to be scrutinized. See the articles below.

Cope, M., Allison, D.B. (2010). White Hat Bias: A Threat to
the Integrity of Scientific Reporting. Acta Paediatrica, Nov.;
99(11): 1615-7. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21039822

Cope, M. B. & Allison, D. B. (2010). White Hat Bias:
Examples of its Presence in Obesity Research and a Call for
Renewed Commitment to Faithfulness in Research Reporting.
International Journal of Obesity, 34(1): 84-8. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19949416.
VII. Things You Can Do to Enhance The Science
Finally, there are things your Committee can do to enhance what
society knows on questions about the effects of interventions. For
questions such as ``What is the effect of some intervention on health
or weight,'' the best way to answer that question, if feasible, is with
randomized controlled trials (RCTs).

When such trials exist, your Committee could request the raw
data from all investigators who have conducted these RCTs and
commission a statistician to analyze all the data together in
an open and transparent manner and issue a public report to
you.

When such trials do not exist or are insufficient to
generate confident conclusions, your Committee could take steps
to have a large, statistically powerful, well-designed RCT
commissioned and executed.

In doing so, you would add substantially to our objective knowledge
about outcomes.
I hope this information is helpful to you in your deliberations.
Sincerely,

David B. Allison, Ph.D.
attachment 1
The Caloric Calculator: Average Caloric Impact of Childhood Obesity
Interventions
August 2013
Y. Claire Wang, M.D., Sc.D., Amber Hsiao, M.P.H., C. Tracy Orleans,
Ph.D., Steven L. Gortmaker, Ph.D.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* From the Department of Health Policy & Management (Wang, Hsiao),
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New
York; the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (Orleans), Princeton, New
Jersey; and Department of Society, Health, and Human Development
(Gortmaker), Harvard School of Public Health, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Address correspondence to: Y. Claire Wang, M.D., Sc.D., Department
of Health Policy and Management, Mailman School of Public Health,
Columbia University, 600 W 168th St, Rm 602 New York NY 10032. E-mail:

[emailprotected]
.
0749-3797/$36.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2013.03.012
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This activity is available for CME credit. See page A4 for information.

Background: The childhood obesity epidemic reflects the daily
accumulation of an ``energy gap''--excess calories consumed
over calories expended. Population-level interventions to
reverse the epidemic can be assessed by the degree to which
they increase energy expenditure and/or reduce caloric intake.
However, no common metric exists for such comparative
assessment.
Purpose: To develop a common metric, the Average Caloric
Impact (ACI), for estimating and comparing population-level
effect sizes of a range of childhood obesity interventions.
Methods: An iterative, collaborative process was used to
review literature from 1996 to 2012 and select illustrative
interventions showing effects on youth diet and/or activity
levels, energy balance, and weight. The ACIs of physical
activity interventions were estimated based on program reach,
frequency, duration, and intensity and mean body weight of the
targeted age and gender group from the 2009-2010 National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. ACIs of dietary
interventions were based on reach and changes in foods and/or
beverages consumed.
Results: Fifteen interventions informed by 29 studies were
included, ranging from individual behavioral to population-
level policies. A web tool, the Caloric Calculator, was
developed to allow researchers and policymakers to estimate the
ACIs of interventions on target populations with reference to
energy gap reductions required to reach the nation's Healthy
People childhood obesity goals.
Conclusions: The Caloric Calculator and ACIs provide
researchers and policymakers with a common metric for
estimating the potential effect sizes of various interventions
for reducing childhood obesity, providing a platform for
evidence-based dialogues on new program or policy approaches as
data emerge.
(Am. J. Prev. Med. 2013; 45(2): e3-e13)

2013 American Journal of Preventive
Medicine.
Background
The obesity epidemic costs the U.S. $147-$210 billion in annual
healthcare costs.\1\ Although the trends have shown some signs of
leveling, more than \1/3\ of U.S. adults and nearly 17% of children and
adolescents are obese.\2\ As a result, it was predicted that one in
three children born in 2000 would be diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in
his or her lifetime.\3\
The rise in childhood obesity since the early 1970s reflects the
accumulation of the small daily ``energy gap''--the excess of calories
consumed over calories expended.
4-5
Previous analyses
estimated that an average surplus of 110-165 kcal/day in energy
accounted for the excess weight gain seen in U.S. children and youth
over a 10 year period.\4\ Thus, effective interventions would have to
bring about a net reduction in this energy gap to reverse the epidemic.
A recent study estimated that among U.S. children aged 2-19 years, a
net reduction of 64 kcal/day per capita in energy surplus would be
needed to achieve the Healthy People 2020 childhood obesity goals, with
a range from 22 kcal/day for those aged 2-5 years, to 77 kcal/day for
those aged 6-11 years, 98 kcal/day for those aged 12-19 years, and much
higher levels among those who are already overweight or obese.\5\
The evidence base for population-level interventions to reduce
childhood obesity levels has grown rapidly, ranging from strategies to
change individual behaviors to those that seek to alter policies,
environments, and social norms. In most cases, however, these policies
or programs are evaluated independently. No common metric exists to
allow comparative assessments of effects across interventions with
varied configurations for a target population.
6-7

In the current paper, the Average Caloric Impact (ACI) is proposed
as a metric to gauge the population-level average effect on daily
calories expended/consumed. This metric was applied to an illustrative
set of interventions evaluated in the literature. Greater emphasis was
placed on population-, school-, or state-level programs than on medical
treatments of overweight/obese youth. The results are presented using a
user-friendly web tool, the Caloric Calculator.
Methods
Selection of Interventions
Using recently published reviews, a set of obesity prevention
interventions targeting U.S. children and adolescents aged 2-5 years
(preschool); 6-11 years (primary school); 12-14 years (middle school);
and/or 15-18 years (high school) was selected. Target populations were
defined by grade level based on the divisions within the typical K-12
system. Mean height and weight for each age group (by gender) were
based on the nationally representative 2009-2010 National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).
From an initial list of 67 studies published between 2000 and 2009,
as reviewed by Brennan, et al.,\8\ only seven physical activity
interventions were included that lasted >6 months and reported outcome
measures that were sufficient to have an influence on calories. For
example, several studies of school lunch programs or wellness policies
were excluded because they reported consumption of only specific
nutrients (e.g., % fat), and/or servings of fruits and vegetables,
rather than changes in total calories consumed or body weight.
Similarly, many evaluations of physical activity programs did not use
objective measures of activity levels (e.g., accelerometers) and thus
were unable to inform changes in energy expenditure.
An iterative and collaborative process was used to identify an
additional 22 studies published between 1996 and 2012; of these, 12
were empirical studies that met the research design and measurement
standards used in the Brennan, et al., review. The remaining studies
provided inputs for the model-based estimates. For dietary
interventions selected, the studies assessed changes in daily caloric
intake before and after the intervention (e.g., California schools'
competitive foods standards).\9\ For studies reporting changes in
consumption of particular foods and/or beverages, published estimates
on the average caloric contribution of these foods and beverages in the
indicated setting (e.g., removing sugar-sweetened beverages from
schools) \10\ were used. Strategies were categorized by implementation
level (individual, school, state/national). Because empirical data were
lacking for some strategies (e.g., promoting walking to schools),
analytic models were used to incorporate available evidence to estimate
the likely caloric effect of these strategies, if broadly implemented.
Caloric Impact Calculations
Physical activity interventions. The physical activity
interventions were placed into one of the following categories: (1)
varied school physical education (PE) classes; (2) school PE
interventions designed to increase moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity (MVPA) levels to achieve more active PE; (3) afterschool
physical activity programs; and (4) active commuting (e.g., walking) to
school. When multiple high-quality studies were available within a
category, the study with the largest effect size was typically used to
represent the best-possible outcome and population-level
implementation.
The effect of the intervention on daily caloric impact was
estimated based on the calculated basal metabolic rate (BMR, which is a
function of age, gender, and body weight), as well as the frequency
(e.g., twice a week); duration (e.g., 30 minutes); and the intensity of
the physical activity (e.g., moderate/vigorous). BMR for an average-
weight child is calculated based on published equations.\11\
Intervention intensity was estimated in METs, representing the amount
of energy expended from carrying out a specific activity relative to
sitting quietly (MET value of 1.0) for a defined period of time. For
instance, walking at a pace of 3 miles per hour represents an average
intensity of 3.3 METs, which burns 3.3 times as many calories than
sitting quietly for the same individual.\12\
Pre-intervention activity levels were based on published baseline
measures of study participants and/or national averages. When MET
values were not reported, activity-specific MET values from the
Ainsworth Compendium for adults \12\ were combined with calculated
youth-specific BMR estimates, following recommendations by Ridley, et
al.\13\ Table 1 provides examples of how various inputs affect the
number of calories expended by different physical activity
interventions.
Dietary interventions. Dietary interventions were similarly
reviewed and categorized. For example, a number of interventions only
measured changes in fruit and vegetable intake, and were excluded
because net impact on caloric intake could not be estimated. One study
that empirically measured the caloric impact of competitive food
policies in high schools was included.\9\ The other five dietary
interventions (e.g., reducing intake of calories from chips) were
estimated based on the authors' calculations.
For policy interventions with limited direct, empirical data (e.g.,
removing sugar-sweetened beverages [SSBs] from schools, and a portion-
size cap on sugary drinks sold in New York City),\14\ dietary data from
NHANES were used to inform the baseline consumption level among those
who would be hypothetically affected by the policy. For example, NHANES
1999-2004 showed that SSBs contributed an average of 224 kcal/day to
the overall caloric intake of U.S. children and adolescents, and 7-15%
of SSBs were consumed in schools.\10\ The estimated caloric impact of
replacing all SSB intake from schools (in session 180 days a year) with
water was averaged across the whole calendar year.
Combined physical activity/dietary interventions. Sonneville and
Gortmaker \15\ have estimated that every 1 hour increase in TV watching
is associated with a 105.5-kcal increase in net total energy intake, or
a 92-kcal increase in energy intake for video- or computer-game
playing. Their findings are consistent with a previously published
randomized trial, which found that reducing TV watching among children
led to lower caloric intake.16 It was hypothesized that children who
spend more time watching TV or playing video games may be more exposed
and/or influenced by food advertising through characters present in
commercials and interactive games that can shape food preferences and
intake.
17-19

Table 1. Daily Caloric Effects of Physical Activity for Select Groups Using Schofield Equations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inputs
------------------------------------------------
Average   Schofield equation                                                         Caloric
Population      weight         (BMR=) a         Intervention                Duration     School-      effect
(kg)                                            D METs    (minutes/    based? b    (kcal/day)
day)                      c
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boys, age in
years:
2-5                   18  22.706 kg + 504.3   Add 30 minutes/        2.3           30         No            44
day of walking
6-11                  34  22.706 kg + 504.3   Add 30 minutes/          7           30         No           186
day of jogging
12-14                 59  17.686 kg + 658.2   Add 15 minutes/        2.6           15        Yes            23
day of PE
15-18                 77  17.686 kg + 658.2   Implement SPARK        3.5           30        Yes            73
Girls, age in
years:
2-5                   17  20.315 kg + 485.9   Add afterschool        3.5         10.5        Yes            11
program
6-11                  35  13.384 kg + 485.9   Make PE more      Varies d           60        Yes             9
active
12-14                 57  13.384 kg + 692.6   Add 30 minutes/        2.6           30        Yes            39
day of PE
15-18                 65  13.384 kg + 692.6   Add 10 minutes/          7           10         No            76
day of jogging
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a The Schofield equations are grouped by gender and age groups (broken down as 0-3 years, 3-10 years, and 10-18
years). Because of this, some age groups have the same equations.
b If the intervention is applied over a full school year, it multiples the caloric impact by 180 days. This is
then averaged over 365 days to account for no change in activity on holidays, weekends, and summer vacation.
c Daily caloric impact = (BMR  D METs  duration in minutes)  1,440 minutes/day.
d The MET value for ``Make PE more active'' is a composite of MET values from five different activities, based
on the Ainsworth Compendium: \12\ lying down, sitting, standing, walking, and running. The change in METs from
the intervention depends on user input of baseline versus target % MVPA. BMR, basal metabolism rate; MVPA,
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity; PE, physical education; SPARK, Sports, Play, and Active Recreation for
Kids.

Online ``Caloric Calculator'' Tool
Accompanying the current paper is a web-based tool
(www.caloriccalculator.org) designed to help users visualize and query
the estimated caloric effects of defined interventions within a defined
target population. Programmed in PHP script for HTML, the tool allows
users to choose one or more interventions and customize their
configurations. For example, the user can select as the target ``Boys''
and ``Middle School (12-14)'' from the dropdown menu, and ``implement''
an intervention to increase PE intensity (e.g., moderate/vigorous) for
a duration of time by specifying the baseline MVPA (default is 37%) and
desired post-intervention level (e.g., 50% as recommended).\20\
The resulting caloric effect is benchmarked against two ``energy
gap'' goals: to return the prevalence of obesity to (1) the early 1970s
and/or (2) the Year-2000 levels. The former more ambitious goal
corresponds to the original goals set in Healthy People 2010; \21\ the
latter provides a rough estimate of the current, more modest Healthy
People 2020 goals.\22\ The methodology underlying the calculations of
these targets for various population subgroups has been described
previously.\5\ All interventions listed assume that no compensatory
changes affecting daily energy balance occur, beyond any effects
observed in the empirical studies cited. For example, the ACI of
increasing MVPA from 37% to 50% during PE classes assumes that students
will not consume additional calories to compensate for additional
physical activity, or that removing a food item from one's diet does
not result in increased consumption of other foods or beverages.
Results
The estimated caloric effect of the 15 interventions in the tool,
by gender and age group, are summarized in Tables 2 and 3. For
instance, for high school boys and girls, adding 15 minutes of PE time
per day for a full school year was estimated to increase mean energy
expenditure by 25 kcal/day; replacing SSBs with water in schools for
the same group would reduce mean energy intake by 15 kcal/day. For this
group, however, an average per capita reduction of 82 kcal/day in
energy surplus would be needed to meet the Healthy People 2020 obesity
prevalence goal of reducing obesity rates from 20.8% to 14.8%.
Returning to the early 1970s level of obesity prevalence--the target
set by the more ambitious Healthy People 2010 goal--would require an
average per capita reduction in energy gap of 217 kcal/day. These
estimates suggest that although any single intervention may not be
sufficient to achieve the Healthy People goals, substantial progress
could be made through a combination of feasible, sustained policy and
environmental interventions.

Table 2. Caloric Impact of Physical Activity Interventions for Average
Student, By Age Group
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inputs for caloric calculations
----------------------------------
Population                            Avg.
Intervention     (age                             caloric   Assumptions
group,      Target   Avg.weight    impact
years)      METs a     (lbs) b     (kcal/
day)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Modeled estimates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Add walking    Both (2-5)        3.3          39         21  Same
at a 3-mph    Both (6-          3.3          76         30   baseline
pace, 15       11)              3.3         127         38   (1.0,
minutes/day   Both (12-                                      sitting
14)                                           quietly)
and target
METs for
all ages,
based on
Ainsworth,
et
al.,\12\
and
Ridley, et
al.\13\
Both (15-         3.3         157         43
18)
Add jogging    Both (2-5)        8.0          39         64  Same
at a 5-mph    Both (6-          8.0          76         90   baseline
pace, 15       11)              8.0         127        115   (1.0,
minutes/day   Both (12-         8.0         157        130   sitting
14)                                           quietly)
Both (15-                                      and target
18)                                           METs for
all ages,
based on
Ainsworth,
et
al.,\12\
and
Ridley, et
al.\13\
Walking to     Both (2-5)        3.3          39          9  Interventio
and from      Both (6-          3.3          76         12   n model
school         11)                                           estimates
(roundtrip)                                                  based on
METs from
Ainsworth,
et
al.,\12\
and
Ridley, et
al.,\13\
Both (12-         3.3         127         15    and
14)              3.3         157         17   published
Both (15-                                      data on
18)                                           average
distances
from
schools
and
students
living
within 1
mile of
school.23
24
Caloric
impact
estimate
uses METs
of 1.0 as
baseline
(i.e.,
sitting in
car).
Implemented
for a full
academic
year.b
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Empirical estimates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Add school PE  Both (2-5)        3.4          39         11  McKenzie,
time, 15      Both (6-          3.4          76         15   et
minutes/day    11)                                           al.,\25\
estimate
3.4 METs
for
elementary
school PE.
Same value
used for
pre-
Both (12-         3.6         127         21    school.
14)              3.7         157         25   Nader, et
Both (15-                                      al.,\26\
18)                                           estimate
3.6 METs
for middle
school PE.
Smith, et
al.,\27\
estimate
3.7 METs
for high
school PE.
Implemente
d for a
full
academic
year.b
Make current   Both (2-5)        4.5          39          3  MET values
PE more       Both (6-          4.5          76          4   used at
active, 30     11)              4.5         127          6   baseline
minutes/day   Both (12-                                      and target
14)                                           is a
composite
of
estimated
MET
values,
based on
Wu, et
al.,\7\
and
Ainsworth,
et
al.,\12\
(4.5 METs)
Both (15-         4.5         157          6    for MVPA,
18)                                           1.8 METs
for non-
MVPA).
Because of
high
variance
in METs,
baseline
activity
levels,
and
population
characteri
stics
between
CATCH,20,
26, 28 29
MSPAN,\25\
and TAAG
30 35
interventi
ons, same
averaged
MVPA% used
for all
age
groups.
Changing
the
intensity
of current
PE time
(not
adding
additional
PE time).
Base case
increases
MVPA from
37% to
50%, based
on DHHS
national
recommenda
tion.\20\
Implemented
for a full
academic
year.b
Implement      Both (2-5)        7.2          39         34  7.2 METs
SPARK using   Both (6-          7.2          76         48   for PE
only PE        11)              7.2         127         58   specialist
specialists   Both (12-         7.2         157         64   s for
to teach PE,   14)                                           SPARK
30 minutes/   Both (15-                                      interventi
day            18)                                           on from
McKenzie,
et
al.,\36\
and
Sallis, et
al.,\37\
used in
calculatio
n to
demonstrat
e maximum
potential
of
interventi
on
(compared
to 5.8
METs for
trained
classroom
teachers).
Adding PE
time to
existing
PE time.
Baseline
METs
assumed to
be 3.4 for
preschool
and
elementary
,\25\ 3.6
for
middle,\26
\ and 3.7
for high
school.\27
\
Add            Both (2-5)        4.5          39         11  Gortmaker,
afterschool   Both (6-          4.5          76         16   et
physical       11)              4.5         127         20   al.,\38\
activity      Both (12-                                      estimate
program        14)                                           %4.0 METs
in
interventi
on. 4.5
METs is
used here
as a
conservati
ve
composite
target
based on
Wu, et
al.\7\
Both (15-         4.5         157         22  Same
18)                                           baseline
(1.0,
sitting
quietly)
and target
METs for
all ages,
based on
Ainsworth,
et
al.,\12\
and
Ridley, et
al.\13\
Implemented
for a full
academic
year.b
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a METs expresses how much energy is needed for physical activities.
Caloric impacts expressed in this table are calculated assuming the
physical activity is above a baseline of 1.0 METs (except where noted,
as with implementing SPARK), which is the baseline resting metabolic
rate when sitting quietly.
b Intervention is applied over a full school year (on average, 180
days). The total caloric impact is averaged over 365 days to account
for no change in activity on holidays, weekends, and summer vacation.
CATCH, The Child and Adolescent Trial for Cardiovascular Health;
MSPAN, The Middle-School Physical Activity and Nutrition intervention;
MVPA, moderate-to-vigorous physical activity; PE, physical education;
SPARK, Sports, Play, and Active Recreation for Kids; TAAG, The Trial
of Activity for Adolescent Girls.

Table 3. Caloric Impact of Dietary and Other Interventions for Average Student By Group
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inputs for caloric calculations
------------------------------------------
Population (age                                     Avg.
Intervention           group, years)                      Affected       caloric          Assumptions
Amount a      pop., % b   impact (kcal/
day)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Modeled estimates
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reduce unhealthy food    All                     1-oz bag of           100           154  Intervention models
intake                  All                       chips per                               estimates based on
day           100            55   published caloric
1 cookie per                               values of average bag
day                               of regular potato
chips and single Oreo
cookie.
Reduce SSB intake        All                       12-oz can           100           136  Intervention models
All                         per day           100           240   estimates based on
20-oz bottle                               published caloric
per day                               values of average can
or bottle of regular
caffeinated cola.
Replace SSBs with water  Both (2-5)                      124           5.5             3  Affected population
in schools              Both (6-11)                     184           6.5             6   and amounts based on
Both (12-14)                    301          10.3            15   published analysis
Both (15-18)                    301          10.3            15   from Wang, et al.\10\
Implemented for a
full academic year.c
Switch from 1 cup of     Both (2-5)                0.64 cups          48.4             7  Averaged grams/cup and
sugary cereals to       Boys (2-5)                0.64 cups          47.3             7   standardized serving
cereals scored highest  Girls (2-5)               0.64 cups          49.6             7   sizes of top ten \39\
in nutritional quality  Both (6-11)               0.93 cups          39.5             6   and bottom ten \40\
Boys (6-11)               0.93 cups          40.2             6   cereals by nutrition
Girls (6-11)              0.94 cups          38.8             6   score, as determined
Both (12-14)              1.16 cups          34.5             5   by CerealFACTS.
Boys (12-14)              1.32 cups          35.5             5   org.\41\
Girls (12-14)              1.0 cups          33.5             5  Affected population
Both (15-18)              1.15 cups          26.6             4   and average grams/
Boys (15-18)              1.25 cups          26.1             4   serving consumed
Girls (15-18)             1.06 cups          27.0             4   based on analysis of
NHANES 2007-2010 data
on 24-hour dietary
recall.
Proportion of cups
consumed in Amount
column based on
standardized 39.2
grams/cup (as
described above), and
grams/serving from
NHANES.
Pass NYC's proposed      Both (2-5)                     24.2           0.6             0  Amount is average
sugary drink size       Boys (2-5)                     21.1           0.9             0   kilocalorie reduction
limit                   Girls (2-5)                    32.3           0.4             0   per day if limited
Both (6-11)                    67.9           5.1             3   consumption to 16 oz/
Boys (6-11)                    70.0           6.1             4   day as in Elbel, et
Girls (6-11)                   64.9           4.2             3   al.,\42\ and Wang, et
Both (12-14)                   93.6           9.4             9   al.\14\
Boys (12-14)                  109.3          10.1            11  Affected population
Girls (12-14)                  77.7           8.7             7   and average
Both (15-18)                  111.8          13.3            15   kilocalorie reduction
Boys (15-18)                  120.3          15.3            18   based on analysis of
Girls (15-18)                 100.1          11.2            11   NHANES 2007-2010 data
on 24-hour dietary
recall.
Those consuming >16 oz
limit consumption to
maximum of 16 oz/day
No ``upsizing'' occurs
(i.e., individuals
purchase more than
one 16-oz beverage to
compensate for size
limit).
SSB definition
includes sodas,
sports drinks, fruit
drinks and punches,
low-calorie drinks,
sweetened tea, and
other sweetened
beverages consumed in
food service
establishments.
Implemented
nationally.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Empirical estimates
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pass California's        Both (15-18)                  157.8           100            78  Taber, et al.,\9\
competitive food                                                                          estimate 157.9 kcal
nutrition standards in                                                                    per weekday fewer
high schools                                                                              calories consumed in
nationally                                                                                California high
schools, compared to
14 other states with
weaker competitive
food laws states.
The intervention only
applies to high
school students.
Implemented for a full
academic year.c
Reduce TV viewing, 60    All                             106           100           106  Sonneville and
minutes/day                                                                               Gortmaker \38\
estimate TV watching
and video/computer
game playing
associated with 105.5-
kcal/hour and 91.8-
kcal/hour increase in
total energy intake
in boys aged 13-15
years and girls aged
12-14 years. Epstein,
et al.,\16\ and
Miller, et al.,\18\
report similar
changes in energy
intake.
Reduce video- or         All                              92           100            92  Same calorie change
computer-game playing                                                                     for other age groups
time, 60 minutes/day
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a The amount designates the current pre-intervention consumption level of the item by the selected population;
amounts are kilocalories unless otherwise specified.
b The impact designates the percentage of the selected eligible population that is affected by the intervention.
c Intervention is applied over a full school year (on average, 180 days). The total caloric impact is averaged
over 365 days to account for no change in activity on holidays, weekends, and summervacation.
NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; NYC, New York City; SSB, sugar-sweetened beverage.

Many of the ACI estimates built into the Caloric Calculator require
stipulated assumptions, which are shown in detail in Tables 2 and 3, as
well as within the web tool. For example, the calculations of energy
expended through increased MVPA during PE involved the following
assumptions: a national baseline of 37% MVPA during PE time,\28\ a
target level of 50% recommended by the CDC,\20\ and 180 school days a
year for school-based interventions. The assumed MET level for non-MVPA
PE time was estimated as 1.8 METs, using an average of lying down,
sitting, and standing.\12\
The time spent on MVPA was estimated to be 4.5 METs based on the
average of moderate physical activity (3 METs) and vigorous physical
activity (6 METs).\7\ For example, for a typical high school adolescent
(average weight: 157 lbs), increasing MVPA from 37% to 50% during a
daily 30 minute PE class for a school year was estimated to produce an
average increase in energy expenditure of 6 kcal/day--clearly
insufficient on its own to reverse the childhood obesity epidemic.
Further, even this small effect could potentially be diminished if
compensation occurred for this additional caloric expenditure with
increased food or beverage consumption.
It is important to note that all estimates used in creating the
Caloric Calculator were population-based. In addition, for
interventions designed to remove a particular food or beverage from the
diet, caloric benefits were accrued only from the population affected
(e.g., the population affected by the NYC sugary drink portion-size cap
was presumed to include those consuming sugary beverages of >16 ounces
per serving, estimated to include only 12% of adolescents aged 12-19
years).\14\
Discussion
Reversing the nation's current childhood obesity epidemic will
require multiple individual, behavioral, policy, environmental, and
normative changes--through public health and clinical strategies--to
reverse the daily accumulation of a positive ``energy gap'' that
brought us to this point. New evidence from New York City,\43\
Philadelphia,\44\ California,
9, 45
and Mississippi \46\
demonstrates that broad approaches involving multifaceted policies and
environmental strategies have the power to halt and reverse the
trend.\47\ However, what has been missing is a metric for estimating
the individual and combined effects of specific interventions to
increase children's activity levels and reduce their intake of energy-
dense, low-nutrient foods and beverages.
This paper expands on the previously published ``energy gap''
framework--which estimated the magnitude of energy surplus underlying
the obesity epidemic among U.S. youth
4-5
--to examine the
effects of various interventions, alone or in combination, to favorably
tip the energy balance. The lack of a common metric for comparing the
effectiveness of strategies with differing behavioral targets (i.e.,
reducing excess caloric intake and/or increasing physical activity) has
stymied past efforts to apply analytic tools to rank existing
strategies on their contribution to reversing the childhood obesity
trend. The development and application of the Average Caloric Impact
(ACI) metric and the Caloric Calculator tool offer an opportunity to
fill this gap.
Although the Caloric Calculator begins to address these issues,
there are nuances in the obesity reduction equation that will require
further research and discussion. The evidence used to estimate ACIs is
still in many ways limited and dependent on the rigor of existing
intervention studies and on the availability and reliability of
intervention outcome measures (e.g., the use of objectively measured,
versus self-reported, outcomes or ecologic associations that can be
examined across studies). In addition, many studies focus narrowly on
specific populations, such as middle school girls30 or a specific age
range.
29, 36, 37

Most challenging at this stage in childhood obesity prevention
research is the lack of high-quality studies with a sufficiently long
follow-up. A 2011 Cochrane review of obesity prevention efforts found
that only 14 of the 55 included studies had interventions lasting more
than 12 months, most of which focused only on children aged 6-12 years.
There is virtually no evidence from studies aimed at younger children
to determine whether intervention benefits can be sustained into later
adolescence or adulthood.\6\ Therefore, it would be inaccurate to make
predictions of weight change from fixed caloric changes using these
estimates, particularly given the multitude of factors that drive
weight change over time \48\ and the large changes seen from childhood
to adolescence.\49\
Study populations also have varied widely with respect to racial/
ethnic composition, SES, and prevalence of obesity at baseline,
limiting the generalizability and comparability of intervention
effects. Thus, the tool represents the authors' best effort to assess
the average impact if these programs were broadly implemented. Local
contexts and subpopulation characteristics are likely to modify the
actual outcomes. The estimates will continue to be refined and updated
as new data emerge from periodic scans of newly published data and
feedback from collaborators in the field of childhood obesity
prevention. Going forward, the Calculator will be further developed to
address specific subsets of the population or allow more user inputs to
facilitate broader dissemination and policy discussions. For example, a
principal of a disproportionately low-income school could use the tool
based on the school's demographics, or parents could use the tool by
entering their child's age, gender, and body weight.
Despite these limitations, there is value in the Caloric
Calculator's ability to translate evidence into practice by generating
caloric impact estimates and projecting the potential cumulative
effects of multicomponent interventions addressing one or both sides of
the energy balance equation. The ACI is a summary measure of several
dimensions of the program or policy evaluated: reach, effectiveness/
efficacy, adoption, implementation, and maintenance.\50\ These
dimensions also convey why the net caloric impact of the same program
will vary from population to population when implemented in the real
world. As such, the tool is expected to offer a starting point to
support policymakers and practitioners in using existing evidence to
drive decision making in a more straightforward manner.
The development of a common metric can lay the groundwork for more
evidence-based resource allocation decisions, both in program
implementation and in further evidence gathering. Future expansion of
this framework may include finer granularity in the population
targeted, such as overweight status, race/ethnicity, and urban/rural
locations as well as concerns for equity, cost effectiveness, and other
long-term outcomes.\47\ Further, the current review underscored the
need to encourage the evaluations of programs and policies to use and
report objective and comparable outcome measures, such as changes in
activity levels (e.g., MET values); duration (e.g., minutes of MVPA
added); net changes in calories consumed in addition to key nutrients
or diet quality; and measured BMI whenever possible.
Because the Caloric Calculator uses national data with the aim of
estimating mean population-level effect sizes, the effect of an
intervention is averaged across those who received and benefited from
the program and those who did not. Therefore, an intervention that has
a large effect but reaches only a small number of children may appear
to have less of an impact at the population level. For example, an
active transport program may target children who live within 1 mile of
their school, which will reach at most 31% of children in Grades K-
8.\23\ The daily caloric impact, when averaged across all children, is
therefore a fraction of the net caloric impact for those who
participate in walking to school. Although not evaluated in the current
study, the same consideration applies to interventions specifically
targeted at overweight adolescents (who have an average energy gap of
700-1,000 kcal/day).\4\
It is important to note that although the analyses presented in
this paper focus on intervention effects on daily energy gaps and
obesity levels in youth, there are important health and nonhealth
benefits gained from improving physical activity and diet that are not
captured by the ACI measure. For instance, there is growing evidence
that physical activity has beneficial effects on mental health outcomes
and academic performance.\51\ Similarly, an intervention to improve the
nutritional quality of a la carte foods and beverages improves the
overall nutritional profile of foods consumed at school despite having
no significant effect on the total number of calories
sold.
52-53

Some investments in childhood obesity prevention have been
projected to be cost effective.\54\ But without knowing what types of
interventions to invest in, efforts may fail to produce the expected
results. There have been many controversial, yet noteworthy, recent
policy recommendations that will be scaled up to the national level
(e.g., menu labeling). Without experimental evidence, however, it can
be difficult to convince the public and policymakers of the
implications and demonstrate the possible impact of implementation. The
Caloric Calculator provides a novel tool for appraising these policies
and interventions based on their potential efficacy, alone or combined,
providing an evidence-based platform to inform practice and policy.

The authors acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Laura K.
Brennan, Ph.D., M.P.H., President and CEO of Transtria LLC (St.
Louis, MO), and her team in the evidence-review process. The
authors thank Shawn Nowicki, M.P.H., and Andrew Wang, M.P.H.,
as graduate student assistants in literature review and the
early development of the tool. The authors also thank Michael
Slaven, MA, who designed and implemented the web tool,
www.caloriccalculator.org, as well as Kevin Hall, Ph.D., and
Carson Chow, Ph.D. (NIH/National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases), for their methodologic advice
on the analysis.
This work was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
(grant no. 68162). This work is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not represent the official views of the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
No financial disclosures were reported by the authors of this
paper.

References

1. Trust for America's Health and the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation. F as in fat: how obesity threatens America's future 2012.
healthyamericans.org/report/100/2012.
2. Ogden C.L., Carroll M.D., Kit B.K., Flegal K.M. Prevalence of
obesity and trends in body mass index among U.S. children and
adolescents, 1999-2010. JAMA 2012; 307(5): 483-90.
3. Narayan K.M., Boyle J.P., Thompson T.J., Sorensen S.W.,
Williamson D.F. Lifetime risk for diabetes mellitus in the U.S. JAMA
2003; 290(14): 1884-90.
4. Wang Y.C., Gortmaker S.L., Sobol A.M., Kuntz K.M. Estimating the
energy gap among U.S. children: a counterfactual approach. Pediatrics
2006; 118(6): e1721-e1733.
5. Wang Y.C., Orleans C.T., Gortmaker S.L. Reaching the healthy
people goals for reducing childhood obesity: closing the energy gap.
Am. J. Prev. Med. 2012; 42(5): 437-44.
6. Waters E., de Silva-Sanigorski A., Hall B.J., et al.
Interventions for preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database
Syst. Rev. (Online) 2011(12): CD001871.
7. Wu S., Cohen D., Shi Y., Pearson M., Sturm R.. Economic analysis
of physical activity interventions. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2011; 40(2): 149-
58.
8. Brennan L., Castro S., Brownson R.C., Claus J., Orleans C.T.
Accelerating evidence reviews and broadening evidence standards to
identify effective, promising, and emerging policy and environmental
strategies for prevention of childhood obesity. Annu. Rev. Public
Health 2011; 32: 199-223.
9. Taber D.R., Chriqui J.F., Chaloupka F.J.. Differences in nutrient
intake associated with state laws regarding fat, sugar, and caloric
content of competitive foods. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 2012;
166(5): 452-8.
10. Wang Y.C., Bleich S.N., Gortmaker S.L. Increasing caloric
contribution from sugar-sweetened beverages and 100% fruit juices among
U.S. children and adolescents, 1988-2004. Pediatrics 2008; 121(6):
e1604-e1614.
11. Schofield W.N. Predicting basal metabolic rate, new standards
and review of previous work. Hum. Nutr. Clin. Nutr. 1985; 39(S 1): 5-
41.
12. Ainsworth B.E., Haskell W.L., Whitt M.C., et al. Compendium of
physical activities: an update of activity codes and MET intensities.
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2000; 32(9S): S498-S504.
13. Ridley K., Olds T.S. Assigning energy costs to activities in
children: a review and synthesis. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2008; 40(8):
1439-46.
14. Wang Y., Vine S. Caloric impact of a 16-ounce portion size cap
on sugar-sweetened beverages served in restaurants. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2013 [In Press].
15. Sonneville K.R., Gortmaker S.L. Total energy intake, adolescent
discretionary behaviors and the energy gap. Int. J. Obes. 2008; 32(S6):
S19-S27.
16. Epstein L.H., Roemmich J.N., Robinson J.L., et al. A randomized
trial of the effects of reducing television viewing and computer use on
body mass index in young children. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 2008;
162(3): 239-45.
17. Guran T., Bereket A. International epidemic of childhood obesity
and television viewing. Minerva Pediatr. 2011; 63(6): 483-90.
18. Miller S.A., Taveras E.M., Rifas-Shiman S.L., Gillman M.W.
Association between television viewing and poor diet quality in young
children. Int. J. Pediatr. Obes. 2008; 3(3): 168-76.
19. Healthy Eating Research. Food and beverage marketing to children
and adolescents: an environment at odds with good health. Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, 2011.
20. DHHS. Strategies to improve the quality of physical education.
Washington D.C.: CDC, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Healthy Promotion, Division of Adolescent and School Health, 2010.
21. DHHS, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy
People 2010: nutrition and overweight. hp2010.nhlbihin.net/2010Objs/
19Nutrition.html.
22. DHHS, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy
People 2020: nutrition and weight status. 2012. www.healthypeople.gov/
2020/topicsobjectives2020/objectiveslist.aspx?topicId=29.
23. McDonald N.C., Brown A.L., Marchetti L.M., Pedroso M.S. U.S.
school travel, 2009 an assessment of trends. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2011;
41(2): 146-51.
24. National Center for Safe Routes to School. How children get to
school: school travel patterns from 1969 to 2009. November 2011.
25. McKenzie T.L., Sallis J.F., Prochaska J.J., Conway T.L.,
Marshall S.J., Rosengard P. Evaluation of a two-year middle-school
physical education intervention: M-SPAN. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2004;
36(8): 1382-8.
26. Nader P.R. Frequency and intensity of activity of third-grade
children in physical education. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 2003;
157(2): 185-90.
27. Smith N.J., Lounsbery M.A., McKenzie T.L. Physical activity in
high school physical education: impact of lesson context and class
gender composition. J. Phys. Act. Health 2013: In Press.
28. McKenzie T.L., Nader P.R., Strikmiller P.K., et al. School
physical education: effect of the Child and Adolescent Trial for
Cardiovascular Health. Prev. Med. 1996; 25(4): 423-31.
29. Kelder S., Hoelscher D.M., Barroso C.S., Walker J.L., Cribb P.,
Hu S. The CATCH Kids Club: a pilot after-school study for improving
elementary students' nutrition and physical activity. Public Health
Nutr. 2005; 8(2): 133-40.
30. Stevens J., Murray D.M., Catellier D.J, et al. Design of the
Trial of Activity in Adolescent Girls (TAAG). Contemp. Clin. Trials
2005; 26(2): 223-33.
31. Baggett C.D., Stevens J., Catellier D.J., et al. Compensation or
displacement of physical activity in middle-school girls: the Trial of
Activity for Adolescent Girls. Int. J. Obes. 2010; 34(7): 1193-9.
32. Elder J.P., Shuler L., Moe S.G., et al. Recruiting a diverse
group of middle school girls into the trial of activity for adolescent
girls. J. School Health 2008; 78(10): 523-31.
33. Gittelsohn J., Steckler A., Johnson C.C., et al. Formative
research in school and community-based health programs and studies:
``state of the art'' and the TAAG approach. Health. Educ. Behav. 2006;
33(1): 25-39.
34. Webber L.S., Catellier D.J., Lytle L.A., et al. Promoting
physical activity in middle school girls: Trial of Activity for
Adolescent Girls. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2008; 34(3): 173-84.
35. Young D.R., Johnson C.C., Steckler A., et al. Data to action:
using formative research to develop intervention programs to increase
physical activity in adolescent girls. Health Educ. Behav. 2006; 33(1):
97-111.
36. McKenzie T.L., Sallis J.F., Kolody B., Faucette F.N. Long-term
effects of a physical education curriculum and staff development
program: SPARK. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 1997; 68(4): 280-91.
37. Sallis J.F., McKenzie T.L., Alcaraz J.E., Kolody B., Faucette
N., Hovell M.F. The effects of a 2-year physical education program
(SPARK) on physical activity and fitness in elementary school students.
Sports, Play and Active Recreation for Kids. Am. J. Public Health 1997;
87(8): 1328-34.
38. Gortmaker S.L., Lee R.M., Mozaffarian R.S., et al. Effect of an
after-school intervention on increases in children's physical activity.
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2012; 44(3): 450-7.
39. Cereal FACTS. Top 10 cereals by nutrition score. n.d.;
cerealfacts.org/cereal_nutrition_advanced_earch.aspx?l=t.
40. Cereal FACTS. Bottom 10 cereals by nutrition score. n.d.;
cerealfacts.org/cereal_nutrition_advanced_search.aspx?l=b.
41. Yale Rudd Center for Food Policy & Obesity. Limited progress in
the nutrition quality and marketing of children's cereals, 2012.
42. Elbel B., Cantor J., Mijanovich T. Potential effect of the New
York City policy regarding sugared beverages. N. Engl. J. Med. 2012;
367(7): 680-1.
43. CDC. Obesity in K-8 students--New York City, 2006-07 to 2010-11
school years. MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly. Rep. 2011; 60(49): 1673-8.
44. Robbins J.M., Mallya G., Polansky M., Schwarz D.F. Prevalence,
disparities, and trends in obesity and severe obesity among students in
the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, school district, 2006-2010. Prev.
Chronic Dis. 2012; 9: E145.
45. Babey S.H., Wolstein J., Diamant A.L., Bloom A., Goldstein H.A..
Patchwork of progress: changes in overweight and obesity among
California's 5th, 7th, and 9th graders, 2005-2010. 2011.
46. Molaison E.F., Kolbo J.R., Zhang L., et al. Prevalence and
trends in obesity among Mississippi public school students, 2005-2009.
J. Miss. State. Med. Assoc. 2010; 51(3): 67-72.
47. Gortmaker S.L., Swinburn B.A., Levy D., et al. Changing the
future of obesity: science, policy, and action. Lancet 2011; 378(9793):
838-47.
48. Hall K.D., Sacks G., Chandramohan D., et al. Quantification of
the effect of energy imbalance on bodyweight. Lancet 2011; 378(9793):
826-37.
49. Van Cleave J., Gortmaker S.L., Perrin J.M.. Dynamics of obesity
and chronic health conditions among children and youth. JAMA 2010;
303(7): 623-30.
50. Glasgow R.E., Vogt T.M., Boles S.M.. Evaluating the public
health impact of health promotion interventions: the RE-AIM framework.
Am. J. Public Health 1999; 89(9): 1322-7.
51. Singh A., Uijtdewilligen L., Twisk J.W., van Mechelen W.,
Chinapaw M.J. Physical activity and performance at school: a systematic
review of the literature including a methodological quality assessment.
Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 2012; 166(1): 49-55.
52. Cullen K.W., Hartstein J., Reynolds K.D., et al. Improving the
school food environment: results from a pilot study in middle schools.
J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2007; 107(3): 484-9.
53. Hartstein J., Cullen K.W., Reynolds K.D., Harrell J., Resnicow
K., Kennel P. Impact of portion-size control for school a la carte
items: changes in kilocalories and macronutrients purchased by middle
school students. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2008; 108(1): 140-4.
54. Trasande L. How much should we invest in preventing childhood
obesity? Health Aff. 2010; 29(3): 372-8.

attachment 2
Predicting Adult Weight Change in the Real World: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis Accounting for Compensatory Changes in Energy
Intake or Expenditure *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Received 6 May 2014; revised 19 August 2014; accepted 8 September
2014; accepted article preview online 17 October 2014; advance online
publication, 23 December 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Review
E.J. Dhurandhar,
[1-3, 7]
K.A. Kaiser,
[1, 3-4, 7]

J.A. Dawson,
[3]
A.S. Alcorn,
[3]
K.D. Keating

[5-6]
and D.B. Allison
[1, 3-4

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Nutrition Obesity Research Center, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA;
[2]
Department of Health
Behavior, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA;

[3]
Office of Energetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA;
[4]
School of Public
Health, Dean's Office, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL, USA;
[5]
Department of Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA and

[6]
Department of Statistics, Kansas State University,
Manhattan, KS, USA. Correspondence: Dr. Professor D.B. Allison, School
of Public Health, Dean's Office, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
1665 University Boulevard, RPHB 140J, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
E-mail:
[emailprotected]
.

[7]
These authors contributed equally to this work.

Background: Public health and clinical interventions for
obesity in free-living adults may be diminished by individual
compensation for the intervention. Approaches to predict weight
outcomes do not account for all mechanisms of compensation, so
they are not well suited to predict outcomes in free-living
adults. Our objective was to quantify the range of compensation
in energy intake or expenditure observed in human randomized
controlled trials (RCTs).
Methods: We searched multiple databases (PubMed, CINAHL,
SCOPUS, Cochrane, ProQuest, PsycInfo) up to 1 August 2012 for
RCTs evaluating the effect of dietary and/or physical activity
interventions on body weight/composition. Inclusion criteria:
subjects per treatment arm %5; %1 week intervention; a reported
outcome of body weight/body composition; the intervention was
either a prescribed amount of over- or underfeeding and/or
supervised or monitored physical activity was prescribed; %80%
compliance; and an objective method was used to verify
compliance with the intervention (for example, observation and
electronic monitoring). Data were independently extracted and
analyzed by multiple reviewers with consensus reached by
discussion. We compared observed weight change with predicted
weight change using two models that predict weight change
accounting only for metabolic compensation.
Findings: Twenty-eight studies met inclusion criteria.
Overfeeding studies indicate 96% less weight gain than expected
if no compensation occurred. Dietary restriction and exercise
studies may result in up to 12-44% and 55-64% less weight loss
than expected, respectively, under an assumption of no
behavioral compensation.
Interpretation: Compensation is substantial even in high-
compliance conditions, resulting in far less weight change than
would be expected. The simple algorithm we report allows for
more realistic predictions of intervention effects in free-
living populations by accounting for the significant
compensation that occurs.
International Journal of Obesity (2015) 39, 1181-1187;
doi:10.1038/ijo.2014.184.
Introduction
Obesity is a serious and prevalent public health concern.\1\ New
public health and clinical interventions to reduce obesity are
frequently advocated or implemented based on hypothetical estimates of
an outcome that may have little empirical support (for example, the
3,500 kcal rule). For example, imagine an initiative from a large
company that replaces its 250 kcal candy bars in its vending machines
with 50 kcal protein bars to reduce energy intake (EI) from snacking
among its employees. This initiative can be expected to produce (in
those who consume at least 250 kcal per day from such snacks), on
average, 5.7 kg of weight loss after 1 year (for example, for a 35 year
old man who is 183 cm tall and weighs 100 kg at baseline, body mass
index = 30). This estimate is based on one of the mathematically
validated prediction models \2\ sometimes used to justify such
interventions.\3\ But is this estimate realistic?
On the basis of the evidence, this estimate is likely optimistic
because current models for predicting weight change are not well suited
for use in free-living subjects. A common rule of thumb used for
decades to predict weight change outcomes is that losing or gaining 1
pound of fat requires a deficit of 3,500 kcals of energy.\4\ This rule
does not consider that human energy balance is a dynamic and adaptable
system or that lean and fat mass is lost during negative energy
balance, and this leads to an underestimation of the change in EI or
energy expenditure (EE) needed to produce weight change.
5-8

Recently, more sophisticated models have been developed to predict
weight changes, which consider the metabolic adaptations that occur
during weight change.
9-12
To accurately predict weight
change in free-living individuals, however, both metabolic and
behavioral compensatory mechanisms must be accounted for.
Specifically, we define the modes of possible compensation as
follows:
Metabolic Compensation
It is a compensation for an energy balance intervention through
physiological changes in metabolism. For example, current mathematical
models account for changes in resting metabolic rate, fluid balance,
the thermic effect of food and spontaneous physical activity resulting
from an energy balance intervention.
11-13

Behavioral Compensation
It is a compensation for an energy balance intervention through
behavior changes. For example, when a dietary or physical activity
intervention attempts to create negative energy balance, an individual
may respond by reducing voluntary EE and/or increasing EI if these
avenues are not strictly controlled. Similarly, during an energy
balance intervention of added energy, voluntary EE may increase and/or
EI may decrease from other sources.
Others have shown that behavioral compensation occurs for physical
activity interventions.\14\ Behavioral compensation may also occur for
interventions that reduce caloric intake or add calorie-containing
foods to the diet.
15-16
Current prediction models are
intended for use where interventions are implemented with high fidelity
(that is, intended intervention exposure was achieved) in isolation,
and when metabolic compensation is the only route of compensation for
the intervention possible. During interventions in free-living
subjects, however, compensation can occur through metabolic
compensation and through behavioral compensation. Behavioral
compensation may diminish the effects of an intervention, making it
important to quantify and account for when predicting outcomes in free-
living populations. It is imperative that more realistic models be used
for predicting outcomes for the reasons stated recently:

``. . . to establish a less controversial legacy for this
important field, we should avoid past traps and be explicit
about reasonable expectations. Implausible results that are
`too good to be true' still threaten nutritional research on
many fronts, including survey measurements, observational
associations, treatment effects in randomized trials, and
estimates of the impact on populations.'' \17\

We therefore set out to build an empirically based model to predict
weight change outcomes in free-living subjects, and to quantify the
extent to which observed weight change in free-living subjects differs
from that predicted under the assumption of no behavioral compensation.
The approach we took was to use systematic review techniques to collect
study data and conduct meta-regression on studies meeting a priori
inclusion criteria. These criteria guided identification of high-
fidelity interventions implemented in free-living adults. The subjects
had some ability to behaviorally compensate for the intervention, yet
the reported information about the intervention and compliance
verification allowed for a high degree of confidence in treatment
fidelity. For our main analysis, we compared the predictions from
models that assume no active compensation
2, 18
with the
observed outcomes as an estimate of the effects of behavioral
compensation.
Materials and Methods
Systematic Review of the Literature and Study Selection
Articles, abstracts and doctoral dissertations were retrieved using
searches performed on the following electronic databases: PubMed,
Cochrane Library, SCOPUS, PsycInfo, Cumulative Index to Nursing and
Allied Health Literature (CINAHL) and Dissertation Abstracts. We
searched PubMed without MeSH headings to identify publications for
inclusion, using the following limits: dated 1 August 2012 back to
earliest records of human studies. Detailed search methods are provided
on the PROSPERO registry website (Registry #CRD42013002912). No ethics
committee approval was required as the data used are published summary
statistics.
All studies were evaluated according to the following inclusion
criteria: (1) the data were from adult human randomized controlled
trials in free-living subjects, (2) the intervention was either a
prescribed amount of over- or underfeeding given and reported (or could
be converted) in kcal and/or supervised or monitored physical activity
was prescribed and verified, (3) an objective verification method was
used to verify the intervention at %80% (for example, observation,
electronic monitoring and provision of food with returned unused
portions), (4) the study had a total sample size of at least five
participants at enrollment, (5) the study protocol included an
intervention period of at least 7 days, (6) the publication was
available in the English language and (7) the study was published and
listed in the above databases on or before 1 August 2012.
Our exclusion criteria are detailed in the online Supplementary
Material. Briefly, we excluded studies on samples that were completely
or predominantly made up of individuals younger than 18 years old or
older than 60 years or having any health conditions that may affect
weight. The filtering process of the initial search results is detailed
in Figure 1 and also described in more detail in the online supplement.
Statistical Analysis
Quantifying the effect of behavioral compensation-comparison with
metabolic compensation models. We entered sample demographic and
intervention data into each of the metabolic compensation model
calculators to most closely represent each intervention as described in
the published papers to estimate weight changes that would occur if
only metabolic compensation occurred. As we included data that had
samples of both men and women where separate baseline data and results
were not reported (only combined summaries), we entered the data for
both genders and mathematically adjusted the outputs for the relative
proportions of men and women. For the NIDDK simulator,\2\ we assumed a
baseline value (when not otherwise reported) of sedentary activity
level (1.4 metabolic equivalents). The difference between the observed
weight change for each study and the weight change predicted by these
models is indicative of the degree of behavioral compensation that is
observed for the interventions in free-living adults included in our
review and meta-analysis.
All model data were analyzed with R routines \19\ and descriptive
summaries were generated with Microsoft Excel version 2010. Further
details of statistical approaches used for the predictive model
building are on the online supplement. Risk of bias was assessed by two
authors (EJD and KAK) independently and discrepancies were discussed
until consensus was reached.
Role of Funding Source
The funding agency (International Life Science Institute--North
America) had no role in the design, conduct, analysis, manuscript
preparation or decision to publish the results of this study.
Results
Results of Publication Search
We retrieved citations dated back to 1935, but more than \2/3\ of
the initial publications retrieved were published after 2001. The final
data set for building the predictive model consisted of 28 studies
published between 1987 and 2012, including 15 exercise studies, nine
studies with added energy, three dietary restriction studies and two
studies that included both dietary restriction and exercise in the
intervention (see Table 1 for a complete listing of included studies
with selected summary data and intervention descriptions). The primary
reasons for exclusion after full text review were studies not being
truly randomized or not having a control group, followed by reliance
only on self-report for EI or physical activity without any objective
verification of compliance. Studies were all published journal
articles, except for two dissertations.
20-21
Eleven studies
had samples that were either 100% men or 100% women. Three other
studies reported results by gender separately if both males and females
were included in the sample. Only six studies (21%) reported the racial
makeup of the samples; therefore, this factor was excluded from further
analysis. Mean ages of the samples ranged from 20.6 to 60 years. Mean
baseline body mass index of the samples ranged from 22.6 to 35.1
kgm^\2\.
Figure 1

PRISMA diagram-literature search and study selection process.

Table 1. Master List and Summary of Included Studies Grouped By Treatment Type and Sorted in Ascending Year of Publication
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sample studied
(mean age-years,      Adjusted daily       Study                        N  randomized,     Method of
Reference(s)      Intervention       pct  female,        dose(s) (kcal:      duration     Intervention       completed,     missing data  Overall mean
baseline BMI     treatment- control)    (weeks)          notes           analyzed        handling      compliance
kgm^\2\)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Johnstone, et     Diet                    38, 0%, 35.1               ^167.2            4  High protein,           20, 17, 17  Completers             100
al.\22\                                                                                   ketogenic diet
Das, et al.\23\   Diet                 35, 76.3%, 27.6               ^285.6           26  Caloric                 46, 39, 39  Completers             100
restriction
Zachwieja, et     Diet and             24, 45.8%, 24.1                 ^675            2  Caloric                 24, 24, 24  No drops                90
al.\24\           exercise                                                                restriction and
daily treadmill
exercise
Moreira, et       Diet and                 49, 68%, 30       ^556.0, ^753.3           11  25% caloric             36, 35, 36  ITT                     99
al.\25\           exercise                                                                restriction
(separate                                                               (controlled
treatments)                                                             feeding) versus
aerobic
exercise
(individualized
and supervised
sessions 3 per
week)
Leon, et al.\26\  Exercise                32.6, 0%, 26               ^245.6           12  Walking and             22, 16, 16  Completers              86
stair climbing
Van Etten, et     Exercise              33.7, 0%, 23.7                ^31.6           18  Weight training         26, 26, 26  Completers              95
al.\27\
Murphy, et        Exercise           44.4, 100%, 25.76         ^81.6, ^84.5           10  Long versus             47, 34, 34  Completers            86.5
al.\28\                                                                                   short bouts of
walking
Crandall \21\     Exercise            51.75, 44%, 30.8                ^76.7           12  Recumbent cycle         13, 13, 13  No drops               100
ergometer
Shaw and Shaw     Exercise               41, 92%, 32.6                ^13.7            8  Resistance              28, 28, 28  Completers            91.1
\29\                                                                                      training
Kirk, et al.\30\  Exercise              20.6, 0%, 28.2               ^104.7           24  High-intensity          25, 19, 19  Completers              96
resistance
training
Whybrow, et       Exercise             27.2, 50%, 23.6      ^455.6, ^513.6,            2  Progressive             12, 12, 12  No drops               100
al.\31\                                                             ^907.1                exercise on
cycle ergometer
or treadmill
Guadalupe-Grau,   Exercise          23.7, 65.2%, 23.03                ^51.7            9  Strength                88, 72, 66  Completers              85
et al.\32\                                                                                training and
plyometric
jumps
Alves, et         Exercise              38.2, 100%, 30               ^106.1           26  Group exercises      156, 146, 156  ITT, BOCF               96
al.\33\
Turner, et        Exercise                  54, 0%, 28               ^187.3           24  Structured              54, 41, 29  Completers              94
al.\34\                                                                                   exercise
Bell, et al.\35\  Exercise              49, 100%, 34.7       ^399.0, ^395.1           24  Pedometer-based      211, 128, 128  Completers           84.77
walking program
Vispute, et       Exercise          23.66, 41.7%, 24.6                ^41.9            6  Abdominal               24, 24, 24  No drops             95.71
al.\36\                                                                                   exercises
Hornbuckle, et    Exercise             28.5, 0%, 25.42                ^57.7           12  Resistance              44, 32, 44  ITT                     96
al.\37\                                                                                   training
Heydari, et       Exercise           37.7, 56.3%, 27.8               ^186.4           12  High-intensity          46, 38, 38  Completers             100
al.\38\                                                                                   intermittent
exercise
Thompson, et      Exercise           49.7, 72.8%, 31.8               ^174.8           16  Supervised           162, 137, 162  ITT                     91
al.,\39\ and                                                                              aerobic
Church, et                                                                                exercise
al.\40\
Addington \20\    Feeding                38.74, 63.8%,       2.9 (aspartame            4  Artificially         150, 111, 111  Completers             100
32.09   group), 142.9 (SSB                sweetened
group)                beverage
(aspartame)
versus SSB
Lammert, et       Feeding              22.4, 0%, 22.61                  191            3  Overfeeding             20, 20, 20  No drops               100
al.\41\                                                                                   carbohydrate or
fat
Martin, et        Feeding            37.7, 56.3%, 27.8                597.1            2  Low- versus high-       10, 10, 10  No drops               100
al.\42\                                                                                   calorie
breakfast
Sabate, et        Feeding            42.6, 45.2%, 23.7                  219           26  Walnuts                 90, 90, 90  No drops                95
al.\43\
Whybrow, et       Feeding              60, 26.7%, 27.7         122.8, 227.5            8  Added fruits and        90, 62, 62  Completers            92.6
al.\44\                                                                                   vegetables
Whybrow, et       Feeding            35.05, 50%, 25.35         343.9, 687.9            2  Added snacks           100, 87, 72  Completers              96
al.\45\
Sheridan, et      Feeding               24.9, 0%, 28.7                314.8            4  Pistachio nuts          15, 15, 15  No drops                99
al.\46\
Casas-Agustench,  Feeding            54.4, 56.3%, 26.5                176.9           12  Mixed nuts              52, 50, 50  Completers              94
et al.\47\
Maersk, et        Feeding                 28, 0%, 22.2    3.1, 365.2, 385.5           26  1 l per day of          60, 47, 47  Completers              85
al.\48\                                                                                   diet soda, SSB
or milk versus
water
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abbreviations: BOCF, baseline observation carried forward; ITT, intention-to-treat analysis reported; pct, percentage; SSB, sugar-sweetened beverage.

Building a Predictive Model
We expected to find enough studies to build a robust regression
model, incorporating mean participant characteristics and evaluating
any significant interactions. However, the relatively low number and
sparsely distributed data prevented reliable estimates from our final
model. Details of the model and its estimations can be found in the
online supplement, Supplementary Figure S1 and Supplementary Tables S1a
and S1b.
Comparison with Metabolic Compensation Models--Estimating Behavioral
Compensation
To address our main research question (What is the effect of
behavioral compensation that occurs in free-living subjects who receive
an energy balance intervention on weight outcomes?), we generated
output for each study using the NIDDK and Pennington weight change
prediction calculators
2, 18
to estimate weight changes that
would occur if only metabolic compensation occurred. The difference
between the observed weight loss for each study and the weight change
predicted by these models is indicative of behavioral compensation
occurring during the intervention. The NIDDK and Pennington models are
highly correlated (Pearson's r = 0.98, P

NIDDK and Pennington calculator predictions for caloric
restriction (D, squares) and overfeeding (F, triangles)
interventions. NIDDK (a) and Pennington (b) model predictions
(x axis) versus actual observed weight changes for all studies
(y axis). Each individual point represents a control versus
treatment comparison; the solid lines are lines of best fit for
slope and black dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals. Gray
dashes lines are axes and lines of identity. Overall,
predictions are an overestimate of observed weight change.
Figure 3

NIDDK and Pennington calculator predictions for exercise
interventions (E). NIDDK (a) and Pennington (b) model
predictions (x axis) versus actual observed weight changes for
all studies (y axis). Each individual point represents a
treatment versus control comparison; the solid lines are lines
of best fit for slope and black dashed lines are 95% confidence
intervals. Gray dashes lines are axes and lines of identity.
Overall, predictions are an overestimate of observed weight
change.
Discussion
We generated simple adjustment factors to predict weight change
resulting from energy balance interventions in free-living adult
populations, with the ability to compensate both behaviorally and
metabolically, using 73 treatment and control arm group outcomes from
28 studies. One of the notable findings was the small number of studies
meeting our inclusion criteria (that is, where compliance was
objectively measured), making it difficult to study the role of
behavioral compensation in a free-living context beyond a very basic
level. Although our estimates are the only ones for this purpose to
date based on the currently available literature, this highlights a gap
in the literature of studies designed to determine the impact of energy
balance perturbations in humans in the context of a full range of
compensation that prevents a more precise estimate. As these studies
are crucial to understanding the effect of public health interventions,
their limited quantity underscores a need for future research in this
area.
Perhaps, the most robust finding from our study most relevant to
public health is that currently available predictions consistently
overestimate weight change, which is evidence of significantly
diminished weight change resulting from behavioral compensation. This
is in spite of some instances where explicit instructions were given to
make no other changes in routine habits, a form of compliance that is
less commonly tracked or verified. In particular, the treatment effect
of added calories was only, on average,  5% of the weight gain
predicted from models assuming no behavioral compensation. Several
included studies reported a mean weight loss effect from added energy.
This indicates that even if a new food is introduced to the diet, for
example, adding a daily snack or beverage, EI and/or EE can be adjusted
reasonably well, resulting in very little weight gain relative to how
much would be expected if this behavioral compensation did not occur.
Behavioral compensation for negative energy balance interventions such
as exercise or dietary restriction is also evident from our analysis,
and results in 37-45% and 56-88% of the weight loss predicted from
metabolic-only compensation models. In our initial example of reducing
EI via snacks by 200 kcals per day for the hypothetical man, the
adjusted estimate of weight change after 1 year would be closer to 3.2
kg. This is lower than the 5.7 kg estimate given by the body weight
simulator that predicts metabolic compensation only.
Therefore, our results suggest that current public health
interventions or clinical interventions that alter one aspect of energy
balance, without holding other aspects constant, may result in more
modest weight changes than predicted or desired. A similar approach has
been reported in pediatric studies,\3\ but it did not attempt to
account for both behavioral and metabolic compensation components. It
is important to take all modes of compensation into consideration when
planning an intervention with targeted amounts of weight change and
when anticipating its outcomes. It is likely that increased doses of
energy perturbations are required. Increased control over compliance
and compensation is necessary to achieve target outcomes. Estimates of
what is required to achieve a specific weight change may be made more
accurate for the purposes of public health recommendations if the
present estimations are considered.
Our results suggest that there might be a differential effect of
treatment type on the degree of behavioral compensation. However, an
aspect of our data set needs to be considered in interpreting this
result. Dietary restriction interventions are associated with greater
treatment effects, and less behavioral compensation, than either
exercise or overfeeding interventions. However, this finding may be
because the dietary restriction interventions included in our analysis
only allowed for behavioral compensation through EE changes, whereas
all exercise and overfeeding interventions allowed for behavioral
compensation through both dietary intake and EE changes.
Our approach has strengths and limitations. First, our inclusion
criteria were rigorous. All included studies have at least 80%
compliance with the prescribed intervention, with compliance verified
objectively (no reliance solely on self-report). In addition, the dose
was corrected in our calculations for the level of compliance reported
in the study. Further, included studies were randomized controlled
trials, and our outcome for generating the predictive model and for
comparing with metabolic compensation models was the control group-
adjusted weight change. Therefore, our models are built to assess true
treatment effect, and are corrected for any weight change due to
factors such as regression to the mean, maturation, historical factors
and behaviors that result from simply participating in a study, rather
than from the treatment itself.
Several limitations should also be considered when interpreting our
analysis. Weight was not always the primary outcome in studies that met
our inclusion criteria. This is particularly true for those with added
EI in the form of nuts. Differences in stated outcomes of interest,
time with researchers and other factors may affect weight outcomes for
individual studies. In addition, body composition may be an important
outcome that we were not able to adequately analyze because of the
limited number of studies including body composition measurements such
as changes in fat mass and fat-free mass. Because of our rigorous
inclusion criteria, our data set is small (28 studies). The types of
studies we selected are necessary for making definitive conclusions
about the impact of perturbations in one aspect of energy balance on
body weight. Studies also tended to be shorter in duration, thus it is
difficult to make conclusions about long-term effects. This is a large
gap in the literature, and a more systematic approach to large, well-
controlled studies to answer these questions is warranted. In addition,
16 of the 28 studies reported data only for those participants who
completed the intervention period, and across all studies there was a
17.8% dropout rate (Table 1), which may have biased our estimates of
weight change toward overestimation. We used the intention to treat
data when reported (four studies). Eight studies reported no dropouts.
Future research is needed to understand potential differences in
compensation between dietary interventions (added or reduced energy),
different food forms and macronutrient compositions. Also, certain
factors should be considered as potential confounders when quantifying
the compensatory response to a specific intervention. For example,
bioavailability of energy in food, efficiencies in physical activity
and food utilization, seasonal effects and durations of interventions
may all influence both the metabolic and behavioral compensatory
response to an intervention. It is also unclear whether compensation
would remain constant over time. Moreover, evaluating the influence of
participant characteristics related to eating behavior (cognitive
restraint, disinhibition and hunger) and compensation during
interventions is needed as this may hold promise for optimizing
treatment effectiveness.
To conclude, we have presented the first empirically based,
quantitative estimation for the range of behavioral compensation that
may be observed for energy balance interventions. This information may
assist in the estimation of weight outcomes of clinical health
interventions. It may also inform public health projections for obesity
interventions or public health initiatives.

Conflict of Interest

DBA has received consulting fees and his university has received
gifts, grants and donations from multiple nonprofit and for-profit
organizations with interests in obesity including publishers,
litigators and food and pharmaceutical companies. KAK has received a
speaker honorarium from Coca-Cola Iberia. The remaining authors declare
no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgements

This project was sponsored by the International Life Sciences
Institute--North America (EJD and KAK, co-PIs). We thank the following
experts for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this
manuscript: Steve Blair, Steve Heymsfield, Rick Mattes, Robert
Matthews, Diana Thomas and Kevin Fontaine. Registry Information:
PROSPERO (http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/search.asp)
CRD42013002912.

Author Contributions

EJD, KAK and DBA conceived the study and developed the design and
selection criteria. KAK performed the literature searches. KAK and EJD
reviewed the literature, selected studies, extracted data, evaluated
risk of bias and wrote significant portions of the manuscript. ASA
assisted with literature selection, data extraction and summary
calculations. JAD and KDK performed the statistical analysis and wrote
some portions of the manuscript. DBA directed the statistical analysis
and wrote some portions of the manuscript.

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on
International Journal of Obesity website (http://www.nature.com/
ijo).

References

1. Flegal K.M., Carroll M.D., Kit B.K., Ogden C.L. Prevalence of
obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass index among U.S.
adults, 1999-2010. JAMA 2012; 307: 491-497.
2. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Body weight simulator. 2013. Available at http://
bwsimulator.niddk.nih.gov/ (accessed on 28 September 2013).
3. Wang Y.C., Hsiao A., Tracy Orleans C., Gortmaker S.L. The caloric
calculator: average caloric impact of childhood obesity interventions.
Am. J. Prev. Med. 2013; 45: e3-e13.
4. Wishnofsky M. Caloric equivalents of gained or lost weight. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr. 1958; 6: 542-546.
5. Hall K.D. What is the required energy deficit per unit weight
loss? Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2008; 32: 573-576.
6. Hall K.D., Chow C.C. Why is the 3,500 kcal per pound weight loss
rule wrong? Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2013; 37: 1614.
7. Thomas D.M., Martin C.K., Lettieri S., Bredlau C., Kaiser K.,
Church T., et al. Response to `Why is the 3500 kcal per pound weight
loss rule wrong?'. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2013; 37: 1614-1615.
8. Thomas D.M., Martin C.K., Lettieri S., Bredlau C., Kaiser K.,
Church T., et al. Can a weight loss of one pound a week be achieved
with a 3,500-kcal deficit? Commentary on a commonly accepted rule. Int.
J. Obes. (Lond) 2013; 37: 1611-1613.
9. Hall K.D., Butte B.A., Swinburn B.A., Chow C.C. Dynamics of
childhood growth and obesity: development and validation of a
quantitative mathematical model. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2013; 1:
97-105.
10. Hall K.D., Chow C.C. Estimating changes in free-living energy
intake and its confidence interval. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011; 94: 66-74.
11. Thomas D.M., Ciesla A., Levine J.A., Stevens J.G., Martin C.K. A
mathematical model of weight change with adaptation. Math Biosci. Eng.
2009; 6: 873-887.
12. Thomas D.M., Schoeller D.A., Redman L.A., Martin C.K., Levine
J.A., Heymsfield S.B. A computational model to determine energy intake
during weight loss. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010; 92: 1326-1331.
13. Hall K.D. Predicting metabolic adaptation, body weight change,
and energy intake in humans. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2010;
298: E449-E466.
14. Thomas D.M., Bouchard C., Church T., Slentz C., Kraus W.E.,
Redman L.M., et al. Why do individuals not lose more weight from an
exercise intervention at a defined dose? An energy balance analysis.
Obes. Rev. 2012; 13: 835-847.
15. Martin C.K., Heilbronn L.K., de Jonge L., DeLany J.P., Volaufova
J., Anton S.D., et al. Effect of calorie restriction on resting
metabolic rate and spontaneous physical activity. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2007; 15: 2964-2973.
16. Alper C.M., Mattes R.D. Effects of chronic peanut consumption on
energy balance and hedonics. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2002;
26: 1129-1137.
17. Ioannidis J.P. Implausible results in human nutrition research.
BMJ 2013; 347: f6698.
18. Multisubject weight change predictor. Pennington Biomedical
Research Center. Available at: http://www.pbrc.edu/research-and-faculty/
calculators/mswcp/ (accessed on 28 September 2013).
19. Team RDC. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna, Austria,
2009.
20. Addington E. Aspartame- or Sugar-Sweetened Beverages. Effects on
Food Appetites and Mood in Young Adults (Doctoral Dissertation). Kansas
State University: Manhattan, KS, USA, 1998.
21. Crandall K.J. The Effects of Exercise Intensity on Energy-
Derived Macronutrient Intake, Caloric Intake, Body Composition, and
Body Weight in the Overweight (Doctoral Dissertation). University of
Northern Colorado: Greeley, CO, USA, 1999.
22. Johnstone A.M., Horgan G.W., Murison S.D., Bremner D.M., Lobley
G.E. Effects of a high-protein ketogenic diet on hunger, appetite, and
weight loss in obese men feeding ad libitum. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008;
87: 44-55.
23. Das S.K, Saltzman E., Gilhooly C.H., Delany J.P., Golden J.K.,
Pittas A.G., et al. Low or moderate dietary energy restriction for long-
term weight loss: what works best. Obesity 2009; 17: 2019-2024.
24. Zachwieja J.J., Ezell D.M., Cline A.D., Ricketts J.C., Vicknair
P.C., Schorle S.M., et al. Short-term dietary energy restriction
reduces lean body mass but not performance in physically active men and
women. Int. J. Sports Med. 2001; 22: 310-316.
25. Moreira E.A., Most M., Howard J., Ravussin E. Dietary adherence
to long-term controlled feeding in a calorie-restriction study in
overweight men and women. Nutr. Clin. Pract. 2011; 26: 309-315.
26. Leon A.S., Casal D., Jacobs D., Jr. Effects of 2,000 kcal per
week of walking and stair climbing on physical fitness and risk factors
for coronary heart disease. J. Cardiopulm. Rehabil. 1996; 16: 183-192.
27. Van Etten L.M., Westerterp K.R., Verstappen F.T., Boon B.J.,
Saris W.H. Effect of an 18-wk weight-training program on energy
expenditure and physical activity. J. Appl. Physiol/ 1997; 82: 298-304.
28. Murphy M.H., Hardman A.E. Training effects of short and long
bouts of brisk walking in sedentary women. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
1998; 30: 152-157.
29. Shaw I., Shaw B.S. Consequence of resistance training on body
composition and coronary artery disease risk. Cardiovasc. J. S. Afr.
2006; 17: 111-116.
30. Kirk E.P., Washburn R.A., Bailey B.W., LeCheminant J.D.,
Donnelly J.E. Six months of supervised high-intensity low-volume
resistance training improves strength independent of changes in muscle
mass in young overweight men. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2007; 21: 151-156.
31. Whybrow S., Hughes D.A., Ritz P., Johnstone A.M., Horgan G.W.,
King N., et al. The effect of an incremental increase in exercise on
appetite, eating behaviour and energy balance in lean men and women
feeding. Br. J. Nutr. 2008; 100: 1109-1115.
32. Guadalupe-Grau A., Perez-Gomez J., Olmedillas H., Chavarren J.,
Dorado C., Santana A., et al. Strength training combined with
plyometric jumps in adults: sex differences in fat-bone axis
adaptations. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009; 106: 1100-1111.
33. Alves J.G., Gale C.R., Mutrie N., Correia J.B., Batty G.D. A 6-
month exercise intervention among inactive and overweight Favela-
residing women in Brazil: the caranguejo exercise trial. Am. J. Public
Health 2009; 99: 76-80.
34. Turner J.E., Markovitch D., Betts J.A., Thompson D.
Nonprescribed physical activity energy expenditure is maintained with
structured exercise and implicates a compensatory increase in energy
intake. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010; 92: 1009-1016.
35. Bell G.J., Harber V., Murray T., Courneya K.S., Rodgers W. A
comparison of fitness training to a pedometer-based walking program
matched for total energy cost. J. Phys. Act. Health 2010; 7: 203-213.
36. Vispute S.S., Smith J.D., Lecheminant J.D., Hurley K.S. The
effect of abdominal exercise on abdominal fat. J. Strength Cond. Res.
2011; 25: 2559-2564.
37. Hornbuckle L.M., Liu P.Y., Ilich J.Z., Kim J.S., Arjmandi B.H.,
Panton L.B. Effects of resistance training and walking on
cardiovascular disease risk in African-American Women. Med. Sci. Sports
Exerc. 2012; 44: 525-533.
38. Heydari M., Freund J., Boutcher S.H. The effect of high-
intensity intermittent exercise on body composition of overweight young
males. J. Obes. 2012; 2012: 480467.
39. Thompson A.M., Mikus C.R., Rodarte R.Q., Distefano B., Priest
E.L., Sinclair E., et al. Inflammation and exercise (INFLAME): Study
rationale, design, and methods. Contemp. Clin. Trials 2008; 29: 418-
427.
40. Church T.S., Earnest C.P., Thompson A.M., Priest E.L., Rodarte
R.Q., Saunders T., et al. Exercise without weight loss does not reduce
C-reactive protein: the INFLAME study. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2010;
42: 708-716.
41. Lammert O., Grunnet N., Faber P., Bjornsbo K.S., Dich J., Larsen
L.O., et al. Effects of isoenergetic overfeeding of either carbohydrate
or fat in young men. Br. J. Nutr. 2000; 84: 233-245.
42. Martin A., Normand S., Sothier M., Peyrat J., Louche-Pelissier
C., Laville M. Is advice for breakfast consumption justified? Results
from a short-term dietary and metabolic experiment in young healthy
men. Br. J. Nutr. 2000; 84: 337-344.
43. Sabate J., Cordero-Macintyre Z., Siapco G., Torabian S., Haddad
E. Does regular walnut consumption lead to weight gain? Br. J. Nutr.
2005; 94: 859-864.
44. Whybrow S., Harrison C.L., Mayer C., James Stubbs R. Effects of
added fruits and vegetables on dietary intakes and body weight in
Scottish adults. Br. J. Nutr. 2006; 95: 496-503.
45. Whybrow S., Mayer C., Kirk T.R., Mazlan N., Stubbs R.J. Effects
of two weeks' mandatory snack consumption on energy intake and energy
balance. Obesity 2007; 15: 673-685.
46. Sheridan M.J., Cooper J.N., Erario M., Cheifetz C.E. Pistachio
nut consumption and serum lipid levels. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2007; 26:
141-148.
47. Casas-Agustench P., Lopez-Uriarte P., Bullo M., Ros E., Cabre-
Vila J.J., Salas-Salvado J. Effects of one serving of mixed nuts on
serum lipids, insulin resistance and inflammatory markers in patients
with the metabolic syndrome. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2011; 21:
126-135.
48. Maersk M., Belza A., Stodkilde-Jorgensen H., Ringgaard S.,
Chabanova E., Thomsen H., et al. Sucrose-sweetened beverages increase
fat storage in the liver, muscle, and visceral fat depot: a 6-mo
randomized intervention study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012; 95: 283-289.

attachment 3
Myths, Presumptions, and Facts About Obesity *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* This article was updated on June 6, 2013, at NEJM.org.
N. Engl. J. Med. 2013;368:446-54.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMsa1208051.
Copyright

13 Massachusetts Medical Society.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Krista Casazza, Ph.D., R.D., Kevin R. Fontaine, Ph.D., Arne Astrup,
M.D., Ph.D., Leann L. Birch, Ph.D., Andrew W. Brown, Ph.D., Michelle M.
Bohan Brown, Ph.D., Nefertiti Durant, M.D., M.P.H., Gareth Dutton,
Ph.D., E. Michael Foster, Ph.D., Steven B. Heymsfield, M.D., Kerry
McIver, M.S., Tapan Mehta, M.S., Nir Menachemi, Ph.D., P.K. Newby,
Sc.D., M.P.H., Russell Pate, Ph.D., Barbara J. Rolls, Ph.D., Bisakha
Sen, Ph.D., Daniel L. Smith, Jr., Ph.D., Diana M. Thomas, Ph.D., and
David B. Allison, Ph.D.**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
** From the Departments of Nutrition Sciences (K.C., M.M.B.B.,
D.L.S., D.B.A.), Health Behavior (K.R.F.), Pediatrics (N.D.), Medicine
(G.D.), Health Care Organization and Policy (E.M.F., N.M., B.S.), and
Biostatistics (T.M., D.B.A.) and the School of Public Health, Office of
Energetics, Nutrition Obesity Research Center (A.W.B., D.B.A.),
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham; the OPUS Center and
the Department of Nutrition, Exercise, and Sports, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen (A.A.); the Departments of Development and
Family Studies (L.L.B.) and Nutritional Sciences (B.J.R.), Pennsylvania
State University, University Park; Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Baton Rouge, LA (S.B.H.); Children's Physical Activity Research
Group, Department of Exercise Science, Arnold School of Public Health,
University of South Carolina, Columbia (K.M., R.P.); the Departments of
Pediatrics and Epidemiology, Program in Graduate Medical Nutrition
Sciences, and Program in Gastronomy, Culinary Arts, and Wine Studies,
Boston University, Boston (P.K.N.); and the Center for Quantitative
Obesity Research, Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ (D.M.T.).
Address reprint requests to Dr. Allison at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Department of Biostatistics, Birmingham, AL 35294, or at

[emailprotected]
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract
Background
Many beliefs about obesity persist in the absence of
supporting scientific evidence (presumptions); some persist
despite contradicting evidence (myths). The promulgation of
unsupported beliefs may yield poorly informed policy decisions,
inaccurate clinical and public health recommendations, and an
unproductive allocation of research resources and may divert
attention away from useful, evidence-based information.
Methods
Using Internet searches of popular media and scientific
literature, we identified, reviewed, and classified obesity-
related myths and presumptions. We also examined facts that are
well supported by evidence, with an emphasis on those that have
practical implications for public health, policy, or clinical
recommendations.
Results
We identified seven obesity-related myths concerning the
effects of small sustained increases in energy intake or
expenditure, establishment of realistic goals for weight loss,
rapid weight loss, weight-loss readiness, physical-education
classes, breast-feeding, and energy expended during sexual
activity. We also identified six presumptions about the
purported effects of regularly eating breakfast, early
childhood experiences, eating fruits and vegetables, weight
cycling, snacking, and the built (i.e., human-made)
environment. Finally, we identified nine evidence-supported
facts that are relevant for the formulation of sound public
health, policy, or clinical recommendations.
Conclusions
False and scientifically unsupported beliefs about obesity
are pervasive in both scientific literature and the popular
press. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health.)

Passionate interests, the human tendency to seek explanations for
observed phenomena, and everyday experience appear to contribute to
strong convictions about obesity, despite the absence of supporting
data. When the public, mass media, government agencies, and even
academic scientists espouse unsupported beliefs, the result may be
ineffective policy, unhelpful or unsafe clinical and public health
recommendations, and an unproductive allocation of resources. In this
article, we review some common beliefs about obesity that are not
supported by scientific evidence and also provide some useful evidence-
based concepts. We define myths as beliefs held to be true despite
substantial refuting evidence, presumptions as beliefs held to be true
for which convincing evidence does not yet confirm or disprove their
truth, and facts as propositions backed by sufficient evidence to
consider them empirically proved for practical purposes.
When standards for evidence are considered, it is critical to
distinguish between drawing conclusions from scientific evidence and
making decisions about prudent actions. Stakeholders must sometimes
take action in the absence of strong scientific evidence. Yet this
principle of action should not be mistaken as justification for drawing
conclusions. Regardless of the urgency of public health issues,
scientific principles remain unchanged. We find the language of the
Federal Trade Commission to be apt: its standard for making claims is
``competent and reliable scientific evidence,'' defined as ``tests,
analyses, research, studies, or other evidence . . . conducted and
evaluated in an objective manner . . . using procedures generally
accepted . . . to yield accurate and reliable results.'' \1\
The scientific community recognizes that randomized experiments
offer the strongest evidence for drawing causal inferences.
Nevertheless, at least since the 1960s, when Sir Austin Bradford Hill
spearheaded the scientific activities that led to the acceptance of the
claim that smoking causes lung cancer and to his classic writing on
association and causation,\2\ the scientific community has acknowledged
that under some circumstances (i.e., when it is unethical or unfeasible
to conduct a randomized study and when observed associations are not
plausibly due to confounding), inferring causality in the absence of
data from randomized, controlled trials is necessary and appropriate.
However, the fact that the appropriateness of inferring causality holds
only under certain circumstances is sometimes discounted by those who
are eager to garner support for a proposal in the absence of strong
data from randomized studies.
Notably, the circumstances that justify drawing a conclusion of
causation from nonexperimental data are rarely met in clinical and
public proposals regarding obesity. It is possible to conduct
randomized studies of even the most sensitive and invasive obesity
procedures, as exemplified by recent articles in the Journal. Moreover,
observational associations germane to the causes, treatment, and
prevention of obesity are subject to substantial confounding, fraught
with measurement problems, and typically small and inconsistent.\3\
Such observational associations are often found to differ from those
later obtained by more rigorously designed studies.\4\ Hence, in the
present discussion, we generally conclude that a proposition has been
shown to be true only when it has been supported by confirmatory
randomized studies. References to published studies are used sparingly
herein, with a more comprehensive listing provided in the Supplementary
Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
Myths
We review seven myths about obesity, along with the refuting
evidence. Table 1 provides anecdotal support that the beliefs are
widely held or stated, in addition to reasons that support conjecture.

Table 1. Seven Myths about Obesity *
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Myth                         Basis of Conjecture
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Small sustained changes in energy  National health guidelines and
intake or expenditure will         reputable websites advertise that
produce large, long-term weight    large changes in weight accumulate
changes                            indefinitely after small sustained
daily lifestyle modifications (e.g.,
walking for 20 minutes or eating two
additional potato chips)
Setting realistic goals in         According to goal-setting theory,
obesity treatment is important     unattainable goals impair
because otherwise patients will    performance and discourage goal-
become frustrated and lose less    attaining behavior; in obesity
weight                             treatment, incongruence between
desired and actual weight loss is
thought to undermine the patient's
perceived ability to attain goals,
which may lead to the
discontinuation of behaviors
necessary for weight loss
Large, rapid weight loss is        This notion probably emerged in
associated with poorer long-term   reaction to the adverse effects of
weight outcomes than is slow,      nutritionally insufficient very-low-
gradual weight loss                calorie diets (
5-6
However, applying the 3,500-kcal rule to cases
in which small modifications are made for long periods violates the
assumptions of the original model, which were derived from short-term
experiments predominantly performed in men on very-low-energy diets
(
5, 7
Recent studies have shown that
individual variability affects changes in body composition in response
to changes in energy intake and expenditure,\7\ with analyses
predicting substantially smaller changes in weight (often by an order
of magnitude across extended periods) than the 3,500-kcal rule
does.
5, 7
For example, whereas the 3,500-kcal rule predicts
that a person who increases daily energy expenditure by 100 kcal by
walking 1 mile (1.6 km) per day will lose more than 50 lb (22.7 kg)
over a period of 5 years, the true weight loss is only about 10 lb (4.5
kg),\6\ assuming no compensatory increase in caloric intake, because
changes in mass concomitantly alter the energy requirements of the
body.
Setting Realistic Weight-Loss Goals
Myth number 2: Setting realistic goals for weight loss is
important, because otherwise patients will become frustrated and lose
less weight.
Although this is a reasonable hypothesis, empirical data indicate
no consistent negative association between ambitious goals and program
completion or weight loss.\8\ Indeed, several studies have shown that
more ambitious goals are sometimes associated with better weight-loss
outcomes (see the Supplementary Appendix).\8\ Furthermore, two studies
showed that interventions designed to improve weight-loss outcomes by
altering unrealistic goals resulted in more realistic weight-loss
expectations but did not improve outcomes.
Rate of Weight Loss
Myth number 3: Large, rapid weight loss is associated with poorer
long-term weight-loss outcomes, as compared with slow, gradual weight
loss.
Within weight-loss trials, more rapid and greater initial weight
loss has been associated with lower body weight at the end of long-term
follow-up.
9-10
A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled
trials that compared rapid weight loss (achieved with very-low-energy
diets) with slower weight loss (achieved with low-energy diets--i.e.,
800 to 1200 kcal per day) at the end of short-term follow-up (
37-38
When media coverage about obesity is
extensive, many people appear to believe some myths (e.g., rapid weight
loss facilitates weight regain) simply because of repeated exposure to
the claims.\39\ Cognitive dissonance may prevent us from abandoning
ideas that are important to us, despite contradictory evidence (e.g.,
the idea that breast-feeding prevents obesity in children). Similarly,
confirmation bias may prevent us from seeking data that might refute
propositions we have already intuitively accepted as true because they
seem obvious (e.g., the value of realistic weight-loss goals).
Moreover, we may be swayed by persuasive yet fallacious arguments
(Whately provides a classic catalogue) \40\ unless we are prepared to
identify them as spurious.
Fortunately, the scientific method and logical thinking offer ways
to detect erroneous statements, acknowledge our uncertainty, and
increase our knowledge. When presented with an alleged truth, we can
pause to ask simple questions, such as, ``How could someone actually
know that?'' Such a simple question allows one to easily recognize some
beliefs as spurious (e.g., 300 kcal is burned during sexual
intercourse). Moreover, we often settle for data generated with the use
of inadequate methods in situations in which inferentially stronger
study designs, including quasi-experiments and true randomized
experiments, are possible, as recently illustrated (see the
Supplementary Appendix). In addition, eliminating the distortions of
scientific information that sometimes occur with public health advocacy
would reduce the propagation of misinformation.
The myths and presumptions about obesity that we have discussed are
just a sampling of the numerous unsupported beliefs held by many
people, including academics, regulators, and journalists, as well as
the general public. Yet there are facts about obesity of which we may
be reasonably certain--facts that are useful today. While we work to
generate additional useful knowledge, we may in some cases justifiably
move forward with hypothesized, but not proved, strategies. However, as
a scientific community, we must always be open and honest with the
public about the state of our knowledge and should rigorously evaluate
unproved strategies.

The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes
of Health.
Supported in part by a grant (P30DK056336) from the National
Institutes of Health.
Dr. Astrup reports receiving payment for board membership from the
Global Dairy Platform, Kraft Foods, Knowledge Institute for Beer,
McDonald's Global Advisory Council, Arena Pharmaceuticals, Basic
Research, Novo Nordisk, Pathway Genomics, Jenny Craig, and Vivus;
receiving lecture fees from the Global Dairy Platform, Novo Nordisk,
Danish Brewers Association, GlaxoSmithKline, Danish Dairy Association,
International Dairy Foundation, European Dairy Foundation, and
AstraZeneca; owning stock in Mobile Fitness; holding patents regarding
the use of flaxseed mucilage or its active component for suppression of
hunger and reduction of prospective consumption (patents EP1744772,
WO2009033483-A1, EP2190303-A1, US2010261661-A1, and priority
applications DK001319, DK001320, S971798P, and US971827P); holding
patents regarding the use of an alginate for the preparation of an
aqueous dietary product for the treatment or prevention of overweight
and obesity (patent WO2011063809-A1 and priority application DK070227);
and holding a patent regarding a method for regulating energy balance
for body-weight management (patent WO2007062663-A1 and priority
application DK001710). Drs. Brown and Bohan Brown report receiving
grant support from the Coca-Cola Foundation through their institution.
Dr. Mehta reports receiving grant support from Kraft Foods. Dr. Newby
reports receiving grant support from General Mills Bell Institute of
Health and Nutrition. Dr. Pate reports receiving consulting fees from
Kraft Foods. Dr. Rolls reports having a licensing agreement for the
Volumetrics trademark with Jenny Craig. Dr. Thomas reports receiving
consulting fees from Jenny Craig. Dr. Allison reports serving as an
unpaid board member for the International Life Sciences Institute of
North America; receiving payment for board membership from Kraft Foods;
receiving consulting fees from Vivus, Ulmer and Berne, Paul, Weiss,
Rifkind, Wharton, Garrison, Chandler Chicco, Arena Pharmaceuticals,
Pfizer, National Cattlemen's Association, Mead Johnson Nutrition,
Frontiers Foundation, Orexigen Therapeutics, and Jason Pharmaceuticals;
receiving lecture fees from Porter Novelli and the Almond Board of
California; receiving payment for manuscript preparation from Vivus;
receiving travel reimbursement from International Life Sciences
Institute of North America; receiving other support from the United
Soybean Board and the Northarvest Bean Growers Association; receiving
grant support through his institution from Wrigley, Kraft Foods, Coca-
Cola, Vivus, Jason Pharmaceuticals, Aetna Foundation, and McNeil
Nutritionals; and receiving other funding through his institution from
the Coca-Cola Foundation, Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Red Bull, World Sugar
Research Organisation, Archer Daniels Midland, Mars, Eli Lilly and
Company, and Merck. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full
text of this article at NEJM.org.
We thank Drs. Kyle Grimes and S. Louis Bridges for their suggestions
on an earlier version of the manuscript.

References

1. Federal Trade Commission. Dietary supplements: an advertising
guide for industry. April 2001 (http://business.ftc.gov/documents/bus09-
dietary-supplementsadvertising-guide-industry#endnotes).
2. Hill A.B. The environment and disease: association or causation?
Proc. R. Soc. Med. 1965; 58: 295-300.
3. Taubes G. Epidemiology faces its limits. Science 1995; 269: 164-
9.
4. Fairman K.A. Why hypotheses informed by observation are often
wrong: results of randomized controlled trials challenge chronic
disease management strategies based on epidemiological evidence. J.
Manag. Care. Pharm. 2011; 17: 224-31.
5. Hall K.D. Predicting metabolic adaptation, body weight change,
and energy intake in humans. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2010;
298: E449-66.
6. Thomas D.M., Martin C.K., Heymsfield S., Redmon L.M., Schoeller
D.A., Levine J.A. A simple model predicting individual weight change in
humans. J. Biol. Dyn. 2011; 5: 579-99.
7. Thomas D.M., Schoeller D.A., Redman L.A., Martin C.K., Levine
J.A., Heymsfield S.B. A computational model to determine energy intake
during weight loss. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010; 92: 1326-31.
8. Linde J.A., Jeffery R.W., Levy R.L., Pronk N.P., Boyle R.G.
Weight loss goals and treatment outcomes among overweight men and women
enrolled in a weight loss trial. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2005; 29: 1002-5.
9. Astrup A., Rossner S. Lessons from obesity management programmes:
greater initial weight loss improves long-term maintenance. Obes. Rev.
2000; 1: 17-9.
10. Nackers L.M., Ross K.M., Perri M.G. The association between rate
of initial weight loss and long-term success in obesity treatment: does
slow and steady win the race? Int. J. Behav. Med. 2010; 17: 161-7.
11. Fontaine K.R., Wiersema L. Dieting readiness test fails to
predict enrollment in a weight loss program. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 1999;
99 :664.
12. Kriemler S., Zahner L., Schindler C., et al. Effect of school
based physical activity programme (KISS) on fitness and adiposity in
primary schoolchildren: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2010;
340: c785.
13. Dobbins M., De Corby K., Robeson P., Husson H., Tirilis D.
School-based physical activity programs for promoting physical activity
and fitness in children and adolescents aged 6-18. Cochrane Database
Syst. Rev. 2009; 1: CD007651.
14. Horta B.L., Bahl R., Martines J.C., Victora C.G. Evidence of the
long-term effects of breastfeeding: systematic reviews and meta-
analyses. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2007.
15. Casazza K., Fernandez J.R., Allison D.B. Modest protective
effects of breast-feeding on obesity: is the evidence truly supportive?
Nutr. Today 2012; 47: 33-8.
16. Kramer M.S., Matush L., Vanilovich I., et al. Effects of
prolonged and exclusive breastfeeding on child height, weight,
adiposity, and blood pressure at age 6.5 y: evidence from a large
randomized trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007; 86: 1717-21.
17. Gillman M.W. Breastfeeding and obesity--the 2011 scorecard. Int.
J. Epidemiol. 2011; 40: 681-4.
18. Jette M., Sidney K., Blumchen G. Metabolic equivalents (METS) in
exercise testing, exercise prescription, and evaluation of functional
capacity. Clin. Cardiol. 1990; 13: 555-65.
19. Bohlen J.G., Held J.P., Sanderson M.O., Patterson R.P. Heart
rate, rate-pressure product, and oxygen uptake during four sexual
activities. Arch. Intern. Med. 1984; 144: 1745-8.
20. Schlundt D.G., Hill J.O., Sbrocco T., Pope-Cordle J., Sharp T.
The role of breakfast in the treatment of obesity: a randomized
clinical trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1992; 55: 645-51.
21. Brisbois T.D., Farmer A.P., McCargar L.J. Early markers of adult
obesity: a review. Obes. Rev. 2012; 13: 347-67.
22. Rolls B.J., Ello-Martin J.A., Tohill B.C. What can intervention
studies tell us about the relationship between fruit and vegetable
consumption and weight management? Nutr. Rev. 2004; 62: 1-17.
23. Vasselli J.R., Weindruch R., Heymsfield S.B., et al. Intentional
weight loss reduces mortality rate in a rodent model of dietary
obesity. Obes. Res. 2005; 13: 693-702.
24. Whybrow S., Mayer C., Kirk T.R., Mazlan N., Stubbs R.J. Effects
of two weeks' mandatory snack consumption on energy intake and energy
balance. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2007; 15: 673-85.
25. Ferdinand A., Sen B., Rahurkar S., Engler S., Menachemi N. The
relationship between built environments and physical activity: a
systematic review. Am. J. Public Health 2012; 102(10): e7-e13.
26. Hewitt J.K. The genetics of obesity: what have genetic studies
told us about the environment. Behav. Genet. 1997; 27: 353-8.
27. Heymsfield S.B. Energy intake: reduced as prescribed? Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2011; 94: 3-4.
28. Carroll S., Dudfield M. What is the relationship between
exercise and metabolic abnormalities? A review of the metabolic
syndrome. Sports Med. 2004; 34: 371-418.
29. Wu T., Gao X., Chen M, van Dam R.M. Long-term effectiveness of
diet-plus-exercise interventions vs. diet-only interventions for weight
loss: a meta-analysis. Obes. Rev. 2009; 10: 313-23.
30. Middleton K.M., Patidar S.M., Perri M.G. The impact of extended
care on the long-term maintenance of weight loss: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Obes. Rev. 2012; 13: 509-17.
31. McLean N., Griffin S., Toney K., Hardeman W. Family involvement
in weight control, weight maintenance and weightloss interventions: a
systematic review of randomised trials. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab.
Disord. 2003; 27: 987-1005.
32. Wing R.R., Jeffery R.W. Food provision as a strategy to promote
weight loss. Obes. Res. 2001; 9: Suppl. 4: 271S-275S.
33. Wright S.M., Aronne L.J. Obesity in 2010: the future of obesity
medicine: where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2011; 7: 69-
70.
34. Sjostrom L., Lindroos A.-K., Peltonen M., et al. Lifestyle,
diabetes, and cardiovascular risk factors 10 years after bariatric
surgery. N. Engl. J. Med. 2004; 351: 2683-93.
35. Hill J.O., Wyatt H.R., Peters J.C. Energy balance and obesity.
Circulation 2012; 126: 126-32.
36. Hall K.D., Heymsfield S.B., Kemnitz J.W., Klein S., Schoeller
D.A., Speakman J.R. Energy balance and its components: implications for
body weight regulation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012; 95: 989-94.
37. Lilienfeld S.O., Ammirti R., Landfield K. Giving debiasing away:
can psychological research on correcting cognitive errors promote human
welfare? Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 2007; 4: 390-8.
38. Shermer M. Why people believe weird things: pseudoscience,
superstition, and other confusions of our time. 3rd ed. London:
Souvenir Press, 2007.
39. Kahneman D. Thinking fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2011.
40. Whately R. Elements of logic. 9th ed. London: Longman, Greens,
1875.

Copyright 13 Massachusetts Medical Society.

attachment 4
Goals in Nutrition Science 2015-2020 *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Edited by: Steven H. Zeisel, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, USA; Reviewed by: Naima Moustaid-Moussa, Texas Tech
University, USA Patrick John Stover, Cornell University, USA; Received:
26 May 2015; Accepted: 14 August 2015; Published: 08 September 2015.
Citation: Allison D.B., Bassaganya-Riera J., Burlingame B., Brown
A.W., le Coutre J., Dickson S.L., van Eden W., Garssen J., Hontecillas
R., Khoo C.S.H., Knorr D., Kussmann M., Magistretti P.J., Mehta T.,
Meule A., Rychlik M., and Vogele C. (2015) Goals in nutrition science
2015-2020. Front. Nutr. 2:26. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2015.00026
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
David B. Allison,
[1-4]
Josep Bassaganya-Riera,
[5]

Barbara Burlingame,
[6-7]
Andrew W. Brown,
[1]

Johannes le Coutre,
[8-10, *]
Suzanne L.
Dickson,
[11]
Willem van Eden,
[12]
Johan
Garssen,
[13]
Raquel Hontecillas,
[5]
Chor San H.
Khoo,
[14]
Dietrich Knorr,
[15]
Martin
Kussmann,
[10, 16]
Pierre J. Magistretti,
[17-18]

Tapan Mehta,
[19]
Adrian Meule,
[20]
Michael
Rychlik,
[21]
and Claus Vogele
[22]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Office of Energetics and Nutrition Obesity Research Center,
School of Public Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA,
[2]
Section on Statistical Genetics,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA,

[3]
Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA,
[4]
Department of
Biostatistics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
USA,
[5]
Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine
Laboratory, Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA,
[6]
Deakin University, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia,
[7]
American University of Rome, Rome, Italy,

[8]
Nestle Research Center, Lausanne, Switzerland,

[9]
Organization for Interdisciplinary Research Projects,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan,
[10]
Ecole
Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,

[11]
Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The
Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden,
[12]
Department of Infectious Diseases and
Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, Netherlands,
[13]
Faculty of Science, Utrecht
Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
Netherlands,
[14]
North American Branch of International
Life Sciences Institute, Washington, D.C., USA, 15 Technische
Universitat Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
[16]
Nestle Institute
of Health Sciences SA, Lausanne, Switzerland,
[17]
Division
of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia,

[18]
Laboratory of Neuroenergetics and Cellular Dynamics,
Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,
[19]
Department of Health Services
Administration, Nutrition Obesity Research Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA,
[20]
Department
of Psychology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria,

[21]
Analytical Food Chemistry, Technische Universitat
Munchen, Freising, Germany,
[22]
Research Unit INSIDE,
Institute for Health and Behaviour, University of Luxembourg,
Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
* Correspondence: Johannes le Coutre

[emailprotected]
,
[emailprotected]
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With the definition of goals in Nutrition Science, we are
taking a brave step and a leap of faith with regard to
predicting the scope and direction of nutrition science over
the next 5 years. The content of this editorial has been
discussed, refined, and evaluated with great care by the
Frontiers in Nutrition editorial board. We feel the topics
described represent the key opportunities, but also the biggest
challenges in our field. We took a clean-slate, bottom-up
approach to identify and address these topics and present them
in eight categories. For each category, the authors listed take
responsibility, and deliberately therefore this document is a
collection of thoughts from active minds, rather than a
complete integration or consensus.
At Frontiers in Nutrition, we are excited to develop and
share a platform for this discussion. Healthy Nutrition for
all--an ambition too important to be handled by
detachedinterest groups.
Johannes le Coutre, Field Chief Editor, Frontiers in Nutrition.
Sustainable Development Goals for Food and Nutrition
(Barbara Burlingame, Chor San H. Khoo, and Dietrich Knorr)

To deliver successfully, nutrition research needs a bold dose of
innovation. Moving forward from the Millennium Development Goals to the
post-2015 sustainable development goals (SDG), global nutrition appears
to require an improved model. Under current practices, feeding the
exploding world population necessitates to close a gap of nearly 70%
between the amount of food available today and the projected
availability by 2050.
(1)
Today, globally, an estimated 805
million people are undernourished or food-insecure,
(2)
yet 1
out of 4 calories from food goes uneaten. Meanwhile, overweight and
obesity affect approximately two billion people, including 42 million
children under the age of 5. Human health notwithstanding environmental
health is also at stake. Agriculture alone accounts for about 70% of
our global water usage and 24% of our greenhouse gas emissions. As a
result, our strategies to overcome issues of food sustainability, food
waste, and food loss must be multifarious and include, at the very
least: (i) Improving the global consumption of food. (ii) Increasing
production efficiencies on existing agricultural land. (iii) Developing
sustainable approaches that reduce the environmental impact of food
production, and in particular greenhouse gas emissions. Certainly, the
impact of agriculture on climate, ecosystems, and water will have to be
reduced, while at the same time, we will need to ensure that it
supports inclusive economic and social development.
(1)

Systems science, the interdisciplinary field that explores the
nature of complex systems, is perhaps the best research model we have
for addressing the urgent needs of a precariously unhealthy planet. For
better or for worse, nutrition imparts a quintessential challenge,
straddling many sectors and disciplines.
In the past, at times, the agenda for mainstream nutrition has been
pushing sectoral lines of reasoning by implementing policies that leave
long-standing problems unresolved, while disrupting other sectors in
the process. Of course, nutrition is not alone in this, but the history
of unintended consequence is long and discouraging.
(3-4)

Agriculture and health have been the mainstay sectors at the United
Nations level, in government ministries, and in academic departments.
Increasingly, nutrition is being recognized as an important pillar for
the environmental sector, with biodiversity for food and nutrition
acknowledged by the Convention on Biological Diversity,
(5)

and the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
accepting whole diets, food, and nutrients for human nutrition as
ecosystem services.
(6)

For all their embracing of nutrition, these sectors often work at
cross-purposes, providing many useful illustrations of policies and
programs that undermine each other's development efforts. We have
policies and interventions in agriculture that contribute to diet-
related chronic disease, environmental degradation, and food
insecurity;
(4, 7)
conversely, in the health sector we have
policies and interventions that compromise agricultural
development;
(8)
and in the environmental sector that lead to
micronutrient malnutrition.
(9)
Agriculture in particular,
while solving some of its own sector problems, has been associated with
many of the environmental and human health crises we now face, which
directly impact upon nutrition, including chemical contamination of
food supplies, loss of agrobiodiversity, and severe environmental
degradation.
(10)

In spite of the clear need to develop innovation for the future,
``systematic attempts to explore existing methods and to develop new
technologies of more sustainable food production systems have so far
been scarce''.
(11)
Although this quote is from over 30 years
ago, it still quite accurately describes the current situation
regarding activities related to sustainable diets and sustainable food
systems. A sustainable development lens with a systems science approach
offers not only a new analytical model for nutrition, but also an
ethical and inclusive framework. Within this framework, nutrition
encompasses more than its traditional domains and takes on issues of
climate change,
(12)
biodiversity and
ecosystems,
(13)
water use/waste,
(14)
food losses
and waste,
(15-16)
sustainable forests and
seas,
(17)
chemical contamination of food and water
supplies,
(18)
environmental regulatory issues and food law,
risk and risk/benefit assessments,
(19)
and monitoring
adherence to and compliance with a range of relevant treaties and
signed declarations/commitments.
(13)

With this mindset of sensitive, cross-sectoral resolve, tangible
and specific solutions will envisage a holistic food chain integration
taking into account a total life cycle assessment. Food and nutrition
security must be an intrinsic component of any solution for food
sustainability. Forthcoming strategies will also have to explore the
potential and utilization of new raw materials.
Improvements of food safety, storage, packaging, and
transportation--including the use of sensor technologies--can reduce
food losses and waste. Innovation will have to equally encompass the
re-evaluation of existing food processing, storage, and home
preparation operations employing existing modern toolboxes. Moreover,
low energy, waste-free or waste-reduced processing, and preparation
operations need to be implemented to a larger extent, including
alternative energy sources. In the same context, water decontamination,
recycling, and preservation tools need to be applied.
Unintended consequences must be considered with any sustainability
program and global solutions are not necessarily applicable in local
contexts. For example, reducing livestock production and consumption in
one setting may benefit both human and environmental health, while in
another setting it may reduce further already marginal intakes of high-
quality protein and micronutrients and marginalize grazing lands that
are self-renewing, sustainable repositories of biodiversity. Finally,
young engineers and scientists need to be encouraged, trained, and
involved to tackle the challenges of the future.
We have a planet in crisis on so many fronts. Regardless of how the
SDGs evolve, this multi-sectoral vision of nutrition research and
action has the potential to make meaningful, and sustainable,
contributions.
Identifying and Mitigating Errors in Nutritional Science
(David B. Allison, Andrew W. Brown, and Tapan Mehta)

``Science,'' as Adam Smith famously said, ``is the great antidote
to the poison of enthusiasm and superstition''.
(20)

Complementarily, Stephen Hawking has called scientists, ``the bearers
of the torch of discovery in our quest for knowledge''.
(21)

Thus, science can be seen as having two key complementary roles--
dispelling false beliefs, and creating new knowledge. For science to
fulfill this joint mission, its practice must be true to its principles
and precepts, including objectivity, methodological rigor,
transparency, and reproducibility. Yet, there are concerns that
departures from these precepts are too common.
(22-28)
Some
have speculated that deviations from good scientific practices have
increased in recent years due to a number of social, institutional, and
economic factors in science.
(25, 29)
Others have speculated
that the problem may be especially severe in the related domains of
nutrition research and obesity research, perhaps because of emotional,
economic, and other factors involved in those topics or because the
everyday familiarity with aspects of those topics is mistaken for
expertise.
(23, 26-28)
It is difficult to quantify whether
the situation is better or worse today than in the past, or whether
this is especially true in nutrition and obesity research compared to
other fields. Nevertheless, it is clear that the problem exists.

Table 1: Common Errors Noted in the Published Literature a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Error                         Example(s) of error
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Errors involving or resulting
Self-reported energy intake
from poor measurement              (33, 118, 119)b (34) c (32) d

Self-reported weights (120)
b (121, 122) d
Errors involving inappropriate
Cluster randomized trials
choice of or incorrect study       with no degrees of freedom (123) c
design
Lack of control for non-
specific factors, i.e., failure to
isolate the independent variable of
interest (124) c

Non-random assignment in
self-described RCTs (125) b
Errors involving replication
Not validating prediction
models in fresh samples (126) d

Gratuitous replication (35)
d
Errors in statistical analyses
Inappropriate baseline
testing in parallel groups RCTs
(127) c (128) d

Failure to appropriately
manage missing data (129) c (130,
131) d

Not accounting for
clustering in cluster randomized
trials (132, 133) b (134, 135) c
(136) d
Errors involving insufficient
Changing endpoints in a
transparency in choices made       study (137) b (138) d
about how to analyze and present
Excessive or unacknowledged
the data                           multiple testing [called p-
hacking,(139) d investigator degrees
of freedom,(140) d or p-value
fiddling,(141) d among other names]
(142) c (143) b
Errors of misleadingly describing
Selectively citing only the
past literature                    part of a study that supports a
hypothesis (35) d

Perpetuating citations from
previous researchwithout confirming
the original source (144) b
Errors that distort the
Publication bias (145) b
scientific record by publishing    (23, 146) d
studies as a function of study
outcomes
Errors of interpretation or
Inappropriate use of causal
communication                      language (24, 35) d

Exaggerating or mis-
describing results (35) d

Highlighting benefits of
treatment when the effects were non-
significant (i.e., spin) (147) d

Issuing misleading press-
releases (148) d
Errors of logic and mathematics
Unreasonable linear
extrapolations (e.g., 3,500 kcal
rule) (149 150) b
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a Errors, examples, and references were identified in a manner neither
systematic nor comprehensive.
b Denotes references correcting or commenting on specific errors.
c references in which the error in question occurred.
d Denotes references that provide tutorials on avoiding or overviews of
the errors.

Several initiatives are going to be important in the coming years
to improve nutrition as a science. First is classifying errors that
exist in the nutrition literature. Just as Mendeleev's Periodic Table
of the Elements led to increased understanding of chemistry and
Linnaeus' taxonomy of life led to a framework for the study of biology,
if we can develop a ``pathology'' or classification of these errors, we
may be better able to quantify the situation, identify patterns,
develop an understanding of origins, and ultimately reduce the
occurrence and severity of these errors. In our non-systematic study of
these issues, we see a number of categories of common errors (Table 1).
We refer to them as errors without making any inference that they are
intentional or unintentional errors.
Second, there is a general movement in science for ``Transparency
and Openness Promotion,'' formalized in ``The TOP
Guidelines''.
(30)
The guidelines recognize eight standards:
citation, data transparency, analytic methods (code) transparency,
research materials transparency, design and analysis transparency,
preregistration of studies, preregistration of analysis plans, and
replication. These standards aim to improve the communication of
science, allowing improved understanding and replicability of results.
Because the TOP Guidelines are being adopted across fields of science,
the field of nutrition will not have to act in isolation to improve its
scientific practices. Instead, we can build on and work with the minds
and resources coming from a spectrum of scientific inquiry. Indeed,
Frontiers in Nutrition was one of the initial signatories.
Third, there is a need to develop sound methodology for evaluating
nutrition and diet in free-living research participants. Issues are
continually documented with self-report diet
methodology,
(31-33)
and yet dietary recommendations depend
heavily on dietary recall data.
(34)
Similarly, although
existing nutrition-related health hypotheses can be investigated using
randomized controlled trials (pragmatic or explanatory), the field
often relies on ordinary association tests using observational data to
quantify evidence
(35-36)
that policy-makers may then use to
create policies or guidelines. The needs here are twofold: to develop
and implement study designs that lie in the causality spectrum between
ordinary association tests and randomized controlled trials

(37-38)
and to develop objective, reliable data on dietary
patterns and nutrient status.
(31-33)

We believe that by recognizing and acknowledging these problems, we
also recognize and acknowledge that our field can do better. This will
pave the way toward constructive efforts to reduce such problems and to
ultimately improve the scientific foundations of nutrition science.
Building the Foundation: Procurement of Relevant Measures and Big Data
Analysis
(Martin Kussmann, Josep Bassaganya-Riera, Raquel Hontecillas, Tapan
Mehta, and Chor San H. Khoo)

Diet is considered a key environmental factor for maintaining
health and preventing disease. As such, we need to better understand
the interactions of nutrition and lifestyle with an individual's
genetic makeup in order to delay or prevent metabolic and cognitive
decline. Nutrition science is therefore undergoing a paradigm shift to
better leverage the potential of nutrigenomics, a discipline that is
already transforming the field.
(39)
To achieve this, the
field will need to transform its current approach to research and
implementation actions, and to take advantage of emerging advances in
other disciplines--research designs, methods, new technologies, big
data analysis, and bioinformation sharing.
The conceptual basis of gene--environmental interactions require
not only research and technology, but also the cross-fertilization of
disciplines: genomics will encompass other-omics, and nutrition
research will need to take on a holistic or system biology approach
rather than just nutrients, ingredients, or genes. Nutrition science
now encompasses more than the classic reductionist and descriptive
approaches to more quantitative and systems-level
approaches.
(40)
Translational research to maintain health
and prevent or delay disease onset requires a transdisciplinary
approach that embraces the complexity of human individuality in a
rapidly changing environment. Nutrigenomics fuels this research by
investigating how genomic and epigenomic individuality predisposes
dietary, health, and disease responses. It also influences how an
individual's genome expresses itself at different omic levels
(proteomics, metabolomics, lipidomics) in response to environmental
factors, including nutrition. Molecular phenotyping of humans over time
and across healthy and safe exposures and challenges have thus been
proposed.
(41)

Both the ongoing prevalence of malnutrition and the increasing
incidence of nutrition- and lifestyle-related chronic diseases require
comprehensive characterization of the complex interactions between
environment and genetic makeup. Systems thinking in human nutrition,
environment, and health requires improvement and translational thinking
in three areas:

(a)  In vitro and in vivo models: a systems approach to human health
implies rethinking of in vitro and in vivo models with
regard to their translatability into human phenotypes:
natural human cell models and panels of rodent strains
should complement cancer cell lines and single rodent
strains.

(b)  Human intervention study designs: classical case/control designs
of human clinical/nutritional intervention studies should
be complemented by longitudinal crossover studies, in which
every subject is one's own case and control. Human clinical
study subjects should not only be assessed at homeostasis,
but also during a challenge to, and restoration of,
homeostasis.

(c)  Tools for molecular phenotyping and capturing of human diet and
lifestyle: nutrigenomic studies have typically been
technology-driven rather than technology-rooted. Normative
science methods and approaches need to be complemented by
more comprehensive systems biology-based investigations
deploying a multitude of omic platforms in an integrated
fashion.
(41)
While comprehensive and
quantitative omics are rapidly progressing in terms of data
generation, quantitative capture and monitoring of diet and
lifestyle have lagged behind. Non-invasive technologies are
now providing more attractive and precise image- and
webbased or body-wearable consumer/research
interfaces.
(42)
The bottleneck in knowledge
generation has moved from (omics and clinical) data
acquisition to processing, visualization, and
interpretation. Innovative tools and methods for
statistical treatment and biological network analysis are
now at the forefront of nutritional and biomedical
sciences.
(43)

To achieve this transformation and advancement of nutritional
science, it is critical to connect researchers from all disciplines
conducting direct or indirect research in the areas, e.g., (gen) omics,
clinicals, dietetics, food science and technology, physiology,
epidemiology, bioengineering, analytics, biomathematics. A
transdisciplinary approach needs to be considered--enabling a spectrum
of communicating and sharing from fundamental laboratory research,
patient- and consumer-relevant outputs from personalized dietary/
nutritional counseling to monitoring/diagnostics. Progress in advancing
nutrigenomic interventions for consumers and patients can only be
accelerated if nutrition research is broadened to include quantitative,
holistic, and molecular sciences.
(44)

``Let the food be your medicine, and medicine be your food,'' a
statement attributed to Hippocrates, the father of Western Medicine,
delineates the impact of nutrition in human health and disease. Indeed,
several decades of research at the interface of nutrition and
immunology demonstrate that infectious, immune-mediated and metabolic
diseases are safely and effectively preventable through dietary
interventions. Nonetheless, there is a major disconnect between the
description of nutrition-based protection from disease and an
insufficient mechanistic understanding at the systems-level of the
complex network interactions by which nutrition mediates clinical
protection. As a result, a comprehensive understanding of the
mechanisms of action underlying the actions of nutritional
interventions and the combinatorial effects of nutrients (i.e.,
synergistic, antagonistic, or additive) at the systems-level remains
largely unknown. As about 70% of the immune system is located in the
gastrointestinal tract since the gut mucosa houses the largest
repertoire of immune cells and commensal microbiota that symbiotically
coexist to elicit protective immunity, studying nutritional immunology
of the gut mucosa is incredibly important.
(45)
Coupling
host-nutrient-microbiota actions, enabled through computational
modeling of the gastrointestinal tract
(46-50)
with systems
immunology frameworks has the potential to predict combinatorial
outcomes of nutrient-microbiota-immune system interactions and advance
toward a comprehensive systems-level mechanistic understanding of how
nutrition and foods prevent disease. Computational models of
nutritional immunology that funnel omics and cellular data judiciously,
coupled with systems biology models of the underlying disease/organ,
will bridge the connection between traditional methods of nutritional
immunology research and their effect on the whole organism, which will
enhance mechanistic insights and translational value. Over 163
nutrition themed systems biology markup language models (SBML) are
already available in the Biomodels database.
(51)
In summary,
applying the iterative systems biology cycle of model building,
calibration, refinement, and validation in nutritional immunology
research has the potential to accelerate the discovery of novel network
biomarkers and systems-level mechanistic understanding of the action of
dietary components on immuneresponses.
There has been an explosion in data collection and aggregation,
some of which can be used for public health purposes, including obesity
and nutrition-related research. Consequently, ample opportunities
emerge to utilize ``big data'' in the pursuit of interesting outcomes
and effectiveness studies related to nutrition and obesity using
techniques such as quasi-experimental approaches. These approaches,
when assumptions are satisfied, are intermediate between ordinary
association tests and randomized controlled trials
(37)
in
terms of presenting evidence for causality. In this article, the term
``big data,'' which is often used subjectively, refers to very large
amounts of data: structured and unstructured that may also increase
over time rapidly.
(52)
These types of data are collected by
both the public and private sectors and increasingly require a
distributed architecture to manage them efficiently. Big data analysis
has generally referred to the confluence of statistical, machine
learning and computational approaches to synthesize and analyze these
large amounts of data. Administrative data, such as micro-level data
aggregated by governments as well as private companies, can be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of pharmacological and surgical
interventions. In fact, private companies have started collecting
unprecedented amounts of data with some companies specializing in data
linkages. For example, companies such as Optum not only aggregate
claims data from private insurance companies but are able to provide
linked clinical data from the corresponding electronic health records
(EHR). Data linkages are an extremely powerful tool since they allow
researchers to answer questions that are otherwise not accessible using
a single data source. For example, claims data do not provide
information about the height and weight of an individual, but the
linked clinical data do. Similarly, the increasing availability of EHR
data and the initiatives to link these EHR data with genomic data can
enable us to pursue a variety of studies, including pharmacogenetic and
precision medicine studies. One of the challenges in accessing and
leveraging ``big data'' is the resources, including the associated cost
of purchasing the data, especially from private companies.
Collaborations between industry and academic researchers are essential
to fully exploit the data and to overcome logistical
challenges.
(53-54)

So far, big data analysis has primarily focused on high-dimensional
prediction models. The data mining and statistical toolkit for such
approaches includes, but is not limited to, techniques such as
boosting, random forests, classification and regression trees, and
lasso-like penalized regression models.
(53)
While randomized
control trials are considered gold standards, there are a variety of
methods and designs that may allow us to generate evidence that may lie
in the spectrum between purely association and definitively causal.
Coupled with ``big data'' is an opportunity to estimate a degree of
causality using techniques such as high-dimensional propensity score
and differential comparison approaches to provide evidence that is
indicative of causality.
(55-56)
There is also a potential to
use instrument variable approaches, used commonly in health policy
studies, by identifying appropriate instruments from ``big data.''
Recent attempts to develop methods that enable to provide a degree of
causal evidence are very encouraging and can allow us to maximize the
potential of ``big data''.
(57-58)

Authenticity and Safety of Foods
(Michael Rychlik)

The authenticity of food is generally related to one or more of the
following attributes: geographic origin, type of agricultural
production, species and kind of raw materials, or certain process
qualities such as sustainability or ecological foot print.
Regularly uncovered crises of food adulteration underline the
sensitivity of consumers to this issue. Apart from meat, foods that are
often adulterated are olive oil, fish, organic foods, spices, tea,
cocoa, coffee, and nuts.
In recent years, there has been tremendous progress in high-
resolution methods to elucidate the molecular fingerprint of food. On
the genetic scale, apart from classical polymerase chain reaction, new
developments of isothermal amplifications or next generation sequencing
will enable more accurate identification of species.
On the protein level, specific biomarker peptides can be used. For
a fingerprint of metabolites, the new methods of non-targeted and
targeted metabolomics already allow a specific authentication. In this
field, the methods currently showing the best resolution are Fourier
transform ion cyclotron mass spectrometry (FT/ICR-MS) or nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
(59)
These new
methodologies generate ``big data,'' from which the relevant
information is only accessible when applying novel bioinformatics
approaches.
Regarding food safety, microbiological decay and foodborne
infections still play an important role. However, contaminants also
endanger the safety of all links in the whole food chain. The recent
discoveries of process contaminants encompass simple molecules, such as
acrylamide, furan, benzene, styrene, as well as more complex compounds
such as 3-monochloropropane-1,2-diol (MCPD) esters. An end of new
discoveries cannot be foreseen yet and we may assume that the sum of
all these contaminants has a significant impact on life-style diseases
such as cancer. Further new contaminants arise from packaging materials
such as mineral oil saturated hydrocarbons (MOSH) or mineral oil
aromatic hydrocarbons (MOAH), and pollutants from the environment such
as the polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS). Moreover, the historic
toxin arsenic is more relevant than ever as rice and rice products are
often contaminated and the mechanisms of arsenic carcinogenicity are
still under controversial discussion.
Generally, risk assessment of food contaminants or residues is
predominantly performed on single compounds. However, almost completely
missing is an assessment of the combined effects of toxins, be it
within one group of compounds or spanning various structural groups.
The current concept for assessing combinatorial effects is that of
cumulative assessment groups (CAGs), which, e.g., assess the cumulative
potency corrected dose of acute reference doses (ARfD) for pesticides
showing the same mode of toxic action.
(60)
However, this
approach is still preliminary and lacks comprehensive confirmation.
The Science Behind Food-Related Behavior in Humans
(Adrian Meule, Chor San H. Khoo, and Claus Vogele)

Numerous environmental, social, and individual factors influence
human food choice and intake.
(61)
In Western and Westernized
societies, household expenditures and dietary energy availability
decreased for unprocessed or minimally processed foods in the last
decades while they increased for convenience foods and processed
products.
(62-63)
An environment where there is easy and
frequent accessibility to food, and where cues signaling food are
ubiquitous, requires constant self-monitoring and -regulation in order
to prevent or manage weight gain.
(61)
This, however, can be
a highly effortful endeavor, leading many people to struggle with long-
term weight maintenance. As evident from data from the last century,
these self-regulatory efforts are made more difficult by increased
consumption of energy-dense palatable foods and ingredients (e.g.,
sugar, fat, and salt).
(64)
As a result, some have argued
that these foods might have an addictive potential and that a subset of
individuals who have difficulties in controlling consumption of these
foods may be addicted to them.
(65-68)

In the scientific literature, the association between food and
addiction and the actual use of the term food addiction has a long
history, dating back to the 1950s and even earlier
times.
(69-70)
Not until recently, however, have researchers
tried to more precisely define what is meant by food addiction and to
systematically investigate its validity, as a consequence of which the
number of publications, including the term food addiction, increased
substantially over the past 5-6 years.
(65, 71)
In humans,
research on food addiction has been promoted by the Yale Food Addiction
Scale (YFAS), a self-report questionnaire developed in 2009, which
measures symptoms of addiction-like eating based on the diagnostic
criteria for substance dependence as outlined in the fourth version of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-
IV).
(72)
Since 2013, these diagnostic criteria have been
revised in the fifth version of the DSM and a new version of the YFAS,
which has been adapted accordingly, is currently under
way.
(73)

Although research on food addiction is growing, it remains a
controversial and debated topic with many researchers questioning the
validity of the food addiction concept based on conceptual
considerations or physiological mechanisms.
(74-78)
To
address these issues, more and better human studies are needed to
resolve questions related to, for example, whether animal models of
food addiction are transferable to human eating
behavior.
(79-80)
These controversies, in particular, lead us
to argue that food addiction research in humans is still in its
infancy, that it would be premature to conclude that some foods are
addictive, and that research efforts to clarify this will further
increase in the years to come.
There are numerous avenues for future directions, which may
include, but are not limited to: how do we define and harmonize
definitions of food addiction? What are the implications of changes in
the diagnostic criteria for substance dependence in the DSM-5 for food
addiction?
(73)
Are all addiction criteria (as described in
the DSM-5) equally applicable to human eating behavior? If not, does
this obliterate the concept of food addiction?
(81)
How can
food addiction be measured in humans other than using the YFAS and
which methodological improvements need to be made to better design
human behavior studies, including randomized controlled trials?

(72)
How relevant is the concept of food addiction for the
treatment of obesity or binge eating and in public policy making? If it
is relevant, how can it best be implemented?
(70, 82)
What
are the disadvantages (if any) of the concept of food addiction?

(83-85)
How can animal models of addiction-like eating be
improved to more specifically reflect relevant processes in humans?

(86)
Which foods are possibly addictive?
(87)
Can
addiction-like eating actually be reduced to the addictive effects of
substances or should the discussion about ``food addiction'' rather be
replaced by a discussion on ``eating addiction''?
(88)

The Molecular and Physiological Science Underlying Nutrition and Brain
Health
(Pierre Magistretti, Johannes le Coutre, and Suzanne L. Dickson)

Cognitive decline, dementia, Alzheimer's disease, and other age-
related neurological diseases are on a rise in high income countries as
well as in low and middle income countries.
(89)
Achieving
and maintaining brain health is a lifelong endeavor with identifiable
targets that are specific for each period in a lifetime. Thus,
targeting cognitive development in the early phases of life and
preventing cognitive decline during aging are priorities for any
preventive or interventional approach. While pharmacological approaches
can only be envisioned for brief periods of time and, for the most
part, have been unsuccessful, nutritional approaches are implementable
for extended periods of time. Initiatives on brain health should
incorporate a nutrition-based approach that can be implemented
throughout the different phases of life.
In order to identify valid nutritional approaches for brain health,
it is important to better understand the mechanisms that are at the
basis of brain energy metabolism regulation. Key advances have been
made in recent years in the identification of the molecular and
cellular mechanisms that regulate the delivery of energy to active
neurons. In particular, an active metabolic exchange has been
characterized between neurons and astrocytes with specific molecular
steps that can become targets for nutritional interventions.
For the identification of the efficacy of such nutritional
interventions, means for appropriate monitoring of markers need to be
defined. This can be achieved by monitoring with brain imaging
techniques, structural markers with morphometric approaches and
myelination with MR as well as functional activation with fMRI, PET,
EEG, and MRS, coupled with neuropsychological tests monitoring
cognitive performance, motivation, and attention. The utility of these
technologies goes beyond brain health and many of these approaches are
being used to validate, in humans, the neuroscience of nutrition that,
so far, has only been conducted in rodent models.
(90-91)

There is no doubt that targeting the molecular steps of brain
metabolism with nutritional interventions and monitoring their
structural and functional outcomes in vivo in humans, in particular
regarding cognitive performance, represents a promising approach for
developing nutritional interventions for achieving brain health that
can be maintained on the long term. Meaningful nutrient intake and
nutritional intervention likely has an impact on the development of
cognitive and behavioral performance measures, thereby determining our
health span throughout life. Brain imaging studies on infants
demonstrate how breast milk promotes healthy neural growth and early
white matter development.
(92)

Nutrients also engage brain pathways linked to metabolic control,
appetite, and food-linked behaviors. There has been a general
expectation that it must be possible to use food formulation/
composition to control how much and what we eat by altering the
satiating and/or reward value of food combinations.
(93-94)

Currently, we lack a sufficient scientific evidence base that certain
``unhealthy'' foods fall short of ``healthy'' foods in their ability to
induce satiation, limit hunger, or reduce hedonic over-eating.
Moreover, it has not yet been demonstrated that any food or combination
of foods has beneficial effects on appetite and energy intake of
sufficient duration or magnitude to impact on body weight or metabolic
health.
(95)
This is a new and emerging field for which major
advances are likely to progress through a better understanding of how
nutrients communicate with the appetite-regulatory brain networks.
Nutrient-brain communication could be direct but likely engages
intrinsic physiological control systems. For example, when we eat,
sensing mechanisms in the gut signal information about the amount and
content of the food to the brain by nervous and endocrine afferent
signals. Indeed, gut-derived hormones such as ghrelin and glucagon-like
peptide 1 communicate with hypothalamic and brainstem areas linked to
energy balance but also to brain areas processing the reward value of
food and even brain areas linked to emotion and
cognition.
(96-97)
Thus, while it seems clear that appetite-
regulating hormones have a capacity to redirect behaviors important for
governing how much and what we eat, the extent to which nutrients can
control these behaviors through engaging intrinsic endocrine signals
remains to be elucidated.
A related question is whether specific nutrients or food
combinations can act on the brain to reinforce their own intake,
leading to addictive-like over-consumption. As reviewed recently

(88)
and as mentioned already in the previous section, it is
very difficult to demonstrate in humans or rodents that foods act on
the brain in a manner similar to addictive drugs, causing individuals
to become addicted to them. It was suggested therefore that the term
``eating addiction'' rather than ``food addiction'' should be used to
better describe addiction-like behavioral over-eating disorders. If it
becomes possible to diagnose this patient group, e.g., through
combining questionnaires about addictive-like behavior for food with
brain imaging,
(98-99)
there will be a large public health
impact on treatment and prevention strategies. Additionally, industrial
stakeholders and politicians will need to find solutions to circumvent
or treat eating addiction.
(88)

The Science of the Human Microbiome
(Dietrich Knorr and Chor San H. Khoo)

The human body harbors over eight million microbial genes, over
10,000 species, and plays host to over a trillion microbes. Microbial
cells outnumber human cells by a factor of 10.
(100)
As a
result, there is considerable interest to better define and understand
the microbial role in host physiology, health, and disease etiology. In
the last decade, there has been a tremendous surge in microbiome
research funded by programs such as the Human Microbiome Project (HMP)
and the MetHIT Program. Advancing new and multiple technological
approaches--whole genome sequencing, metagenomics, high-throughput-
analysis, proteomics, transcriptomics, cultivation, metabolomics, and
bioinformatics--has led to new insights into microbial variety and
abundance in 15-18 body sites, including the oral cavity, skin, airway,
gut, and vagina, from 242 healthy participants in the largest cohort
study to date. Findings from this research were published in two
seminal papers in 2012 by the Human Microbiome
Consortium.
(100-101)
The HMP study has the largest
collection of data on abundance and variety of the human microbiome,
with 5,177 unique microbial taxonomic profiles from 16S ribosomal RNA
genes, more than 3.5 terabases of metagenomic sequence, and 800
reference strains isolated and sequenced.
(100)
Noteworthy
observations from the HMP study are outlined in Table
2.
(102)

Table 2: Variation in Microbial Ecology Among Individuals (102)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Each person's microbiome is unique and no two individuals have the same
microbiome (102) However, in spite of individual microbial differences,
different individuals can still be considered healthy
Microbial communities across varying body regions may predict some
characteristics such as breast fed history and educational level
Microbial communities from different body regions from an individual
were predictive for others. For example, the oral community can be used
to predict the gut community
Overall, low relative numbers of pathogens have been observed
Strong site specialization but considerable variation in diversity and
abundance of each habitat's signature microbes among subjects
Strong functional stability. This means that while the microbial
compositions were widely different, the functionality is similar. This
suggests flexibility to develop microbial communities that can provide
similar performance
Wide variation in patterns of alpha and beta diversity (alpha-diversity
within a site; beta diversity among subjects)
Correlations between ethnicity and microbiome composition across all
body habitats
A positive correlation of vaginal pH to microbial diversity (higher pH
having higher diversity)
An association of age with skin microbiome-associated metabolic pathways
and oral microbiome composition
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Translating learnings from emerging microbiome and health research
presents exciting opportunities for future food and nutrition
development. The use of microbes in food product development is not
new. Fermented products are widespread and common in the marketplace.
Food biotechnology has been in existence for more than 8,000
years.
(103)
The potential health impact of gut microbiota
has been postulated by Metchnikoff
(104)
and since then,
numerous related research results have been
provided.
(105-107)
Probiotics are supplied in starter
cultures and thus need to be preserved for transportation and use. As
the highest possible cell density is required, losses that occur during
processing, transportation, and storage, including in products, are
detrimental. Consequently, approaches to increase and retain
physiological fitness have been explored.
(108-109)

Emerging capabilities to characterize microbial communities and
their functions in the oral cavity present insights into the role
microbes may play in taste and olfaction, and present new opportunities
to further personalize and refine food products to better suit
individual taste and palatability preferences. Oral pre- and probiotics
may be an opportunity for innovation.
These emerging advances in human microbiome structure, diversity,
and function present exciting new opportunities for new food products,
ingredients, or dietary approaches that can be used for supporting
daily health, direct or adjunct intervention for risk reduction, or for
new therapeutics for symptom reliefs (IBS). However, to advance these
undertakings, several key questions need to be addressed. How easy is
it to translate microbiome research to food and dietary applications?
Limited well-designed studies have been performed that explore the
impact of food and diet on microbial ecology and function. What
biomarkers are available or need to be developed to understand how food
and diet impact on the microbiome (gut, gut-brain, gut-kidney, etc.)?
What microbial combination will be best suited for achieving specific
outcomes? Of challenge is the ability to identify and separate the
``good'' from the ``bad'' microbes that can present foodborne illness
or exacerbate disease risks. Gene sequencing and whole genome
sequencing technologies have been used to diagnose and trace food
contamination, and are now also applied in medicine. How can current
microbiome research be easily translated for food and product
applications? How easy is it to transfer available technologies and
tools already developed for use in food and nutrition applications?
In addition, there remains room for improvement when translating to
innovative or tailor-made products. Needs and opportunities include
process generated structures, which impact on food properties (process-
structure-function relationship) as outlined in the European Technology
Platform Strategic Research Agenda (ETP SRA) (2007; 2012; 2014) for
designing tailor-made foods for the targeted release of essential food
constituents at points of need to support human microbiota growth and
metabolic fitness. This needs to include the entire human digestion
system encompassing the chewing apparatus, mouth microbiota, and
enzymes. Moreover, food can contain viable microbial cultures as well
as active enzymes. Understanding their role in and during digestion as
well as their impact on gut, mouth, and skin microbiota may lead to the
development of new food design concepts with targeted nutritional
benefits.
Finally, emerging technologies are being introduced to the food
processing area, including high hydrostatic pressure, pulsed electric
fields, and atmospheric plasma. Little is known about their impact and
function with regard to the human microbiota. These technologies could
open new avenues for process-function-structure relationships as well
as provide foods with metabolic properties not achieved via traditional
processing.
(36)

Nourishing the Immune System and Preventing Disease
(Johan Garssen, Willem van Eden, and Josep Bassaganya-Riera)

Whereas the disciplines of pharmaceutical and nutritional sciences
have evolved separately in the Western world, for Asia these two
research areas have been connected for centuries. However, today, with
the ever-growing burden of chronic diseases in modern societies, the
high relevance of specialized nutrition in both prevention and
therapeutic approaches receives increased attention and recognition.
The gap between food and pharma is narrowing.
(110)
One
reason might be that, scientifically, the evidence for the so-called
multi-target or polypharmacology approaches aimed at disease management
is growing. Medical nutrition is beginning to be recognized as a unique
and potentially powerful area in Western societies at the interface
between food and pharma.
Medical nutrition targets innovative nutritional therapies,
offering healthcare professionals solutions to effectively manage
disease-related malnutrition and specific disease states. Medical
nutrition is and will be increasingly understood as a useful and
sometimes even essential component in the management of patient health.
Many medical conditions can be managed better when patients are
receiving a specialized diet adapted to their unique circumstances.
Sometimes, the constraints to appetite may be physical, as in the case
of stroke patients who may find it difficult or impossible to swallow,
or of young children with neurological disabilities. Sometimes, the
problem may simply be insufficient intake, caused by the loss of
appetite. It is well known that many chronic diseases are associated
with malnutrition, a phenomenon that is not solely based on body mass
index or body weight. Many obese patients suffer from specific
malnutrition. Examples of disease areas that might be associated with
specific malnutrition are cancer, stroke, and COPD. However, frail or
elderly people are treated and fed with this type of medical nutrition
as well. Medical nutrition might bring solutions and support to these
cases across a broad range of care settings--in the hospital, in the
care home, or in the community. It contains unique compositions of
specific nutrients that would be impossible or impractical to achieve
through normal food intake alone. In most cases, it is administered via
the gastrointestinal tract orally or with a feeding tube, utilizing the
natural route for nutrient digestion and absorption. These cases are
underpinned by a unique scientific rationale, preclinical and clinical
research, and health economic evaluation making it very similar to the
traditional pharma approach. By making medical nutrition an integral
part of care, patient outcomes are significantly improved. Lower
healthcare costs by shortening hospital stays and keeping patients
independent for longer are key outcomes for medical nutrition
intervention. The food for special medical purposes (FSMP) is the
regulatory directive involved with the quality/safety and efficacy of
medical foods.
Another and unique medical area for which medical nutrition is
aimed is disease-specific (the so-called disease targeted) medical
nutrition. This type of medical nutrition is a unique, effective,
therapeutic nutritional intervention for patients with, e.g., a
clinical need to avoid certain nutrients due to specific diseases or
conditions where normal food intake is harmful. Examples are inborn
errors of metabolism such as phenylketonuria (PKU) or severe cow's milk
allergy and childhood epilepsy. Ketogenic therapy during refractory
epilepsy can reduce seizures significantly. Other examples for disease-
specific medical nutrition are science-driven concepts containing
different and uniquely selected nutrients that can act in an orchestra
leading to a delay in disease progression. Validated examples have been
described for Alzheimer's, HIV, diabetes, and
cancer.
(111-114)

Disease-targeted medical nutrition can be aimed at conditions such
as chronic inflammation. These inflammatory conditions are on the rise.
This is caused by changes in life-style, food consumption patterns, and
aging. Inflammation-associated conditions, such as atherosclerosis,
type 1 and type 2 diabetes, obesity, Alzheimer's disease, and many
others, are a growing burden to health budgets. Inflammatory conditions
are thought to result from failing mechanisms of immunological
tolerance. Of these mechanisms, deficient suppressive activities of a
specialized subset of T cells, called regulatory T cells (Tregs), are
being recognized as a major factor in the failure of immunological
tolerance. A start has been made with the definition of antigen-
specific Tregs with a broad anti-inflammatory effect, such as, for
example, those that recognize inflammation-associated stress-
proteins.
(115)
Herewith, the restoration of this regulation
will be a widely sought goal, also for the field of nutrition. A
telling example of what may be possible is the following. Wieten, et
al., have shown that the up-regulation of stress-proteins, such as heat
shock protein 70 (HSP70), in the cells lining the gut, leads to the
local induction of Tregs.
(116)
Working with a model of
chronic and relapsing arthritis, it was found that HSP70 was also
induced in Peyer's patches and the induced HSP70-specific Tregs were
having a systemic effect seen to fully control arthritis. This up-
regulation was achieved by the oral administration in mice of
carvacrol, an essential oil of Oregano species. It showed that our diet
may contain effective coinducers of stress-proteins and that these co-
induced proteins can elicit anti-inflammatory activity in the immune
system. Similar activities have now been described for other food
components.
(117)
Therefore, especially for the diets of the
aging individual, substances with anti-inflammatory activities will be
an attractive component. In the field of veterinary medicine and food
animal production, restrictions are now being imposed on the use of
antibiotics, certainly on the use of antibiotics as growth-enhancers.
Also here, feed additives are searched with the purpose of controlling
inflammation and thereby enhancing weight gain.
In combination with drugs, medical devices and lifestyle
modification, medical nutrition, and immune system targeted
nutraceuticals can play an essential role in health care and precision
medicine. Expectedly, it will lead to lower costs of care: fewer
complications, shorter hospital stays and reduced mortality, and the
reduction of disease manifestations.
Over the coming years, Medical Nutrition and Nutraceuticals have
the opportunity to be accepted as a bridge between food and traditional
pharma approaches--not as isolated therapy but as part of integrated
systems-wide health care. Additionally, pharma often is focusing on a
monotherapeutic approach (one molecule one target) and medical
nutrition will be recognized as the multi-target approach for disease
management. Regulation and acceptance depends on national and
international guidelines. Changes in regulation for medical nutrition
are to be expected since medical nutrition is a relatively new
therapeutic area that falls between different regulations and
guidelines. For instance, in the USA, under section 5(b) of the Orphan
Drug Act [21 U.S.C. 360ee(b)(3)], a medical food is formulated to be
consumed or administered enterally under the supervision of a physician
and which is intended for the specific dietary management of a disease
or condition for which distinctive nutritional requirements, based on
recognized scientific principles, are established by medical
evaluation. Thus, from a regulatory perspective, medical foods are
different than dietary supplements in that claims for medical foods can
allude to disease management whereas dietary supplement claims cannot.
Medical foods are exempted from the labeling requirements for health
claims and nutrient content claims under the Nutrition Labeling and
Education Act of 1990. In order to be a medical food, a product must
meet the following criteria: to be a food for oral or tube feeding, the
product must be labeled for the dietary management of a specific
medical disorder, disease, or condition for which there are distinctive
nutritional requirements, and the product must be intended to be used
under medical supervision. Essentially, medical food comes into play
when dietary management cannot be achieved by the modification of the
normal diet alone. For instance, medical foods could be used to replete
key metabolic components that might be depleted in diabetes or
inflammation. Only translational research and randomized, placebo
controlled double-blind clinical trials can validate these new
concepts.

References

1. Creating a Sustainable Food Future. Available from: http://
www.wri.org/sites/default/files/wri13_report_4c_wrr_online.pdf.
2. FAO, IFAD, and WFP. The State of Food Insecurity in the World
2014. Strengthening the Enabling Environment for Food Security and
Nutrition. Rome (2014). Available from: http://www.fao.org/3/a-
i4030e.pdf.
3. Garnett T., Appleby M.C., Balmford A., Bateman I.J., Benton T.G.,
Bloomer P., et al. Agriculture. Sustainable intensification in
agriculture: premises and policies. Science (2013) 341: 33-4.
doi:10.1126/science.1234485.
4. Tillotson J.E. America's obesity: conflicting public policies,
industrial economic development, and unintended human consequences.
Annu. Rev. Nutr. (2004) 24: 617-43. doi:10.1146/
annurev.nutr.24.012003.132434.
5. Agricultural Biodiversity A. Cross-Cutting Initiative on
Biodiversity for Food and Nutrition (2006). Available from: https://
www.cbd.int/decision/cop/?id=11037.
6. Fourteenth Regular Session of the Commission on Genetic Resources
for Food and Agriculture. Rome (2013). Available from: http://
www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/028/mg538e.pdf.
7. Zhang R. Food security: food trade regime and food aid regime. J.
Int. Econ. Law (2004) 7: 565-84. doi:10.1093/jiel/7.3.565.
8. Latham M. The great vitamin A fiasco. World. Nutr. (2010) 1: 12-
45.
9. Golden C.D., Fernald L.C.H., Brashares J.S., Rasolofoniaina
B.J.R., Kremen C. Benefits of wildlife consumption to child nutrition
in a biodiversity hotspot. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA (2011) 108:19653-
6. doi:10.1073/pnas.1112586108.
10. Foley J.A., Defries R., Asner G.P., Barford C., Bonan G.,
Carpenter S.R., et al.Global consequences of land use. Science (2005)
309:570-4. doi:10.1126/science.1111772.
11. Knorr D, editor. Sustainable Food Systems. Westport, CT: AVI
Publishing (1983).
12. Wheeler T., von Braun J. Climate change impacts on global food
security. Science (2013) 341:508-13. doi:10.1126/science.1239402.
13. Toledo A., Burlingame B. Biodiversity and nutrition: a common
path toward global food security and sustainable development. J. Food.
Compost. Anal. (2006) 19: 477-83. doi:10.1016/j.jfca.2006.05.001.
14. Waldron S., Flowers H., Arlaud C., Bryant C., McFarlane S. The
significance of organic carbon and nutrient export from peatland-
dominated landscapes subject to disturbance, a stoichiometric
perspective. Biogeosciences (2009) 6: 363-74. doi:10.5194/bg-6-363-
2009.
15. Gustavsson J., Cederberg C., Sonesson U., Meybeck A., van
Otterdijk R.. Global food losses and food waste. In: Interpack 2011
(Dusseldorf) (2011). Available from: http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/
mb060e/mb060e.pdf.
16. Godfray H.C.J., Beddington J.R., Crute I.R., Haddad L., Lawrence
D., Muir J.F., et al. Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 billion
people. Science (2010) 327: 812-8. doi:10.1126/science.1185383.
17. Vinceti B., Termote C., Ickowitz A., Powell B., Kehlenbeck K.,
Hunter D. The contribution of forests and trees to sustainable diets.
Sustainability (2013) 5: 4797-824. doi:10.3390/su5114797.
18. Meffe R., de Bustamante I. Emerging organic contaminants in
surface water and groundwater: a first overview of the situation in
Italy. Sci. Total Environ. (2014) 481: 280-95. doi:10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2014.02.053.
19. Myers G.J., Davidson P.W., Strain J.J. Nutrient and methyl
mercury exposure from consuming fish. J. Nutr. (2007) 137: 2805-8.
20. Smith A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. Vol. 3, 4th ed. London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell (1786). 206
p.
21. Hawking S., Mlodinow L. The Grand Design. New York: Random House
Publishing Group (2010) p. 5.
22. Collins F.S., Tabak L.A. Policy: NIH plans to enhance
reproducibility. Nature (2014) 505: 612-3. doi:10.1038/505612a.
23. Schoenfeld J.D., Ioannidis J.P.A. Is everything we eat
associated with cancer? A systematic cookbook review. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. (2013) 97: 127-34. doi:10.3945/ajcn.112.047142.
24. Cofield S.S., Corona R.V., Allison D.B. Use of causal language
in observational studies of obesity and nutrition. Obes. Facts (2010)
3: 353-6. doi:10.1159/000322940.
25. Kaiser K.A., Cofield S.S., Fontaine K.R., Glasser S.P., Thabane
L., Chu R., et al. Is funding source related to study reporting quality
in obesity or nutrition randomized control trials in top-tier medical
journals? Int. J. Obes. (Lond) (2012) 36: 977-81. doi:10.1038/
ijo.2011.207.
26. Casazza K., Allison D.B. Stagnation in the clinical, community
and public health domain of obesity: the need for probative research.
Clin. Obes. (2012) 2: 83-5. doi:10.1111/j.1758-8111.2012.00052.x.
27. Casazza K., Fontaine K.R., Astrup A., Birch L.L., Brown A.W.,
Bohan Brown M.M., et al. Myths, presumptions, and facts about obesity.
N. Engl. J. Med. (2013) 368: 446-54. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1208051.
28. Bohan Brown M.M., Brown A.W., Allison D.B. Nutritional
epidemiology in practice: learning from data or promulgating beliefs?
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. (2013) 97: 5-6. doi:10.3945/ajcn.112.052472.
29. PLoS Medicine Editors. Making sense of non-financial competing
interests. PLoS Med. (2008) 5: e199. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050199.
30. Nosek B.A., Alter G., Banks G.C., Borsboom D., Bowman S.D.,
Breckler S.J., et al. Promoting an open research culture. Science
(2015) 348: 1422-5. doi:10.1126/science.aab2374.
31. Archer E., Pavela G., Lavie C.J. The inadmissibility of what we
eat in America and NHANES dietary data in nutrition and obesity
research and the scientific formulation of national dietary guidelines.
Mayo Clinic Proceedings (2015) 90(7): 911-26. doi:10.1016/
j.mayocp.2015.04.009.
32. Dhurandhar N.V., Schoeller D., Brown A.W., Heymsfield S.B.,
Thomas D., Sorensen T.I.A., et al. Energy balance measurement: when
something is not better than nothing. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) (2014)
39(7): 1109-13. doi:10.1038/ijo.2014.199.
33. Schoeller D.A., Thomas D., Archer E., Heymsfield S.B., Blair
S.N., Goran M.I., et al. Self-report-based estimates of energy intake
offer an inadequate basis for scientific conclusions. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. (2013) 97: 1413-5. doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.062125.
34. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. Scientific Report of the
2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (2015). Available from:
http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015-scientific-report/PDFs/
Scientific-Report-of-the-2015-Dietary-Guidelines-Advisory-
Committee.pdf.
35. Brown A.W., Bohan Brown M.M., Allison D.B. Belief beyond the
evidence: using the proposed effect of breakfast on obesity to show 2
practices that distort scientific evidence. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. (2013)
98: 1298-308. doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.064410.
36. Brown J., de Vos W.M., DiStefano P.S., Dore J., Huttenhower C.,
Knight R., et al. Translating the human microbiome. Nat. Biotechnol.
(2013) 31: 304-8. doi:10.1038/nbt.2543.
37. Mehta T., Allison D.B. From measurement to analysis reporting:
grand challenges in nutritional methodology. Front. Nutr. (2014) 1.
doi:10.3389/fnut.2014.00006.
38. Pavela G., Wiener H., Fontaine K.R., Fields D.A., Voss J.D.,
Allison D.B. Packet randomized experiments for eliminating classes of
confounders. Eur. J. Clin. Invest. (2015) 45(1): 45-55. doi:10.1111/
eci.12378.
39. Kussmann M., Van Bladeren P.J. The extended nutrigenomics--
understanding the interplay between the genomes of food, gut microbes,
and human host. Front. Genet. (2011) 2: 21. doi:10.3389/
fgene.2011.00021.
40. van Ommen B., El-Sohemy A., Hesketh J., Kaput J., Fenech M.,
Evelo C.T., et al. The Micronutrient Genomics Project: a community-
driven knowledge base for micronutrient research. Genes. Nutr. (2010)
5: 285-96. doi:10.1007/s12263-010-0192-8.
41. Kussmann M., Morine M.J., Hager J., Sonderegger B., Kaput J..
Perspective: a systems approach to diabetes research. Front. Genet.
(2013) 4: 205. doi:10.3389/fgene.2013.00205.
42. Stumbo P.J., Weiss R., Newman J.W., Pennington J.A., Tucker
K.L., Wiesenfeld P.L., et al. Web-enabled and improved software tools
and data are needed to measure nutrient intakes and physical activity
for personalized health research. J. Nutr. (2010) 140: 2104-15.
doi:10.3945/jn.110.128371.
43. Nguyen T.-P., Scotti M., Morine M.J., Priami C. Model-based
clustering reveals vitamin D dependent multi-centrality hubs in a
network of vitamin-related proteins. BMC Syst. Biol. (2011) 5: 195.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-195.
44. Kussmann M., Fay L.B. Nutrigenomics and personalized nutrition:
science and concept. Per. Med. (2008) 5: 447-55. doi:10.2217/
17410541.5.5.447.
45. Viladomiu M., Hontecillas R., Yuan L., Lu P., Bassaganya-Riera
J. Nutritional protective mechanisms against gut inflammation. J. Nutr.
Biochem. (2013) 24: 929-39. doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2013.01.006.
46. Carbo A., Bassaganya-Riera J., Pedragosa M., Viladomiu M.,
Marathe M., Eubank S., et al. Predictive computational modeling of the
mucosal immune responses during Helicobacter pylori infection. PLoS One
(2013) 8: e73365. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073365.
47. Carbo A., Hontecillas R., Kronsteiner B., Viladomiu M.,
Pedragosa M., Lu P., et al. Systems modeling of molecular mechanisms
controlling cytokine-driven CD4+ T cell differentiation and phenotype
plasticity. PLoS Comput. Biol. (2013) 9: e1003027. doi:10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1003027.
48. Carbo A., Olivares-Villagomez D., Hontecillas R., Bassaganya-
Riera J., Chaturvedi R., Piazuelo M.B., et al. Systems modeling of the
role of interleukin-21 in the maintenance of effector CD4+ T cell
responses during chronic Helicobacter pylori infection. MBio. (2014)
5:e1243-1214. doi:10.1128/mBio.01243-14.
49. Mei Y., Abedi V., Carbo A., Zhang X., Lu P., Philipson C., et
al. Multiscale modeling of mucosal immune responses. BMC Bioinformatics
(2015) 16(Suppl. 12).
50. Leber A., Viladomiu M., Hontecillas R., Abedi V., Philipson C.,
Hoops S., et al. Systems modeling of interactions between mucosal
immunity and the gut microbiome during clostridium difficile infection.
PLoS One (2015) 10: e0134849. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0134849.
51. Mc Auley M.T., Proctor C.J., Corfe B.M., Cuskelly G.C, Mooney
K.M. Nutrition research and the impact of computational systems
biology. J. Comput. Sci. Syst. Biol. (2013) 6: 271-85. doi:10.4172/
jcsb.1000122.
52. Laney D. 3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity,
and Variety. Application Delivery Strategies. Stamford, CT: META Group
Inc. (2001).
53. Einav L., Levin J. Economics in the age of big data. Science
(2014) 346: 1243089. doi:10.1126/science.1243089.
54. Wallace P.J., Shah N.D., Dennen T., Bleicher P.A., Bleicher
P.D., Crown W.H. Optum labs: building a novel node in the learning
health care system. Health Aff. (Millwood) (2014) 33: 1187-94.
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0038.
55. Schneeweiss S., Rassen J.A., Glynn R.J., Avorn J., Mogun H.,
Brookhart M.A. High-dimensional propensity score adjustment in studies
of treatment effects using health care claims data. Epidemiology (2009)
20: 512-22. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181a663cc.
56. Rosenbaum P.R. Using Differential Comparisons in Observational
Studies (2013). Available from: http://amstat.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/
10.1080/09332480.2013.845002 (accessed May 23, 2015).
57. Peters J., Buhlmann P., Meinshausen N. Causal Inference Using
Invariant Prediction: Identification and Confidence Intervals (2015).
Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1501.01332 (accessed May 23,
2015).
58. Buhlmann P., Peters J., Ernest J. CAM: causal additive models,
high-dimensional order search and penalized regression. Ann. Stat.
(2014) 42: 2526-56. doi:10.1214/14-AOS1260.
59. Roullier-Gall C., Witting M., Gougeon R.D., Schmitt-Kopplin P.
High precision mass measurements for wine metabolomics. Front. Chem.
(2014) 2: 102. doi:10.3389/fchem.2014.00102.
60. Leeman W.R., Krul L., Houben G.F. Complex mixtures: relevance of
combined exposure to substances at low dose levels. Food Chem. Toxicol.
(2013) 58: 141-8. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2013.03.050.
61. Meule A., Vogele C. The psychology of eating. Front. Psychol.
(2013) 4:215. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00215.
62. Moubarac J.-C., Batal M., Martins A.P.B., Claro R., Levy R.B.,
Cannon G., et al. Processed and ultra-processed food products:
consumption trends in Canada from 1938 to 2011. Can. J. Diet. Pract.
Res. (2014) 75: 15-21. doi:10.3148/75.1.2014.15.
63. Poti J.M., Mendez M.A., Ng S.W., Popkin B.M. Is the degree of
food processing and convenience linked with the nutritional quality of
foods purchased by U.S. households? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. (2015) 101: 1251-
62. doi:10.3945/ajcn.114.100925.
64. Davis C. Evolutionary and neuropsychological perspectives on
addictive behaviors and addictive substances: relevance to the ``food
addiction'' construct. Subst. Abuse. Rehabil. (2014) 5: 129-37.
doi:10.2147/SAR.S56835.
65. Gearhardt A.N., Davis C., Kuschner R., Brownell K.D. The
addiction potential of hyperpalatable foods. Curr. Drug Abuse Rev.
(2011) 4: 140-5. doi:10.2174/1874473711104030140.
66. Davis C. From passive overeating to ``food addiction'': a
spectrum of compulsion and severity. ISRN Obes. (2013) 2013: 435027.
doi:10.1155/2013/435027.
67. Avena N.M., Gold M.S. Food and addiction--sugars, fats and
hedonic overeating. Addiction (2011) 106: 1214-5. doi:10.1111/j.1360-
0443.2011.03373.x.
68. Ahmed S.H., Guillem K., Vandaele Y.. Sugar addiction: pushing
the drug-sugar analogy to the limit. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab.
Care. (2013) 16: 434-9. doi:10.1097/MCO.0b013e328361c8b8.
69. Davis C., Carter J.C. Compulsive overeating as an addiction
disorder. A review of theory and evidence. Appetite (2009) 53: 1-8.
doi:10.1016/j.appet.2009.05.018.
70. Davis C., Carter J.C. If certain foods are addictive, how might
this change the treatment of compulsive overeating and obesity? Curr.
Addict. Rep. (2014) 1: 89-95. doi:10.1007/s40429-014-0013-z.
71. Krashes M.J., Kravitz A.V. Optogenetic and chemogenetic insights
into the food addiction hypothesis. Front. Behav. Neurosci. (2014) 8:
57. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00057.
72. Meule A., Gearhardt A.N. Five years of the Yale Food Addiction
Scale: taking stock and moving forward. Curr. Addict. Rep. (2014) 1:
193-205. doi:10.1007/s40429-014-0021-z.
73. Meule A., Gearhardt A.N. Food addiction in the light of DSM-5.
Nutrients (2014) 6:3 653-71. doi:10.3390/nu6093653.
74. Rogers P.J. Obesity--is food addiction to blame? Addiction
(2011) 106: 1213-4. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2011.03371.x.
75. Benton D. The plausibility of sugar addiction and its role in
obesity and eating disorders. Clin. Nutr. (2010) 29: 288-303.
doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2009.12.001.
76. Wilson G.T. Eating disorders, obesity and addiction. Eur. Eat.
Disord. Rev. (2010) 18: 341-51. doi:10.1002/erv.1048.
77. Ziauddeen H., Farooqi I.S., Fletcher P.C. Obesity and the brain:
how convincing is the addiction model? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. (2012) 13:
279-86. doi:10.1038/nrn3212.
78. Ziauddeen H., Fletcher P.C. Is food addiction a valid and useful
concept? Obes. Rev. (2013) 14: 19-28. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
789X.2012.01046.x.
79. Hill J.O., Berridge K., Avena N.M., Ziauddeen H., Alonso-Alonso
M., Allison D.B., et al. Neurocognition: the food-brain connection.
Adv. Nutr. (2014) 5:5 44-6. doi:10.3945/an.114.006437.
80. Salamone J.D., Correa M. Dopamine and food addiction: lexicon
badly needed. Biol. Psychiatry (2013) 73: e15-24. doi:10.1016/
j.biopsych.2012.09.027.
81. Gearhardt A.N., Corbin W.R., Brownell K.D. Food addiction: an
examination of the diagnostic criteria for dependence. J. Addict. Med.
(2009) 3: 1-7. doi:10.1097/ADM.0b013e318193c993.
82. Gearhardt A.N., Brownell K.D. Can food and addiction change the
game? Biol. Psychiatry (2013) 73: 802-3. doi:10.1016/
j.biopsych.2012.07.024.
83. DePierre J.A., Puhl R.M., Luedicke J. A new stigmatized
identity? Comparisons of a ``food addict'' label with other stigmatized
health conditions. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych. (2013) 35: 10-21.
doi:10.1080/01973533.2012.746148.
84. Latner J.D., Puhl R.M., Murakami J.M., O'Brien K.S. Food
addiction as a causal model of obesity. Effects on stigma, blame, and
perceived psychopathology. Appetite (2014) 77: 77-82. doi:10.1016/
j.appet.2014.03.004.
85. Lee N.M., Hall W.D., Lucke J., Forlini C., Carter A. Food
addiction and its impact on weight-based stigma and the treatment of
obese individuals in the U.S. and Australia. Nutrients (2014) 6: 5312-
26. doi:10.3390/nu6115312.
86. Avena N.M. The study of food addiction using animal models of
binge eating. Appetite (2010) 55: 734-7. doi:10.1016/
j.appet.2010.09.010.
87. Schulte E.M., Avena N.M., Gearhardt A.N. Which foods may be
addictive? The roles of processing, fat content, and glycemic load.
PLoS One (2015) 10: e0117959. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117959.
88. Hebebrand J., Albayrak O., Adan R., Antel J., Dieguez C., de
Jong J., et al. ``Eating addiction'', rather than ``food addiction'',
better captures addictive-like eating behavior. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. (2014) 47: 295-306. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.08.016.
89. Wimo A., Prince, M. World Alzheimer Report 2010 (2010).
Available from: http://www.alz.co.uk/research/files/
WorldAlzheimerReport.pdf.
90. Ohla K., Toepel U., le Coutre J., Hudry J. Visual-gustatory
interaction: orbitofrontal and insular cortices mediate the effect of
high-calorie visual food cues on taste pleasantness. PLoS One (2012) 7:
e32434. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032434.
91. Crouzet S.M., Busch N.A., Ohla K. Taste quality decoding
parallels taste sensations. Curr. Biol. (2015) 25: 890-6. doi:10.1016/
j.cub.2015.01.057.
92. Deoni S.C.L., Dean D.C., Piryatinsky I., O'Muircheartaigh J.,
Waskiewicz N., Lehman K., et al. Breastfeeding and early white matter
development: a cross-sectional study. Neuroimage (2013) 82: 77-86.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.090.
93. Blundell J. Making claims: functional foods for managing
appetite and weight. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. (2010) 6: 53-6. doi:10.1038/
nrendo.2009.224.
94. Mercer J.G., Johnstone A.M., Halford J.C.G. Approaches to
influencing food choice across the age groups: from children to the
elderly. Proc. Nutr. Soc. (2015) 74(2): 1-9. doi:10.1017/
S0029665114001712.
95. Halford J.C.G., Harrold J.A. Satiety-enhancing products for
appetite control: science and regulation of functional foods for weight
management. Proc. Nutr. Soc. (2012) 71: 350-62. doi:10.1017/
S0029665112000134.
96. Skibicka K.P., Dickson S.L. Enteroendocrine hormones--central
effects on behavior. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. (2013) 13: 977-82.
doi:10.1016/j.coph.2013.09.004.
97. Egecioglu E., Skibicka K.P., Hansson C., Alvarez-Crespo M.,
Friberg P.A., Jerlhag E., et al. Hedonic and incentive signals for body
weight control. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. (2011) 12: 141-51.
doi:10.1007/s11154-011-9166-4.
98. Gearhardt A.N., Corbin W.R., Brownell K.D. Preliminary
validation of the Yale Food Addiction Scale. Appetite (2009) 52: 430-6.
doi:10.1016/j.appet.2008.12.003.
99. Iozzo P., Guiducci L., Guzzardi M.A., Pagotto U. Brain PET
imaging in obesity and food addiction: current evidence and hypothesis.
Obes. Facts (2012) 5: 155-64. doi:10.1159/000338328.
100. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. A framework for human
microbiome research. Nature (2012) 486: 215-21. doi:10.1038/
nature11209.
101. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. Structure, function and
diversity of the healthy human microbiome. Nature (2012) 486: 207-14.
doi:10.1038/nature11234.
102. Ding T., Schloss P.D. Dynamics and associations of microbial
community types across the human body. Nature (2014) 509: 357-60.
doi:10.1038/nature13178.
103. Knorr D., Sinskey A.J. Biotechnology in food production and
processing. Science (1985) 229: 1224-9. doi:10.1126/
science.229.4719.1224.
104. Metchnikoff E. The Prolongation of Life: Optimistic Studies.
New York, London: G.P. Putnam's Sons (1908).
105. Chung D. It's a jungle in there. New Sci. (2004) 182: 42-5.
106. Claesson M.J., Jeffery I.B., Conde S., Power S.E., O'Connor
E.M., Cusack S., et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet
and health in the elderly. Nature (2012) 488: 178-84. doi:10.1038/
nature11319.
107. Salonen A., Lahti L., Salojarvi J., Holtrop G., Korpela K.,
Duncan S.H., et al. Impact of diet and individual variation on
intestinal microbiota composition and ermentation products in obese
men. ISME J. (2014) 8: 2218-30. doi:10.1038/ismej.2014.63.
108. Ananta E., Birkeland S.-E., Corcoran B., Fitzgerald G., Hinz
S., Klijn A., et al. Processing effects on the nutritional advancement
of probiotics and prebiotics. Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. (2004) 16: 114-
24. doi:10.3402/mehd.v16i2-3.7933.
109. Volkert M., Ananta E., Luscher C., Knorr D. Effect of air
freezing, spray freezing, and pressure shift freezing on membrane
integrity and viability of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG. J. Food Eng.
(2008) 87: 532-40. doi:10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2008.01.008.
110. Georgiou N.A., Garssen J., Witkamp R.F. Pharma-nutrition
interface: the gap is narrowing. Eur. J. Pharmacol. (2011) 651: 1-8.
doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.11.007.
111. Gori A., Rizzardini G., Van't Land B., Amor K.B., van Schaik
J., Torti C., et al. Specific prebiotics modulate gut microbiota and
immune activation in HAART-naive HIV-infected adults: results of the
``COPA'' pilot randomized trial. Mucosal. Immunol. (2011) 4: 554-63.
doi:10.1038/mi.2011.15.
112. Cahn P., Ruxrungtham K., Gazzard B., Diaz R.S., Gori A., Kotler
D.P., et al. The immunomodulatory nutritional intervention NR100157
reduced CD4+ T-cell decline and immune activation: a 1-year multicenter
randomized controlled double-blind trial in HIV-infected persons not
receiving antiretroviral therapy (The BITE Study). Clin. Infect. Dis.
(2013) 57: 139-46. doi:10.1093/cid/cit171.
113. Scheltens P., Twisk J.W.R., Blesa R., Scarpini E., von Arnim
C.A.F., Bongers A., et al. Efficacy of Souvenaid in mild Alzheimer's
disease: results from a randomized, controlled trial. J. Alzheimers
Dis. (2012) 31: 225-36. doi:10.3233/JAD-2012-121189.
114. Faber J., Berkhout M., Fiedler U., Avlar M., Witteman B.J., Vos
A.P., et al. Rapid EPA and DHA incorporation and reduced PGE2 levels
after one week intervention with a medical food in cancer patients
receiving radiotherapy, a randomized trial. Clin. Nutr. (2013) 32: 338-
45. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2012.09.009.
115. van Herwijnen M.J.C., Wieten L., van der Zee R., van Kooten
P.J., Wagenaar-Hilbers J.P., Hoek A., et al. Regulatory T cells that
recognize a ubiquitous stress-inducible self-antigen are long-lived
suppressors of autoimmune arthritis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA (2012)
109: 14134-9. doi:10.1073/pnas.1206803109.
116. Wieten L., van der Zee R., Spiering R., Wagenaar-Hilbers J.,
van Kooten P., Broere F., et al. A novel heat-shock protein coinducer
boosts stress protein Hsp70 to activate T cell regulation of
inflammation in autoimmune arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. (2010) 62: 1026-
35. doi:10.1002/art.27344.
117. Wieten L., van der Zee R., Goedemans R., Sijtsma J., Serafini
M., Lubsen N.H., et al. Hsp70 expression and induction as a readout for
detection of immune modulatory components in food. Cell Stress
Chaperones (2010) 15: 25-37. doi:10.1007/s12192-009-0119-8.
118. Levitsky D.A., Brown A.W., Hansen B.C., Atkinson R.L., Byrne
N., Cheskin L.J., et al. An unjustified conclusion from self-report-
based estimates of energy intake. Am. J. Med. (2014) 127:e33.
doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2014.08.029.
119. Schoeller D., Archer E., Dawson J.A., Heymsfield S. Implausible
results from the use of invalid methods. J. Nutr. (2015) 145: 150.
doi:10.3945/jn.114.199521.
120. Keith S.W., Stommel M., Allison D.B., Schoenborn C.A. Self-
report corrections for BMI: comment on Keith, et al. Int. J. Obes.
(Lond) (2012) 36: 1591. doi:10.1038/ijo.2011.277.
121. Le A., Judd S.E., Allison D.B., Oza-Frank R., Affuso O.,
Safford M.M., et al. The geographic distribution of obesity in the U.S.
and the potential regional differences in misreporting of obesity.
Obesity (Silver Spring) (2014) 22: 300-6. doi:10.1002/oby.20451.
122. Keith S.W., Fontaine K.R., Pajewski N.M., Mehta T., Allison
D.B. Use of self-reported height and weight biases the body mass index-
mortality association. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) (2011) 35: 401-8.
doi:10.1038/ijo.2010.148.
123. Tarro L., Llaurado E., Albaladejo R., Morina D., Arija V., Sola
R., et al. A primary-school-based study to reduce the prevalence of
childhood obesity--the EdAl (Educacio en Alimentacio) study: a
randomized controlled trial. Trials (2014) 15: 58. doi:10.1186/1745-
6215-15-58.
124. Barr S.B., Wright J.C. Postprandial energy expenditure in whole-
food and processed-food meals: implications for daily energy
expenditure. Food Nutr. Res. (2010) 54: 5144. doi:10.3402/
fnr.v54i0.5144.
125. Williams L.K., Abbott G., Thornton L.E., Worsley A., Ball K.,
Crawford D. Improving perceptions of healthy food affordability:
results from a pilot intervention. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act.
(2014) 11: 33. doi:10.1186/1479-5868-11-33.
126. Siontis G.C.M., Tzoulaki I., Castaldi P.J., Ioannidis J.P.A.
External validation of new risk prediction models is infrequent and
reveals worse prognostic discrimination. J. Clin. Epidemiol. (2015) 68:
25-34. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2014.09.007.
127. Cassani R.S.L., Fassini P.G., Silvah J.H., Lima C.M., Marchini
J.S. Impact of weight loss diet associated with flaxseed on
inflammatory markers in men with cardiovascular risk factors: a
clinical study. Nutr. J. (2015) 14: 5. doi:10.1186/1475-2891-14-5.
128. Bland J.M., Altman D.G. Comparisons against baseline within
randomised groups are often used and can be highly misleading. Trials
(2011) 12: 264. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-264.
129. Weerts S.E., Amoran A. Pass the fruits and vegetables! A
community--university--industry partnership promotes weight loss in
African American women. Health Promot. Pract. (2009) 12: 252-60.
doi:10.1177/1524839908330810.
130. Kaiser K.A., Affuso O., Beasley T.M., Allison D.B. Getting
carried away: a note showing baseline observation carried forward
(BOCF) results can be calculated from published complete-cases results.
Int. J. Obes. (2011) 36: 886-9. doi:10.1038/ijo.2011.25.
131. Elobeid M.A., Padilla M.A., McVie T., Thomas O., Brock D.W.,
Musser B., et al. Missing data in randomized clinical trials for weight
loss: scope of the problem, state of the field, and performance of
statistical methods. PLoS One (2009) 4: e6624. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0006624.
132. Li P., Brown A., Oakes J.M., Allison D. Comment on
``Intervention effects of a school-based health promotion programme on
obesity related behavioural outcomes''. J. Obes. (2015). doi:10.1155/
2015/708181.
133. Li P., Brown A., Oakes J.M., Allison D. School-based obesity
prevention Intervention in Chilean children: effective in controlling,
but not reducing obesity. J. Obes. (2015). doi:10.1155/2015/183528.
134. Grydeland M., Bjelland M., Anderssen S.A., Klepp K.-I., Bergh
I.H., Andersen L.F., et al. Effects of a 20-month cluster randomised
controlled school-based intervention trial on BMI of school-aged boys
and girls: the HEIA study. Br. J. Sports Med. (2014) 48: 768-73.
doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092284.
135. Bere E., Klepp K.-I., Overby N. Free school fruit: can an extra
piece of fruit every school day contribute to the prevention of future
weight gain? A cluster randomized trial. Food Nutr. Res. (2014) 58:
23194. doi:10.3402/fnr.v58.23194.
136. Brown A.W., Li P.B., Bohan Brown M.M., Kaiser K.A., Keith S.W.,
Oakes J.M., et al. Best (but oft forgotten) practices: designing,
analyzing, and reporting cluster randomized controlled trials. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. (2015) 102: 1-8. doi:10.3945/ajcn.114.105072.
137. Lewis D.W., Fields D.A., Allison D.B. Inconsistencies and
inaccuracies in reporting on choice of endpoints and of statistical
results in RCT of maternal diet. Pediatr. Obes. (2015). doi:10.1111/
ijpo.12030.
138. Su C.-X., Han M., Ren J., Li W.-Y., Yue S.-J., Hao Y.-F., et
al. Empirical evidence for outcome reporting bias in randomized
clinical trials of acupuncture: comparison of registered records and
subsequent publications. Trials (2015) 16:28. doi:10.1186/s13063-014-
0545-5.
139. Simonsohn U., Nelson L.D., Simmons J.P. P-curve: a key to the
file-drawer. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. (2014) 143: 534-47. doi:10.1037/
a0033242.
140. Simmons J.P., Nelson L.D., Simonsohn U. False-positive
psychology: undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis
allows presenting anything as significant. Psychol. Sci. (2011) 22:
1359-66. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632.
141. Gadbury G.L., Allison D.B. Inappropriate fiddling with
statistical analyses to obtain a desirable p-value: tests to detect its
presence in published literature. PLoS One (2012) 7: e46363.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0046363.
142. Hernandez-Cordero S., Barquera S., Rodriguez-Ramirez S.,
Villanueva-Borbolla M.A., Gonzalez de Cossio T., Dommarco J.R., et al.
Substituting water for sugar-sweetened beverages reduces circulating
triglycerides and the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in obese but not
in overweight Mexican women in a randomized controlled trial. J. Nutr.
(2014) 144: 1742-52. doi:10.3945/jn.114.193490.
143. Brown A.W., Sievenpiper J.L., Kyle T.A., Kaiser K.A.
Communication of randomized controlled trial results must match the
study focus. J. Nutr. (2015) 145: 1027-9. doi:10.3945/jn.114.207282.
144. Katz T.J. Propagation of errors in review articles. Science
(2006) 313: 1236. doi:10.1126/science.313.5791.1236a.
145. Cope M.B., Allison D.B. Critical review of the World Health
Organization's (WHO) 2007 report on ``evidence of the long-term effects
of breastfeeding: systematic reviews and meta-analysis'' with respect
to obesity. Obes. Rev. (2008) 9: 594-605. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
789X.2008.00504.x.
146. Allison D.B., Faith M.S., Gorman B.S. Publication bias in
obesity treatment trials? Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. (1996)
20: 931-7.
147. Boutron I., Dutton S., Ravaud P., Altman D.G. Reporting and
interpretation of randomized controlled trials with statistically
nonsignificant results for primary outcomes. JAMA (2010) 303: 2058-64.
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.651.
148. Yavchitz A., Boutron I., Bafeta A., Marroun I., Charles P.,
Mantz J., et al. Misrepresentation of randomized controlled trials in
press releases and news coverage: a cohort study. PLoS Med. (2012)
9:e1001308. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001308.
149. Brown A.W., Hall K.D., Thomas D., Dhurandhar N.V., Heymsfield
S.B., Allison D.B. Order of magnitude misestimation of weight effects
of children's meal policy proposals. Child. Obes. (2014) 10: 542-4.
doi:10.1089/chi.2014.0081.
150. Bohan Brown M.M., Brown A.W., Allison D.B. Linear extrapolation
results in erroneous overestimation of plausible stressor-related
yearly weight changes. Biol. Psychiatry (2014) 78(4): e10-1.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.10.028.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.
Copyright 2015 Allison, Bassaganya-Riera, Burlingame, Brown, le
Coutre, Dickson, van Eden, Garssen, Hontecillas, Khoo, Knorr, Kussmann,
Magistretti, Mehta, Meule, Rychlik and Vogele. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

attachment 5
Unintended Consequences of Obesity-Targeted Health Policy
Virtual Mentor
American Medical Association Journal of Ethics
April 2013, Volume 15, Number 4: 339-346.
Policy Forum
Andrew W. Brown, Ph.D., and David B. Allison, Ph.D.

L'enfer est plein de bonnes volontes et desirs. [Hell is full
of good wishes and desires.]
Saint Bernard of Clairvaux.
[1]

The conflict between individual freedom of choice and a
government's obligation to protect its citizenry from threats to public
health is often at the center of health policy debates. This has played
out in New York City, for instance, with freedom of choice being the
rallying cry of those opposed to a citywide ban on large containers of
beverages,
[2]
while saving lives through health-motivated
policies is offered as the justification for the
regulations.
[3]
However, several other ethical concerns
exist related to the creation or implementation of public policy.
Herein, we will discuss a catalog of ethical concerns identified by M.
ten Have, et al.[
4]
related to policies intended to prevent
or treat obesity.
We discuss these ethical concerns in light of two key issues: (1)
Under which circumstances does obesity merit being considered a public,
as opposed to simply a common, health concern? Whether or not obesity
is considered a public health concern is important in deciding whether
impinging on individuals' rights may be warranted. (2) How plausible is
it that a given policy or program will have negative unintended
consequences? These consequences are important to consider when
deciding if a policy should be implemented. We then suggest strategies
for minimizing ethical and other unintended adverse consequences of
obesity-targeted health policies.
Ethical Concerns in Obesity-Targeted Health Policies
In ``Ethics and Prevention of Overweight and Obesity: An
Inventory,'' Marieke ten Have and colleagues identify ethical concerns
posed by 60 actual or proposed public policies, corporate initiatives,
and behavior recommendations intended to prevent or treat
obesity.
[4]
One group of ethical concerns comprises direct
negative consequences of a program, including physical and psychosocial
harm, dissemination of inadequate information, and creation or
exacerbation of inequalities. The other group of ethical concerns
encompasses disrespect for individuals and their rights and values,
including transgressing personal and cultural values of eating,
invading privacy, assigning fault for obesity, and abridging freedom of
choice. Typically, more than one of these concerns exist with varying
degrees of severity for any proposed policy or recommendation, but
often the debate is dichotomized as a desire to promote health versus a
desire to preserve individual liberty.
The complexity of ethical considerations in obesity policymaking
can be demonstrated by a policy that would allow the government to
remove an obese child from his or her home (see Table 1). Note that the
pros and cons listed in the table are not necessarily weighted by
importance because importance is dependent on individual perspectives
and specific situations. Here, the assumed benefit of the policy is
that removing the child from the home will improve his or her weight
and therefore health, though that assumption is itself
contentious.
[5]
As the table shows, the ethical
considerations are far more complex than health vs. freedom of choice.
To add to the complexity, a given individual may consider one specific
ethical concern more important than all others: for health advocates
the physical health implications may outweigh all other concerns, while
for the parents the sanctity of the parent-child relationship may be
paramount.
[6]

Table 1. Ethical Concerns of an Example Policy in Which the Government
Is Allowed To Remove Obese Children From Homes. The Ethical Concerns Are
Not Necessarily Equally Prevalent and Do Not Necessarily Carry Equal
Weight
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ethical concern [4]        Pro-policy view        Anti-policy view
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Physical health            Improved health if    There may not be the
professionals can     resources or knowledge
affect weight.        to improve the health
of the removed child
in the long term.
Psychosocial well-being    Obesity is            Removing children from
associated with       parents may be more
psychological         traumatic than the
disorders.            obesity.
Equality                   All children have     Obesity affects the
the right to a        poor and minorities to
healthy childhood     a greater extent, so
and life.             this policy will
disproportionately
target these groups.
Informed choice                                  Parents are no longer
able to make decisions
for their child.
Social/cultural values     The social value      The social value placed
placed on fitness     on parent-child
and health is         relationships is
upheld.               violated.
Privacy                                          The family's and
child's privacy may be
compromised.
Attribution of             Responsibility for    The parents are
responsibility             the child's obesity   directly or indirectly
is shared among       blamed for the obesity
society and medical   and stigmatized.
professionals.
Liberty                                          The parent's and
child's liberties are
violated.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Under Which Circumstances Should Obesity Be Considered a Public Health
Concern?
The example in Table 1 has ramifications for specific individuals
in specific circumstances and particularly focuses on minors, who are
broadly considered not fully responsible for their own actions. The
justifications and ramifications of broad health-targeted policies
affecting ordinary adults are quite different.
Before proceeding, we must distinguish between two distinct uses of
the phrase ``public health'' as a prefix to terms such as ``problem,''
``concern,'' or ``issue.'' The phrase is often used merely to convey
that the problem affects a large number of people. The term
``population health'' is emerging to express this idea.
[7]

But in debates about policies that may impinge on individual rights and
values, the phrase is used more specifically to denote health problems
in which individuals' actions may not be sufficient to protect them
from ill health and collective action may offer such protection.
Examples of the latter definition include certain infectious diseases
from which protection can be afforded by mass vaccination and toxins in
public drinking water supplies, which can be minimized by a variety of
government policies.
Using the more specific definition, it is not clear that obesity
qualifies as a public health concern in all
circumstances.
[8]
When considering some putative
contributors to obesity, such as adenovirus 36 or environmental
endocrine disruptors,
[9]
the definition does seem to apply:
individuals generally cannot fully detect and protect themselves from
exposure to these factors by their own action, and collective action at
a societal level mandated by government policies might do so. However,
when considering some other putative contributors to obesity such as
ingesting excess energy or being insufficiently active, there generally
are not external unavoidable constraints, as opposed to influences, on
individuals. Thus, collective action to protect individuals from
undetectable or unavoidable contributing factors is not required in
such cases.
At this point, we should address a related argument. This is
perhaps the most commonly used argument to justify policies about
obesity: obesity is costly to society, largely through the healthcare
system, and this justifies collectively infringing upon individual
liberty to decrease obesity. We do not agree with this argument.
Regardless of the cost of obesity, that cost itself does not
necessarily justify society's imposing such policies. The fact that one
party (society in this case) voluntarily takes on an obligation to
cover some costly benefit to a second party (individual citizens in
this case) does not necessarily give the first party the right to
dictate the behaviors of the second party. There are several
alternatives which include society's not volunteering to take on the
obligation, society's taking on the obligation but distributing the
costs equitably to its members (e.g., charging obese persons more for
health coverage), or society's voluntarily accepting the obligation and
then simply agreeing to be ``magnanimous'' and bear the additional
expense of costly behaviors in the interests of preserving individual
liberty.
This is not to say that obesity is not a problem. Obesity is
associated with many chronic diseases, decreased productivity, and
psychosocial difficulties. But if a health policy targeting a putative
cause of obesity does not address an issue in which individuals'
actions are insufficient to protect themselves from obesity, then the
policy may be unwarranted regardless of cost.
Good Intentions, Unintended Consequences
Various policy advocates insist that obesity needs to be addressed
by public policy, either because they reject the definition of public
health provided above or because they believe action must be taken
despite obesity's not specifically being a public health concern.
Innumerable policy recommendations have been proposed or enacted in an
effort to reduce obesity, from ``sin'' taxes
[10]
and
``psychic'' taxes
[11]
to information campaigns

[12]
and alterations to the built
environment.
[13]
In some cases, the scientific evidence
demonstrates fairly clearly that the recommendation will not
substantially reduce obesity, which means these policies not only raise
ethical concerns but may have no beneficial outcome; other
recommendations are simply equivocal--the potential exists for benefits
and harms--and the balance between ethical consequences and health
benefits is thus uncertain.
[14]

When the outcomes of a particular proposal are uncertain,
especially for interventions grounded in ``common sense,'' one could
ask, ``How could it hurt to try?'' Some ways various policies could
hurt, despite good intentions, were previously
highlighted.
[15]
Such negative consequences include direct
negative effects and encroachment on individual freedom like the list
from ten Have, et al., but also include direct costs of resources,
damage to scientific and political credibility, and distraction from
more promising efforts and policies. In fact, direct, unintended
negative consequences of some policy proposals have been demonstrated
(Table 2).

Table 2. Unintended Consequences of Actions Intended To Affect Obesity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Documented unintended
Action              Good intention            consequence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tax sugar-sweetened      Decrease energy intake  Increased consumption
beverages (SSBs).        to decrease weight.     of beer beyond the
decrease in sugar-
sweetened
beverages.[17]
Alert patients to their  Make the patient aware  Patients may feel
heavy weight status.     of a problem as a       stigmatized, become
first step in           depressed and eat
addressing it.          more, and avoid future
appointments.[16]
Labeling calories on     Awareness of calories   Purchases of SSBs
vending machine          will result in          increased in some
beverages.               decreased               settings.[18]
consumption.
Label ``unhealthful''    Increase ``healthful''  Increased selection of
foods with messages      behaviors and           an ``unhealthful''
that encourage           decrease                snack.[19]
consuming fruits and     ``unhealthful''
vegetables.              behaviors.
Describe certain         Decrease caloric        Consumers consumed more
restaurants and foods    consumption and shift   calories in side
as more ``healthful''    consumption toward      dishes and beverages,
and ``low-calorie.''     ``healthful'' foods.    and underestimated
total meal calories
when choosing
``healthy''
restaurants or main
dishes.[20]
Labeling calories and    Awareness of calories   Men ate more
removing value pricing   and eliminating value   calories.[21]
on menu items.           pricing will decrease
energy consumption.
Discourage chocolate     Decrease caloric        Chocolate consumption
consumption.             consumption.            increased for some
women in some
circumstances.[22]
Encourage children to    Children prompted to    Children ate as many
consume fruits by        eat fruits will         calories when prompted
incorporating them       increase consumption    by fruit games as when
into games.              of ``healthful''        prompted by energy-
foods and decrease      dense-snack games, did
caloric consumption     not increase fruit
overall.                consumption, and ate
more overall than when
not prompted by
food.[23]
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For instance, the ``common sense'' impetus behind informing
patients that they are obese may be the old maxim, ``the first step in
solving a problem is admitting you have one.'' Yet, there is evidence
that clinically relevant words to describe a patient's weight (e.g.,
morbidly obese and obese) are considered stigmatizing, which patients
state may make them avoid future appointments.
[16]

It is important to note that the good intentions and unintended
consequences in the table represent hand-picked examples and these
interventions may not be negative in all circumstances. For instance,
there is some evidence that the effects of menu labeling on consumer
choice can be inconsistent or even positive if delivered in specific
ways, including whether or not educational information is included and
whether the participants are male or female.
[21, 24-25]

Thus, the selected examples in Table 2 bring up yet another ethical
concern: if a policy intervention benefits one subset of the population
but harms another, what action should be taken? One could argue against
implementing a policy so as to do no harm to one group, while another
could argue that failing to act is tantamount to harming the group that
stands to benefit.
[26-27]

Minimizing Negative Ethical Consequences in Reversing Obesity
Marieke ten Have and colleagues raise an important complementary
point to ethical concerns over policy recommendations: ``The fact that
objections are raised does not automatically imply that a programme
should not be implemented''.
[4]
When considering an obesity-
targeted public health policy, we propose six recommendations:

1.  Evaluate whether the proposed policy addresses an exposure that
can truly be considered a public health
concern.
[8]

2.  Be honest about the quality and quantity of evidence about the
policy.
[14]

3.  Generate sufficient, high-quality evidence before implementing
the policy and have plans in place to generate quality
evidence about the effectiveness of the policy once
instated.
[28]

4.  Do not assume there is negligible or no harm from the policy (see
Table 2).

5.  Do not assume that achieving a health benefit overrides respect
for other values and ethical principles.
[4, 29]

6.  Given a choice between two or more plausible policies, choose the
policy that least compromises ethical
values.
[29]

These guidelines should help prevent us from paving the roads to
health with good wishes but unintended consequences.

References

1. Shapiro F.R., ed. The Yale Book of Quotations. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press; 2006: 319.
2. Grynbaum M.M.. New York plans to ban sale of big sizes of sugary
drinks.New York Times. May 30, 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/31/
nyregion/bloomberg-plans-a-ban-onlarge-sugared-
drinks.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. Accessed January 3, 2013.
3. Levine S. Supporters of Mayor Bloomberg's anti-obesity initiative
[news release]. New York: City of New York; September 13, 2012. http://
www.nyc.gov/html/om/html/2012b/support_for_soda_limits.html. Accessed
January 8, 2013.
4. ten Have M., de Beaufort I.D., Teixeira P.J., Mackenbach J.P.,
van der Heide A. Ethics and prevention of overweight and obesity: an
inventory. Obes. Rev. 2011; 12(9): 669-679.
5. Summar P. Anamarie 4 years later: weight gain, size of child, 7,
remain unexplained. Albuquerque Journal. March 13, 2005. http://
www.abqjournal.com/news/metro/320825metro03-13-05.htm. Accessed January
4, 2013.
6. Parents visit overweight child. ABC News. August 31, 2000. http://
abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=95940&page=1. Accessed January 4, 2013.
7. Kindig D., Stoddart G. What is population health? Am. J. Public
Health. 2003; 93(3): 380-383.
8. Anomaly J. Is obesity a public health problem? Public Health
Ethics. 2012; 5(3): 216-221.
9. McAllister E.J., Dhurandhar N.V., Keith S.W., et al. Ten putative
contributors to the obesity epidemic. Crit. Rev. Food. Sci. Nutr. 2009;
49(10): 868-913.
10. Chaufan C., Hong G.H., Fox P. Taxing ``sin foods''--obesity
prevention and public health policy. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009; 361(24):
e113.
11. Lucas, Jr. G. Paternalism and psychic taxes: the government's
use of negative emotions to save us from ourselves. http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2150402. Accessed March 20,
2013.
12. Puhl R., Peterson J.L., Luedicke J. Fighting obesity or obese
persons? Public perceptions of obesity-related health messages. Int. J.
Obes. (Lond). 2012. [Epub ahead of print]
13. White House Task Force on Childhood Obesity. Solving the Problem
of Obesity Within a Generation: White House Task Force on Childhood
Obesity Report to the President. 2010: 78-82. http://www.letsmove.gov/
sites/letsmove.gov/files/
TaskForce_on_Childhood_Obesity_May2010_FullReport.pdf. Accessed March
20, 2013.
14. Casazza K., Fontaine K.R., Astrup A., et al. Myths,
presumptions, and facts about obesity. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013; 368(5):
446-454.
15. Allison D.B. Evidence, discourse and values in obesity-oriented
policy: menu labeling as a conversation starter. Int. J. Obes. (Lond).
2011; 35(4): 464-471.
16. Puhl R., Peterson J.L., Luedicke J. Motivating or stigmatizing?
Public perceptions of weight-related language used by health providers.
Int. J. Obes. (Lond). 2012. [Epub ahead of print]
17. Wansink B., Just D.R., Cawley J., et al. From Coke to Coors: a
field study of a sugar-sweetened beverage tax and its unintended
consequences. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2079840. Accessed March 20, 2013.
18. Jue J.J., Press M.J., McDonald D., et al. The impact of price
discounts and calorie messaging on beverage consumption: A multi-site
field study. Prev. Med. 2012; 55(6): 629-633.
19. Werle C.O.C., Cuny C. The boomerang effect of mandatory sanitary
messages to prevent obesity. Marketing Letters. 2012; 23(3): 883-891.
20. Chandon P., Wansink B. The biasing health halos of fast-food
restaurant health claims: lower calorie estimates and higher side-dish
consumption intentions. J. Consumer Res. 2007; 34(3): 301-314.
21. Harnack L.J., French S.A., Oakes J.M., Story M.T., Jeffery R.W.,
Rydell S.A. Effects of calorie labeling and value size pricing on fast
food meal choices: results from an experimental trial. Int. J. Behav.
Nutr. Phys. Act. 2008; 5: 63.
22. Durkin K., Hendry A., Stritzke W.G. Mixed selection. Effects of
body images, dietary restraint, and persuasive messages on females'
orientations towards chocolate. Appetite. 2013; 60(1): 95-102.
23. Folkvord F., Anschutz D.J., Buijzen M., Valkenburg P.M. The
effect of playing advergames that promote energy-dense snacks or fruit
on actual food intake among children. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012; 97(2):
239-245.
24. Girz L., Polivy J., Herman C.P., Lee H. The effects of calorie
information on food selection and intake. Int. J. Obes. (Lond). 2012;
36(10): 1340-1345.
25. Roberto C.A., Larsen P.D., Agnew H., Baik J., Brownell K.D.
Evaluating the impact of menu labeling on food choices and intake. Am.
J. Public Health. 2010; 100(2): 312-318.
26. Vartanian L.R., Smyth J.M. Primum non nocere: obesity stigma and
public health. J. Bioeth. Inq. 2013; 10(1): 49-57.
27. Gill T.P. Key issues in the prevention of obesity. Br. Med.
Bull. 1997; 53(2): 359-388.
28. Landefeld C.S., Shojania K.G., Auerbach A.D. Should we use large
scale healthcare interventions without clear evidence that benefits
outweigh costs and harms? No. BMJ. 2008; 336(7656): 1277.
29. Have M.T., van der Heide A., Mackenbach J.P., de Beaufort I.D.
An ethical framework for the prevention of overweight and obesity: a
tool for thinking through a programme's ethical aspects. Eur. J. Public
Health. 2012. [Epub ahead of print]

Andrew W. Brown, Ph.D., is a postdoctoral trainee in the Office of
Energetics and Nutrition Obesity Research Center at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham. Trained in nutritional biochemistry and
statistics, Dr. Brown's research focuses on establishing an evidence
base for common assumptions about nutrition and health on such topics
as organic agriculture, artificial sweeteners, and dietary supplements.
His recent work relates to research reporting fidelity and its
implications for science and policy.
David B. Allison, PhD, is distinguished professor, Quetelet Endowed
Professor of Public Health, associate dean for science, director of the
Office of Energetics, and director of the NIH-funded Nutrition Obesity
Research Center at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. He has
authored more than 450 scientific publications, received many awards
for his research and mentoring, is an elected fellow of many academic
societies, and in 2012 was elected to the Institute of Medicine of the
National Academies.

Disclosure

Dr. Brown receives grant support from the Coca-Cola Foundation
through his institution.
Dr. Allison has served as an unpaid board member for the
International Life Sciences Institute of North America. He has
received: payment for board membership from Kraft Foods; consulting
fees from Vivus, Ulmer and Berne, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton,
Garrison, Chandler Chicco, Arena Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, National
Cattlemen's Association, Mead Johnson Nutrition, Frontiers Foundation,
Orexigen Therapeutics, and Jason Pharmaceuticals; lecture fees from
Porter Novelli and the Almond Board of California; payment for
manuscript preparation from Vivus; travel reimbursement from
International Life Sciences Institute of North America; other support
from the United Soybean Board and the Northarvest Bean Growers
Association; grant support through his institution from Wrigley, Kraft
Foods, Coca-Cola, Vivus, Jason Pharmaceuticals, Aetna Foundation, and
McNeil Nutritionals; and other funding through his institution from the
Coca-Cola Foundation, Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Red Bull, World Sugar
Research Organisation, Archer Daniels Midland, Mars, Eli Lilly and
Company, and Merck. Dr. Allison has no financial interests in any of
these companies.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Michelle M. Bohan Brown, Ph.D. (University of
Alabama at Birmingham), for her valuable input.
The viewpoints expressed on this site are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of the AMA.
Copyright 2013 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

attachment 6
Evidence, Discourse, and Values in Obesity-Oriented Policy: Menu-
Labeling as a Conversation Starter
Commentary
D.B. Allison.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Correspondence: Dr. D.B. Allison, Department of Biostatistics,
Ryals Public Health Building, 1665 University Boulevard, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, UAB Station, Birmingham, AL 35294-0022, USA.
E-mail:
[emailprotected]
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Departments of Biostatistics and Nutrition Sciences, Nutrition Obesity
Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
USA.
International Journal of Obesity (2011) 35, 464-471; doi:10.1038/
ijo.2011.28; published online 15 March 2011.

The new study by Dr. Elbel and colleagues provides an opportunity
to reflect on where we are with respect to menu labeling as a tool in
our antiobesity arsenal and more generally to consider some issues
surrounding policy-level proposals for stemming the obesity epidemic.
By `menu labeling', I refer to listing the calories of menu items on
the menu. In this commentary, I address two aspects: evidence on menu
labeling per se; and, at least as important, several scientific,
social/political and epistemological issues that generally apply when
considering obesity-related policies.
Elbel, et al.,\1\ deserve praise for this interesting paper. Dr
Elbel previously offered that menu labeling is a good idea and should
be implemented, stating `I see particular value in it when the options
are this versus nothing at all . . . Given that the problem is so
intense, I think we have to try things.' \2\ Yet, despite his previous
favorable view, he does not mince words upon completing his latest
study: `Our evaluation of New York City's labeling law suggests that .
. . this public policy intervention had no significant effect on
purchasing behavior within our study period for a low-income, racially
and ethnically diverse population of parents and adolescents.' The
authors' qualifying clauses are appropriate as their study cannot rule
out any effect, in any period, for any population. Yet, it certainly is
one more bit of evidence tipping the scales toward the conclusion that
menu labeling does not have substantial or consistent beneficial
effects on energy intake.
Strengths and Limitations of the Study by Elbel, et al.
The study had multiple strengths, including using Newark as a
comparator city, acquisition of actual receipts, the real-world setting
and a population of interest. There are also key limitations. First, it
is an observational (non-experimental) study that, similar to all
observational studies, is subjected to potential confounding and cannot
alone justify conclusions about causation. Second, because no body mass
index measurements were taken, we cannot discern whether a thinner or
more obese clientele was buying food at these restaurants, which might
affect our interpretation of the value of menu labeling or whether some
body mass index categories increased and others decreased their
calories purchased. Third, the statistical analyses did not account for
potential clustering (potential non-independence) of observations
within restaurants and families as it should have, although it seems
unlikely that this would make the nonsignificant results significant.
Finally, and importantly, the study only looks at calories purchased at
a single eating occasion. It does not tell us about calories actually
consumed at that occasion (except perhaps the upper limit), about
whether the knowledge of the calories one purchased on that occasion or
simply being `attuned to calories' might have affected energy intake
throughout the day, nor about how menu labeling affected body weight or
body fat over an extended time period, the ultimate goal of menu
labeling. Although the fact that calories purchased did not differ
before and after menu labeling makes a beneficial effect less
plausible, one cannot rule out that, for example, patrons who realized
how many calories were in their purchases chose to eat less of the
total food they purchased or chose to indulge at the restaurant, but
eat less later.
If we are to understand the value of any macro-environmental
manipulation intended to reduce obesity levels, we must eventually
measure body weight, fat or obesity levels because we know that people
often compensate for perturbations in energy intake or expenditure
(c.f. 3). For example, Anderson and Matsa4 showed that `On average,
when a given individual eats out, he consumes 238 more calories per
meal than when he eats at home. . . . (However,) eating out increases
intake over the entire day by only 35 calories . . . although
individuals tend to eat more at restaurants, they compensate to a
substantial degree by eating less throughout the rest of the day. Meal-
level estimates therefore overestimate the net effect of restaurants on
total caloric intake.'
Empirical Issues
What does the empirical literature show on the effects of menu
labeling?
Although it is impossible to comprehensively summarize this
literature herein (for an extensive tabulation through mid 2009, see
ref. 5), the study by Elbel, et al., accords with most literature in
showing no clear and consistent benefit. Furthermore, to my knowledge,
no study has assessed effects on weight, total energy balance or total
energy intake for periods beyond 24 h. Thus, no studies are truly
probative on the actual question of interest: whether menu labeling
reduces obesity levels.
Of the extant studies, many are observational
6-7
and
those that are experimental are typically, if not exclusively, in
laboratory analog settings (for example, see ref. 8). Some studies show
that menu labeling is associated with or affects reduced calories
purchased, although among men the association appears less than among
women, or is absent entirely.
9-10
Other studies show no
association or effect,\7\ and some even show statistically significant
increases (adverse effects) in calories purchased with menu labeling
among young men.
8, 11
One study suggests menu labeling may
decrease calories that parents purchase for children, but not calories
that they purchase for themselves.\12\ Another study suggests that,
when ingested calories (measured by self-report) after the eating
occasion on the same day in which menu labeling is used are considered,
there is a reduction in total energy intake if the menu labeling is
accompanied by a statement that `The recommended daily caloric intake
for an average adult is 2,000 calories.' \13\ As treatment-induced
biases in self-report measures are well documented (for example, see
ref. 14), it is unclear whether this statement affected actual intake
or merely reporting. Finally, yet another study shows that calorie
labeling may either increase or decrease energy consumed, depending on
the food item labeled.\15\ Thus, although under some circumstances
there are hints of short-term (that is, within one eating occasion or
day) benefits on energy purchased or consumed, overall the results do
not offer compelling evidence for effectiveness. When we contrast these
recent results with earlier literature offering statements such as `. .
. we estimated that menu labeling would avert 40.6% of the 6.75 million
pound average annual weight gain in the county population aged 5 years
and older',\16\ it seems that some initial expectations were overly
optimistic.
Important Biases To Consider
In reviewing this literature, it is also important to note biases
that may be present. One type is what Cope and Allison \17\ called
`white hat bias,' the tendency to distort research information in the
service of seemingly righteous ends. Cope and Allison \18\ cited an
example of the Food and Drug Administration in its proposed ruling on
menu labeling, citing a study as supporting a favorable conclusion that
its data did not actually support. As another example, consider an
article that reported in the abstract `Results were similar in most
analyses conducted stratified by factors such as age, race and
education level'.\8\ Although not explicitly inaccurate, this seems to
be a misleading statement given that in the article's body the authors
report that `Average energy intake was higher among males in the . . .
(menu labeling) conditions compared with those who selected their meal
from the control menu' with a P-value of 0.01 and no such effect was
observed among females. In a similar vein, a recent New York Times \19\
article based on private e-mails from within the NY City Health
Department shows that in their zeal to make consumers `fear' soda as
adiposity promoting, they were willing to knowingly `oversimplify'
messages and knowingly ignore some science.
Another form of bias is publication bias, whereby the probability
that a paper is published or perhaps where it is published, and the
resulting attention it receives, depends on its outcome, which is often
a bias toward studies showing positive effects.\20\ Notably, opinion
pieces suggesting that policies, such as menu labeling, front-of-pack
labeling and taxation of sugar-sweetened beverages, will be beneficial
have appeared in the most prominent journals such as JAMA

21-22
or New England Journal of Medicine.
23-24

Yet, subsequent empirical reports stating that menu labeling, programs
designed to reduce consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages and front-
of-pack labeling do not seem to be very effective have been published
in respectable but far less prominent journals and may receive less
attention. Moreover, several dissertations and theses that have found
no beneficial effects do not appear to be published as yet (see Table
below). If these studies are not published and considered, the
published literature may offer a misleadingly favorable view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reference               Design                      Results
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\   Randomized experiment      ` . . . provision of calorie
information does not alter
food choice but does
influence the amount people
eat. Although the salad and
pasta contained the same
number of calories, calorie
information decreased
consumption of pasta, but
increased consumption of
salad.'
\25\   Randomized experiment      `There are no differences in
total calorie . . . chosen
across the three groups:
price only, nutrition info
only, and price + info
groups.'
\26\   Randomized experiment      `No significant differences
were found in the foods
ordered among the various
menu conditions.'.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reporting quality?
The published research record should have the greatest precision
possible and be reported in a way that helps readers understand the
nature of the research, including its limitations, especially when the
research has the potential to affect clinical care, public health
practices or legislative policies. In part because of this, company-
based clinical trials are held to rigorous scrutiny; hence, perhaps
consequently, the reporting quality of industry-sponsored obesity
trials seems to be at least as good as, and perhaps better than, non-
industry-sponsored trials.\27\ These same rigorous standards of
reporting quality should be applied to all articles in peer-reviewed
journals, especially those that may influence policy. In this light,
consider that, although the paper by Elbel, et al.,\1\ is subtitled `A
Natural Experiment', the design is not an experiment as defined in the
scientific literature (for example, see ref. 28, p. 1) but a type of
observational study sometimes referred to as a quasi-experiment.\29\
Such quasi-experiments do not permit the strong inferences to causation
that true experiments do. Hence, when the conclusion by Elbel, et
al.,\1\ states `This study examines the effects (emphasis added) of
menu labeling . . .', causal language is used without justification.
Although this is a common slip,\30\ it may nevertheless confuse
readers, including mass media reporters or policy makers into thinking
an effect (or lack thereof) has been shown when, in fact, only a lack
of an association has been shown. Further, just as association does not
necessarily imply causation, lack of association does not necessarily
imply lack of causation. Similarly, Elbel, et al.,\1\ discuss `calories
consumed', but the actual outcome of the study was calories purchased.
This is an important distinction because the menu labeling could
conceivably cause consumers to consume less of a perceived high-calorie
item even if it is purchased. I state these points about precision,
when I have made similar errors of imprecise language in my own papers,
to point out that we should hold papers in the public health policy
arena to every bit as rigorous a standard of reporting as we do big
pharmaceutical randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Allowing ourselves
to slip into imprecise language potentially creates misunderstandings
among readers that can lead to erroneous public discourse about
proposed policies.
Social and Philosophical Issues
Does it matter if it matters?
At a presentation on menu labeling at the 2009 Obesity Society
meeting, Professor K.D. Brownell asked `Does it matter if it matters?'
That is, does it matter whether data show that menu labeling is
beneficial in deciding whether to endorse it? He used the instructive
analogy of tags that describe a garment's composition. We do not demand
randomized experiments showing that such tags produce a benefit; we
simply take as given that people have a `right' to know the composition
of the fabrics they purchase. Can we extend this argument by analogy to
menu labeling? Perhaps, but trying invites the question, who is `we' in
the preceding sentence? Is it society at large? Or is it we members of
the scientific community acting in our role as scientists per se rather
than as member of the general public who just happen to be scientists
by profession? This is an important distinction, because if we are not
predicating our endorsement of a policy based on empirical evidence or
even expert scientific opinion on the policy's effects, then this does
not seem to be a scientific issue at all but rather one of politics,
morality or taste, and it is not obvious that scientists qua scientists
have anything special to add here. And if not, is this even a relevant
topic of discussion for our scientific conferences and journals? In
fact, because there are potential costs and harms of all interventions,
balancing risks and benefits is important. By analogy, consider what
Food and Drug Administration wrote in its final ruling banning ephedra
as a weight loss supplement and in determining whether there was a
`significant or unreasonable risk': `There is no requirement that there
be evidence proving . . . harm to specific individuals, only that
scientific evidence supports the existence of risk. . . . `Unreasonable
risk,' thus, represents a relative weighing of . . . known and
reasonably likely risks against its known and reasonably likely
benefits.' \31\ In this light, it does matter if it matters.
Choice-Limiting Versus Choice-Promoting Strategies
Obesity-related legislation is mushrooming. Between 2003 and 2005,
in the United States, at least 717 bills and 134 legislative
resolutions were proposed, of which 17% of bills and 53% of resolutions
were adopted.\32\ Proposals for policy-based approaches almost
invariably meet resistance when the policies offend the moral or
political sensibilities of some persons. This especially occurs when
the proposed policy is seen as treading on the rights or autonomy of
individuals in the interests of public health paternalism. Therefore,
if we wish to minimize such resistance, we should aim to advance
proposals that are freedom and choice promoting, rather than
restricting. Consequently, many advocates of policy level approaches
recognize the merit of `opt-out' versus `opt-in' approaches \33\ that
can be effective in promoting desired behavioral changes without
compromising individual liberty. Unfortunately, not all public health
advocates are sensitive to this issue. For example, proposals for
taxing certain foods, such as sugar-sweetened beverages, limit
individual freedom to negotiate a price for a desired product with the
purveyor. By way of contrast, consider the experiments by experiments
by Sharpe, et al.,\34\ showing that consumers' extremity avoidance
behavior (for example, not wanting to choose the smallest or largest
item in a series) led to a potentially useful effect. Specifically,
merely offering a smaller size drink in addition to (not instead of)
the existing sizes led to an overall reduction in the amount of drink
purchased. On the basis of these results, one could imagine a policy in
which restaurants that offer multiple sizes of drinks would be required
to offer an additional drink smaller than their current smallest size
and, if effective, the principle might be extended to other foods that
are sold in multiple distinct serving sizes. Such a policy would limit
the freedom of corporations, but not of individuals, and hence
presumably meet far less resistance from libertarians.
How might libertarian concerns relate to menu labeling? One benefit
of menu labeling is that it provides more information for consumers to
make more informed choices. As someone with libertarian leanings, I
generally favor more and accurate information being made available to
citizens \35\ and, as an individual consumer, I enjoy learning about
the foods I may choose to eat; therefore, in many settings such as
fast-food restaurants, I would enjoy menus labeled with nutritional
information. However, that is just a statement of my personal
preferences and tastes, not a scientific statement, and other
individuals may have other preferences and tastes. For example, in
2008, `After students and parents raised concerns about displayed
calorie counts leading to or worsening eating disorders, Harvard
University Dining Services removed the index cards detailing
nutritional information from dining halls'.\36\ Regardless of the
empirical basis for the Harvard parents' concerns, their feelings and
preferences are real, and if we seek policies that allow choice, we
will respect such feelings.
How might advocates of menu labeling minimize the resistance they
receive if they try to move menu labeling into all restaurants, not
just into fast-food chains? In this light, consider that this is not
the first time in history that restaurant menu content has been subject
to scrutiny and change. Years ago, it was common for restaurants to
have `blind menus' without prices listed so patrons could take out
their guests without the mood of the dinner being affected by the guest
seeing the prices.\37\ Although such practice is now uncommon, many
higher-end restaurants still provide such menus to patrons upon
request. In this way, consumer choice is enhanced. The price
information is there for all who want it and hidden for those who do
not (in an `opt-out' manner). There is an analogy with respect to
calorie information. In some circumstances, for example, when someone
takes their special someone out for that romantic dinner to propose
marriage or celebrate an anniversary, even the most health conscious
among us may not wish to consider the calories in our food. This
potential preference could be respected and choice enhanced if
consumers had the option of viewing a menu with or without the calorie
contents (in a `opt-out' manner). In a full-service restaurant with
printed menus, this can be easily accomplished, and if menu labeling
advocates propose such a choice-promoting approach, they are likely to
meet applause instead of resistance from libertarians.
Can we lead by example?
Mohandas Gandhi said, `We must be the change we wish to see in the
world. Change can only come from the roots upwards, never from the
treetop down'.\38\ Our more modern guru, Michael Jackson, sang `I'm
Starting With The Man In The Mirror. . . . If You Wanna Make The World
A Better Place, Take A Look At Yourself And Then Make That Change!' In
this light, an irony to the menu-labeling advocacy has occurred.
According to Friedman,\39\ `Fast food is eaten disproportionately by
low-income people, who are more likely to be overweight.' Further,
meals eaten in full-service restaurants tend to be high in calories and
fat as well,\40\ maybe even higher than those in fast-food restaurants,
especially in the case of children's and adolescents'
meals.
41-42
Further, higher income people, who are more
likely to patronize such restaurants, are not exempt from obesity. Yet,
our early public health salvo at restaurants has not been aimed at
those establishments likely frequented by the well-established senior
academicians and high-ranking public health officials who propose the
policies, but at those more frequented by people of lesser means. Other
proposals that seem targeted more at persons of lesser means and that
may seem restrictive or punitive have been made, such as restricting
the provision of toys in children's fast-food meals, disallowing
purchase of sugar-sweetened beverages with Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program funds (food stamps), and restricting the location of
fast-food outlets.
I do not doubt that the intentions of most policy advocates are
sincerely beneficent, nor that the greater uniformity of chain
restaurants offers a rationale for starting there within the category
of restaurants. Nevertheless, incarnations of public health paternalism
aimed more at changing unhealthy behaviors among members of less-
powerful social classes than the equally unhealthy behaviors of the
social classes proposing the policies cannot be seen as Gandhian and
has likely provoked some of the pushback that has occurred. This
sentiment is well illustrated by the feminist writer, Anna Kirkland.

`. . . this environmental approach to obesity has been sold
as a progressive, structurally focused alternative to
stigmatization, but it actually embeds and reproduces a
persistent tension in feminist approaches to social problems:
well-meant efforts to improve poor women's living conditions at
a collective level often end up as intrusive, moralizing, and
punitive direction of their lives . . . good choice dominated
by elite norms of consumption and movement'.\43\

As our field moves forward with the consideration of other public
health policies that may have paternalistic aspects, perhaps we should
start with the man in the mirror. Given the plausible weight-reducing
effects of less heating and air conditioning and more sleep,\44\
perhaps advocates of paternalistic public health policies should first
demand that the use of heating and air conditioning be reduced in the
buildings in which they and we work (which would also have an
environmental and economic benefit) and take a pledge not to work on
grant proposals, manuscripts or e-mail correspondence after 2200 hours.
That would be leadership that walks the walk.
Majority rules?
An argument sometimes made in support of a proposed policy approach
to obesity is that the general population desires the policy. Regarding
menu labeling, a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation briefing states that
survey and focus group research indicates that `males and females of
diverse educational backgrounds reacted favorably to the idea of
labeling menu items with just calorie information or identifying
healthier options with a uniform, commonly defined symbol to help them
make better choices'.\5\ Of course, public opinion should count. In the
extreme case of a unanimous population opinion, the decision is easy.
However, in cases in which there is a majority view favoring a new
policy, but not unanimity, should majority rule? There are reasons to
question `majority rules' as a justification for a new policy, and
again we should be open in acknowledging that subjective values in
addition to scientific evidence come into play. First, one should view
opinion poll results about proposed policies with healthy scientific
skepticism. Research on survey methodology has repeatedly shown that
seemingly minor variations in question wording can have major
influences on responses.\45\ For example, very different responses are
obtained when people are asked whether the government should `forbid'
something as opposed to whether the government should `allow'
something, even though one question is just the complement of the
other. Thus, we should perhaps only be persuaded by results of surveys
purportedly showing popular support when such results are replicated
with multiple differently worded questionnaires prepared by different
parties.
Second, sometimes the public may desire a policy based on an
erroneous view of its likely effects. Those advocates who accept
paternalistic public health approaches could argue that one should act
in accordance with the public's interests, not necessarily on the basis
of their expressed views.
Finally, and most importantly from a libertarian view in which
individual freedom is paramount, the desire of the majority is
insufficient justification to tread upon the rights of the individual.
Consider, for example, our response to a proposal that we have required
prayer of a particular religious doctrine because the majority of the
population thinks it is a desirable thing. The United States and many
other democratic countries have already affirmed that, regardless of
popular view, such a proposal is unacceptable. Clearly, most proposed
obesity-related policies, including mandatory menu labeling, are not so
extreme, and yet we should remember that multiple children in multiple
countries (including the United States) have been removed from their
parents' and homes by governmental actions on the basis of protecting
them from their obesity-promoting environment,
46-47
and that
in 2008 three Mississippi legislators proposed `An Act To Prohibit
Certain Food Establishments From Serving Food To Any Person Who Is
Obese, Based On Criteria Prescribed By The State Department Of Health'
(http://billstatus.ls.state.ms.us/documents/2008/pdf/HB/0200-0299/
HB0282IN.pdf). Not surprisingly, the legislation was never enacted.
Thus, we should be skeptical of majority public opinion as a
justification for restrictive policies.
Epistemological Issues
What constitutes an adequate evidence base?
Consider that, after analyzing 38 policy documents from five
European countries, authors found that `Only 22% of the obesity
statements were evidence based'.\48\ We seem to have a dearth of
evidence in the obesity policy domain. There is little (although not
zero) debate that randomized experiments offer the highest quality
evidence we can obtain about the effects of interventions, including
policies. There is also little debate that results obtained from well-
done randomized experiments, especially on long-term outcomes on
variables such as body weight or fat, will not always be available when
we wish to make a statement, conclusion or decision about a proposed
policy. In such situations, what should the standard of evidence be and
who gets to decide that standard? At present, there is no obvious
consensus. Importantly, answering the question of what constitutes
adequate evidence depends on the context in which the question is
called and will not be the academic community's alone (or in some cases
at all) to decide. For example, in deciding whether a particular piece
of litigation is justifiable, the level of scientific evidence required
will be determined by applicable law as interpreted by the judiciary,
not by academics.
Second, in considering what constitutes adequate evidence, it is
essential to distinguish between conclusion making and decision making.
Scientists and public health advocates sometimes clash because they
conflate this distinction. The advocate, who may be someone who is also
sometimes a scientist, maligns the scientist qua scientist as trying to
hold back progress and upholding an unreasonable standard, whereas the
scientist maligns the advocate as playing `fast and loose with' or even
ignoring scientific evidence. The problem is rarely that the two
parties disagree on what evidence exists or what it shows, but rather
they are answering two different types of questions and fail to realize
or acknowledge this. The scientist is concerned with questions about
the truth of propositions and addresses questions such as `By generally
accepted scientific standards, can we reasonably conclude today to a
reasonable degree of certainty that A causes B?' In contrast, the well-
meaning public health advocate is concerned with questions about what
we should do, such as `Given what we know today, however limited, is it
prudent to implement A in the hopes that B will happen in response?' If
we recognize this, there is no contradiction between the scientist
saying that the evidence for the benefit of a proposed policy is weak,
limited, inconclusive, or even non-existent and the advocate saying
that, despite the fact that there is insufficient evidence to conclude
that the policy will be effective, we should give it a try to determine
whether it might plausibly work and whether the likely benefits
outweigh the likely costs. Recognizing this, the honest advocate need
not and should not try to inflate the evidence in support of a policy
they wish to advance, as seems to be done now,
18-19
but can
honestly acknowledge the degree of uncertainty, respect scientists for
contributing discussions of evidence to promote an informed decision-
making process, and then advocate for prudential decision making.
Are randomized studies needed and possible?
Some advocates of policy approaches are dismissive of the role of
randomized trials. In arguing this position, several valid points are
commonly noted. These are listed in the first column of Table below.
Unfortunately, gaining acceptance of these points is often followed by
a rhetorical sleight of hand, whereby they are replaced with the far
stronger and fundamentally different points listed in the second column
of the table below. Writings that cogently show the fallacies of these
points are listed in the third column.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Invalid points often
Valid points about which    conflated with the valid       References
there is  little if any       ones by advocates of       disputing the
debate                 proposed  actions        invalid point
------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is difficult to         It is impossible and perhaps             \49\
conduct randomized         irrelevant to conduct
experiments to test the    randomized experiments to
effects of public          test the effects of public
policies.                  policies.
It is sometimes necessary  Once we decide to move                   \50\
to move forward and take   forward, there is no need
actions even in the        to do so in a manner in
absence of the highest     which the highest quality
quality evidence that is   evidence that is
practically obtainable.    practically obtainable is
indeed obtained.
In some situations (e.g.,  In general, it is                       51 52
when considering smoking   appropriate to draw strong
as a cause of lung         conclusions about causation
cancer), the scientific    in the absence of
community has judged       experimental evidence.
that it is appropriate
to draw strong
conclusions about
causation in the absence
of experimental
evidence.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In conversation, a colleague who is a strong advocate of public
policy interventions such as menu labeling and taxation of selected
foods said, `You know, David, we are never going to know for sure
whether these policies work before we implement them.' I replied, `You
may be right, but the way we are going about it, we will never know
afterward either.' It is unfortunate that, to date, all the evidence we
have on menu labeling is either from short-term laboratory analog
experiments or from non-experimental observational studies. Although
practical complexities undoubtedly exist, it is certainly possible that
as the Federal Government proceeds with national menu labeling \53\
they could randomly introduce it in \1/2\ of the states or counties in
the United States and not in the other \1/2\ for a year in a valid
cluster-randomized trial. At year's end, they might plausibly have
unequivocal evidence on the effects of menu labeling on food purchases.
Such data could offer guidance about whether to then implement the
program in the remaining locations or discontinue the requirement.
Similarly, many major national fast-food restaurant chains, were they
inclined to conduct such a study, would easily have the financial
resources and computer recording infrastructure of purchases to conduct
such a trial by randomly assigning labeled menus to some of restaurants
and unlabeled menus to others and then comparing the sales figures. If
such studies were conducted at the state or county level, one could
even solicit participation from and enroll specific subjects who are
known to be high fast-food consumers at baseline and go beyond merely
examining the effects on purchases at the cluster level; instead, one
could study the actual end point of interest, body weight or fat in
individual persons. Remarkably, for all the passion that public policy
advocates bring to the table to push policies forward, they have not
used that passion to demand that such studies be carried out. If they
did so, perhaps they would help us learn how effective the policies
they advocate are.
Could it hurt?
An argument sometimes made by advocates of policies that seem
intuitively sound to them but are not supported by strong evidence is
that, even if ineffective, such policies will be harmless. This is
fallacious reasoning. There are at least five types of harm, or more
generically cost, that may accrue. The first is direct negative effects
of the policies on collateral outcomes (concerns about economic impacts
and stigmatization are sometimes raised) or on the outcomes that are
themselves the targets of policy, such as the increase in calories
purchased by males seen in some menu-labeling studies.
11, 35

The second is encroachment on individual freedom that occurs with some
policies as discussed earlier. The third is that if the scientific
community advances a policy as very likely to be beneficial, which is
then found not to be beneficial, our credibility may be damaged and,
like the boy who cried wolf, our voices will carry less weight when we
genuinely have important messages to convey. The fourth cost is
distraction. When we focus our efforts on advocating and implementing
methods that turn out to be ineffective, we are not spending those
efforts on other approaches that might be better. Finally, there are
direct resource costs. Every dollar our society spends implementing one
policy is $1 less that we have available to support education, the
arts, or any number of other things our citizens may find as equally
deserving causes. This is not to say that these harms or costs will
come to fruition in implementing any one policy, but they are
plausible, should enter into society's decision analysis, and justify
asking about evidence of benefit when considering proposed policy
approaches to obesity.
Conclusion
The timely study by Elbel, et al.,\1\ adds to the growing body of
evidence suggesting, but not demonstrating, that menu labeling has no
important effect on reducing calories purchased at a single dining
occasion. Moreover, it highlights the frustrating truth that, as such
policies are implemented, they are not implemented in a manner that
allows the most rigorous assessments of their effects to be conducted.
Like all other studies to date, the study by Elbel, et al.,\1\ does not
offer strong evidence about causation (or lack thereof), information
about long-term effects, or effects on the variable that menu labeling
is intended to affect, namely, obesity levels. As we move forward to
consider this and other policy-level proposals for addressing obesity,
as scientists we should hold high standards of discourse and of
evidence and we should maintain a sense of humility about the accuracy
of our predictions about the effects of our proposed policies. Society
will sometimes be justified in moving forward even in the absence of
strong evidence for the benefits of a proposed policy; yet, as
scientists we should offer our most unbiased assessment of the current
evidential base and ask that, as any new policies are implemented,
rigorous evaluations of their effects should be conducted.

Conflict of Interest

Dr. Allison has received grants, honoraria, donations and consulting
fees from numerous food, beverage, pharmaceutical companies and other
commercial, government and nonprofit entities with interests in obesity
and nutrition; receives royalties from obesity-related books; and in
the past has received funds from litigators representing the restaurant
industry in menu-labeling litigation.

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Drs. Kevin Fontaine, Alexis Wood and Kyle Grimes
for their helpful comments.

Disclaimer

The opinions expressed are the author's and not necessarily those of
any organization with which he is affiliated.

References

1. Elbel B., Gyafami J., Kersh R. Child and adolescent fast food
choice and the influence of calorie labeling: a natural experiment.
Int. J. Obesity 2011; 35: 493-500.
2. Winerman L. With menu labeling law, diners will soon know calorie
counts, 2010, http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/2010/03/with-menu-
labeling-law-diners-will-soon-know-caloriecounts.html#. Accessed 28
December 2010.
3. Faith M.S., Fontaine K.R., Baskin M.L., Allison D.B. Toward the
reduction of population obesity: macro-level environmental approaches
to the problems of food, eating, and obesity. Psychol. Bull. 2007; 133:
205-226.
4. Anderson M.L., Matsa D.A. Are restaurants really supersizing
America? Amer. Econ. J: Appl. Econ. (in press). http://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id%1079584. Accessed December 28, 2010.
5. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Menu labeling: does providing
nutrition information at the point of purchase affect consumer
behavior?, 2009, http://www.rwjf.org/files/research/
20090630hermenulabeling.pdf. Accessed 26 December 2010.
6. Pulos E., Leng K. Evaluation of a voluntary menu-labeling program
in full-service restaurants. Am. J. Public Health 2010; 100: 1035-1039.
7. Elbel B., Kersh R., Brescoll V.L., Dixon L.B. Calorie labeling
and food choices: a first look at the effects on low-income people in
New York City. Health Aff. (Millwood) 2009; 28: w1110-w1121.
8. Harnack L.J., French S.A., Oakes J.M., Story M.T., Jeffery R.W.,
Rydell S.A. Effects of calorie labeling and value size pricing on fast
food meal choices: Results from an experimental trial. Int. J. Behav.
Nutr. Phys. Act. 2009; 5: 63.
9. Bollinger B., Leslie P., Sorensen A. Calorie Posting in Chain
Restaurants. Unpublished manuscript. http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/news/
StarbucksCaloriePostingStudy.pdf. Accessed 29 December2010.
10. Gerend M.A. Does calorie information promote lower calorie fast
food choices among college students? J. Adolesc. Health 2009; 44: 84-
86.
11. Aaron J., Evans R., Mela D. Paradoxical effect of a nutrition
labeling 33. Scheme in a student cafeteria. Nutr. Res. 1995; 15: 1251-
1261.
12. Tandon P.S., Wright J., Zhou C., Rogers C.B., Christakis D.A.
Nutrition menu labeling may lead to lower-calorie restaurant meal
choices for children. Pediatrics 2010; 125: 244-248.
13. Roberto C.A., Larsen P.D., Agnew H., Baik J., Brownell K.D.
Evaluating the impact of menu labeling on food choices and intake. Am.
J. Public Health 2010; 100: 312-318.
14. Taber D.R., Stevens J., Murray D.M., Elder J.P., Webber L.S.,
Jobe J.B., et al. The effect of a physical activity intervention on
bias in self-reported activity. Ann. Epidemiol. 2009; 19: 316-322.
15. Girz L.P.. The Effects of Calorie Information on Food Selection
and Intake (Master's Thesis). University of Toronto: Toronto, Canada,
2009.
16. Kuo T., Jarosz C.J., Simon P., Fielding J.E. Menu labeling as a
potential strategy for combating the obesity epidemic: a health impact
assessment. Am. J. Public Health 2009; 99: 1680-1686.
17. Cope M.B., Allison D.B. White hat bias: examples of its presence
in obesity research and a call for renewed commitment to faithfulness
in research reporting. Int. J. Obes. 2010; 34: 84-88.
18. Cope M., Allison D.B. White hat bias: a threat to the integrity
of scientific reporting. Acta. Paediatr. 2010; 99: 1615-1617.
19. Hartocollis A. E-mails reveal dispute over city's ad against
sodas. New York Times 2010, e-pub ahead of print 29 October 2010.
20. Emerson G.B., Warme W.J., Wolf F.M., Heckman J.D., Brand R.A.,
Leopold S.S. Testing for the presence of positive-outcome bias in peer
review: a randomized controlled trial. Arch. Intern. Med. 2010; 170:
1934-1939.
21. Ludwig D.S., Brownell K.D. Public health action amid scientific
uncertainty: the case of restaurant calorie labeling regulations. JAMA
2009; 302: 434-435.
22. Nestle M., Ludwig D.S. Front-of-package food labels: public
health or propaganda? JAMA 2010; 303: 771-772.
23. Brownell K.D., Farley T., Willett W.C., Popkin B.M., Chaloupka
F.J., Thompson J.W., et al. The public health and economic benefits of
taxing sugar-sweetened beverages. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009; 361: 1599-
1605.
24. Nestle M. Health care reform in action-calorie labeling goes
national. N. Engl. J. Med. 2010; 362: 2343-2345.
25. Read J.L. The Effect of Point-of-Purchase Nutrition Information
on Consumer Choice in Fast Food Restaurants (Master's Thesis).
University of Guelph: Ontario, Canada, 2008.
26. Platkin C.S. Think Before You Eat: Calories and Exercise
Equivalents Presented on Menus at Point-of-Choice (Doctoral
Dissertation). Florida International University: Miami, FL, 2009.
27. Thomas O., Thabane L., Douketis J., Chu R., Allison D.B.
Industry funding and the reporting quality of large long-term weight
loss trials. Int. J. Obes. 2008; 32: 1531-1536.
28. Cox D.R., Reid N. The Theory of the Design of Experiments.
Chapman & Hall/CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, 2000.
29. Campbell D.T., Stanley J.C. Experimental and Quasi-Experimental
Designs for Research. Rand McNally: Chicago, 1963.
30. Cofield S.C., Corona R.V., Allison D.B. Use of causal language
in observational studies of obesity and nutrition. Obes. Facts 2010; 3:
353-356.
31. Food and Drug Administration. Federal Register Final Rule, FFR
696787 Final Rule Declaring Dietary Supplements Containing Ephedrine
Alkaloids Adulterated Because They Present an Unreasonable Risk, 2004,
http://www.fda.gov/Food/DietarySupplements/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/RegulationsLaws/ucm079733.htm.
Accessed 8 January 2011.
32. Boehmer T.K., Brownson R.C., Haire-Joshu D., Dreisinger M.L.
Patterns of childhood obesity prevention legislation in the United
States. Prev. Chronic Dis. 2007; 4: A56.
33. Yudin H. Opt out, not opt in. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 2003; 169:
279.
34. Sharpe K.M., Staelin R., Huber J. Using extremeness aversion to
fight obesity: policy implications of context dependent demand. J.
Consumer Res. 2008; 35: 406-422.
35. Allison D.B., Heshka S., Sepulveda D., Heymsfield S.B. Counting
calories--caveat emptor. JAMA 1993; 270: 1454-1456.
36. Hu M.Y. Calorie cards removed from dining halls. Harvard Crimson
2008, http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2008/9/24/calorie-cards-removed-
from-dining-halls/.
37. Bruni F. Disappearing Ink. New York Times 2006, http://
dinersjournal.blogs.nytimes.com/2006/08/15/disappearing-ink/?apage%3.
Accessed 28 December 2010.
38. Quoted in Gandhi A. In: Einhorn L., Gandhi A. (eds). Forgiveness
and Child Abuse: Would YOU Forgive?, Chapter 17. Robert Reed
Publishers: Bandon, OR, 2006. p 71.
39. Friedman R.R. Scientific Studies Related to Menu Labeling. http:/
/www.cspinet.org/new/pdf/
yale_rudd_ctr_menu_labeling_grouped_studies.pdf. Accessed 29 December
2010.
40. Guthrie J.F., Lin B.H., Frazao E. Role of food prepared away
from home in the American diet, 1977-78 versus 1994-96: changes and
consequences. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2002; 34: 140-150.
41. Serrano E.L., Jedda V.B. Comparison of fast-food and non-fast-
food children's menu items. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2009; 41: 132-137.
42. Yamamoto J.A., Yamamoto J.B., Yamamoto B.E., Yamamoto L.G.
Adolescent calorie/fat menu ordering at fast food restaurants compared
to other restaurants. Hawaii Med. J. 2006; 65: 231-236.
43. Kirkland A. The environmental account of obesity: a case for
feminist skepticism. J. Women Culture Society 2011; 36: 463-485.
44. McAllister E.J., Dhurandhar N.V., Keith S.W., Aronne L.J.,
Barger J., Baskin M., et al. Ten putative contributors to the obesity
epidemic. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2009; 49: 868-913.
45. Schwartz N., Groves R.N., Schuman H. Survey Methods. In: Gilbert
D., Fiske S.T., Lindzey T. (eds). The Handbook of Social Psychology.
vol. 1, 4th edn. Oxford University Press: New York, NY, 1998, pp. 143-
179.
46. Faure G. Should parents of obese kids lose custody? Time
Magazine 2009, http://www.time.com/time/health/article/
0,8599,1930772,00.html. Accessed 26 December 2010.
47. Murtagh L. Judicial interventions for morbidly obese children.
J. Law Med. Ethics 2007; 35: 497.
48. Martin-Bautista E., Campoy C., Decsi T., Bokor S., von Rosen-von
Hoewel J., Laitinen K., et al. Obesity related programming statements
in infant feeding policies in five European countries. Adv. Exp. Med.
Biol. 2009; 646: 169-173.
49. Rosen L., Manor O., Engelhard D., Zucker D. In defense of the
randomized controlled trial for health promotion research. Am. J.
Public Health 2006; 96: 1181-1186.
50. Ayres I. Government By Chance. In: Super Crunchers: Why Thinking-
by-Numbers Is the New Way to Be Smart, Chapter 3. Bantam Books, 2007.
51. Green M.D., Freedman D.M., Gordis L. Reference Guide on
Epidemiology. In: Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence, 2nd edn.
Federal Judicial Center, Washington, D.C., http://www.fjc.gov/public/
pdf.nsf/lookup/sciman06.pdf/$file/sciman06.pdf. Accessed 27 December
2010.
52. Hill A.B. The environment and disease: association or causation?
Proc. R. Soc. Med. 1965; 58: 295-300.
53. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry: Questions
and Answers Regarding the Effect of Section 4205 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 on State and Local Menu and
Vending Machine Labeling Laws. Fed. Reg. 2010; 75: 164 http://
edocket.access.gpo.gov/2010/pdf/2010-21067.pdf.

attachment 7
The Development of Scientific Evidence for Health Policies for Obesity:
Why and How
Molly B. Richardson,
[1-2]
Michelle S.
Williams,
[3]
Kevin R. Fontaine,
[2]-[3]
David B.
Allison.
[2], *

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Department of Population Health Sciences, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University.
\[2]\ Nutrition Obesity Research Center, University of Alabama at
Birmingham (UAB).
\[3]\ School of Nursing, Auburn University.
* Corresponding Author: School of Public Health, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Ryals Building, Room 140J, 1665 University
Boulevard, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, Phone: (205) 975-9167,

[emailprotected]
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Running title: Scientific process to develop obesity policy

Acknowledgements: Supported in part by the NIH (T32HL105349) and
the Nutrition Obesity Research Center (P30DK0563360). The opinions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
those of the NIH or any other organization. We gratefully acknowledge
Gregory Pavela, Alexandra S. Allison, Ted Kyle, Jennifer Holmes, Olivia
Affuso, Paula Chandler-Laney, and Daniel L. Smith, Jr. for input on
this manuscript.
Conflict of Interest: DBA has received financial support from
numerous nonprofit and for profit organizations including government,
litigators, food and beverage, pharmaceutical, and publishing
companies.
Abstract
Potential obesity-related policy approaches have recently been
receiving more attention. While some have been implemented and others
only proposed, few have been formally evaluated. We discuss the
relevance, and in some cases irrelevance, of some of the types of
evidence that are often brought to bear in considering obesity-related
policy decisions. We discuss major methods used to generate such
evidence, emphasizing study design and the varying quality of the
evidence obtained. Third, we consider what the standards of evidence
should be in various contexts, who ought to set those standards, as
well as the inherent subjectivity involved in making policy decisions.
Finally, we suggest greater transparency from both academics and
policymakers in the acknowledgment of subjectivities so they can
distinguish and communicate the roles played by empirical evidence and
subjective values in the formulation of policy.
Introduction
Proposals to use policy measures such as taxing persons with
obesity as ways to raise revenue and discourage poor health behaviors,
including high levels of consumption, existed at least as early as
1904.\1\ However, it was largely in the mid-1990s that the academic and
professional dialogue around obesity shifted from one dominated by
basic science and clinical research to involve a third branch, namely,
public health approaches. Inspired in part by the successful efforts to
curtail cigarette smoking, potential obesity-related policy approaches
began receiving more attention. A selection of such policies include,
but are not limited to, providing information (e.g., labeling
restaurant menus with nutritional facts), marketing ideas to inspire
behavior change (e.g., placing public health posters in subway systems
to discourage or encourage certain food or activity behaviors),
mandating the measurement and reporting of the body mass index (BMI) of
schoolchildren to parents, enacting worksite economic contingencies,
changing food offerings for schoolchildren, zoning of allowable
restaurants, banning the sale of certain portion sizes, taxing or
subsidizing certain foods, and providing economic incentives and
disincentives through insurance charges. Some of these have been
implemented and some have only been proposed. Few have been rigorously
evaluated and fewer still have unequivocal evidence demonstrating
efficacy in stabilizing or reducing body weight.
Because the implementation of such policies typically involves at
least some of the following: money, limitations on the freedom of
businesses to engage in certain types of commerce, limitations on
personal freedom, and opportunity cost with regard to time and
attention; it is not surprising that obesity-related policy proposals
often provoke heated debate. Moreover, the debate frequently focuses on
moral issues, sometimes involving the balance between autonomy and
beneficence or individual fairness and societal benefits. Because these
issues revolve around morals and values, they are difficult to
reconcile. As such, they are repeatedly deferred while the dialogue
jumps to questions of judging the quality of evidence. Yet even here,
disagreements abound as to the strength of evidence and whether it
supports a particular position on a proposed policy. Equally important
and sometimes debated, but often simply glossed over, are questions
such as, (1) What type of evidence is needed and appropriate for a
particular situation? (2) How can such evidence be generated? and (3)
Is evidence even needed at all to justify the implementation or
rejection of a particular proposed policy?
In this article, we address three macro-level questions. First,
concerning evidence, we raise questions about the relevance of some
types of evidence that are often brought to bear in policy dialogues.
Second, we discuss the major methods used to generate such evidence,
with particular focus on the fact that there are a range of study
designs (i.e., ordinary association tests to pure randomized controlled
trials [RCTs]) that yield evidence of varying quality and varying
ability to support causality. Third, we consider what the standards of
evidence should be in various contexts, as well as who ought to set
those standards, and emphasize the inherent subjectivities involved in
making policy decisions. We conclude by noting that it would be
beneficial if both academics and policymakers were transparent in
recognizing and conveying those subjectivities while taking care to
both understand and distinguish the roles of empirical evidence and
subjective values.
What Do We Want Evidence About?
Evidence Regarding Plausibility
When considering a potential policy, the first evidence-oriented
question we might ask is, ``Is there evidence that the policy will
plausibly be effective?'' That is, is there reason to speculate that
the policy will work? Of course, beyond simply saying we cannot prove
the contrary, the plausibility of a proposition is subjective, but
one's reasons for declaring something plausible or implausible can be
specified. At the most superficial level, many obesity policies can be
deemed plausible on the basis of the simple concept of energy imbalance
as a cause of obesity. Any policy directed at either increasing energy
expenditure or decreasing energy intake might thus be assessed as
plausible by some. In some cases, this general plausibility is all that
is needed to initiate a policy. For example, when considering calorie-
labeling of restaurant menus, U.S. District Judge Richard J. Holwell
ruled that:

``The Court agrees with Dr. Allison that one cannot conclude
with scientific certainty from the available evidence that a
regulation of this type will ultimately be successful in
combating obesity. But even if there are no data demonstrating
conclusively that Regulation 81.50 will be effective,
conclusive proof is not required to establish a reasonable
relationship between Regulation 81.50 and the City's interest
in reducing obesity. Based on the evidence presented by the
City, as well as common sense, it seems reasonable to expect
that some consumers will use the information disclosed pursuant
to Regulation 81.50 to select lower calorie meals when eating
at covered restaurants and that these choices will lead to a
lower incidence of obesity.'' \2\

In contrast, empiricists (or Bayesians) might state that the
existing evidence indicates that no proposed public health approach to
obesity has been convincingly shown to work or, at best, that no
approach has more than very modest effects when it has been applied or
tested.
3-4
Therefore, the a priori expectation is that the
next proposed policy will have little to no effect. By analogy, this
rationale is similar to the statistically minded high school guidance
counselor who advises the basketball star to study academics because,
while the counselor cannot rule out that this player will be the one to
get drafted to the NBA or WNBA, it is unlikely.
Plausibility may also be low in some people's minds for policies
that aim to affect one component of energy balance in one context while
leaving other components of energy balance untouched. Such policies,
even if effective in altering the one component of energy balance in
the desired direction, will only be effective if this alteration is not
compensated (or is at least incompletely compensated) for by
alterations in other components of energy balance. Empirical,
experimental evidence indicates that such compensation does indeed
occur, although the compensation is usually incomplete.\5\ This
suggests that the plausible effects of policies that work through
proposed alterations in one component of energy balance should not be
based on models that assume no compensation (c.f., The Caloric
Calculator, which estimates average caloric impact, which predicts
effect sizes for childhood obesity interventions),\6\ as such models
will likely markedly overestimate plausible effects.
The plausible benefit of many proposed policy approaches also rests
of the assumption of additivity--a small effect coupled with several
other slight effects will collectively produce a larger response in the
outcome. This is particularly applicable to the category of ``nudge,''
a term introduced by Thaler and Sunstein to describe multiple, minor,
likely unnoticeable changes to alter one's behavior.\7\ Rozin, et al.,
showed that multiple modest changes, or nudges, affecting food
accessibility (location of ingredients at a salad bar and size and type
of serving utensils) in a cafeteria setting reduced the calories
purchased during single meals without removing choices.\8\ They
predicted that the reduced purchasing would translate to a cumulative
benefit of weight loss over 1 year. Again, this type of study relies on
several assumptions: that fewer calories purchased translates to fewer
calories consumed; that ``all else is equal,'' i.e., that no
compensation occurs; that short-term effects persist in the long term;
that multiple interventions have additive effects; and that effects of
interventions work equally well when subjects are fully aware of the
interventions (as in ordinary commerce) as when the interventions are
not disclosed (as in many studies). Such a study also brings up
questions of whether patrons would purchase fewer calories in an
ordinary setting such as a store and that would result in weight loss.
For example, Wansink. et al., found that increasing the cost of soda
resulted in reduced soda purchased but was associated with increased
sales of beer.\9\ These nudges also may elicit a different response
when persons are made aware of the interventions or with repeated long-
term exposure (i.e., daily or weekly grocery shopping).\10\ The nudge
approach has also been criticized on several other
grounds,
11-12
and such criticism highlights that what seems
plausible to one person may not seem so to another.
Evidence Regarding Postulated Intermediaries
Evidence of the effectiveness of obesity policy may also rest on
evidence regarding presumed mediating variables. An example is a
proposed policy for an action intended to increase fruit and vegetable
consumption, with the main assumption being that increased intake of
fruits and vegetables (the mediating factor) will decrease adiposity or
promote less weight gain. Empirical support for the policy may include
a demonstration that the proposed action does indeed lead to increased
fruit and vegetable consumption. However, such support can only be
suggestive because it does not necessarily follow that increases in
fruit and vegetable intake will actually decrease or prevent adiposity
or lessen weight gain, and the same argument applies for other
postulated intermediaries.
13-14

Evidence from Analogue Studies
Analogue studies attempt to represent key aspects of ordinary life
while controlling or limiting external factors, which increases
internal validity and can yield key insights \15\ yet potentially
decreases external validity.\16\ An example of an analogue study was
conducted by Epstein, et al., to compare the effects of taxation versus
subsidization on food purchases.\17\ They found that using taxes on
foods with low nutrient density but also high caloric content was
successful at reducing caloric intake, whereas subsidizing low-calorie
foods increased caloric intake. This type of evidence supports the
plausibility, but not necessarily the effectiveness, of a policy for
decreasing obesity. One area of opportunity is the use of pragmatic
RCTs, which emphasize rigorous methods in real-world contexts.\18\
Direct Evidence Regarding Effectiveness
Of course, the key evidence desired is evidence of a policy's
effectiveness on the ultimate outcome: decreased levels of obesity.
Although optimal, such evidence is often difficult to obtain.
Ultimately, an ideal study would bear direct evidence of effectiveness,
under actual conditions of use, during extended periods of time, and
would be of a nature to allow strong inference of cause and effect.
These would be randomized studies of actual policy or of extremely
close proximity. There is no question that these studies would be
difficult, expensive, time-consuming, and in some cases potentially
unethical. We do not advocate a lack of action without this type of
evidence; however, there should be a clear understanding that without
such evidence, statements about the effects of a policy remain
speculative.
Evidence Regarding Unintended Consequences
It is important to keep in mind that implementation of any policy
often brings with it unintended and undesirable consequences. Many of
these consequences have been previously highlighted.
19-20

Such consequences can include, but are not limited to, inequitable
distribution of the costs to implement the policy, encroaching on
individual freedoms, over-consumption or increased purchasing of
certain foods, stigmatization, depression, and avoidance of doctor
appointments.
19-20
One author contends that the emphasis on
body weight has led to weight-based bullying, increased disordered
eating, body dissatisfaction, extreme dieting, and complications from
obesity surgery, among others.\21\ While some evidence exists on
potential unintended and undesirable consequences, it is fairly limited
as this field has not been fully investigated. Again, fear of
unintended negative consequences should not paralyze us into inaction,
but should lead us to practice humility about the potential value of
our proposals, to think things through carefully, and to vigilantly
monitor implemented policies for any potential unintended consequences.
Evidence Regarding Public Opinion
Reports of the results of public opinion surveys on the
desirability of particular obesity-related policies have proliferated
in recent years.\22\ By implication, this suggests that if a large
portion of the population supports a proposed policy, then implementing
the proposal is merited. Is such a conclusion reasonable? Should
evidence of public opinion about the desirability of policies be
considered?
Suh, et al., suggest that public opinion should be solicited to
``better understand the public mindset about relevant policy
strategies, and to identify attitudes among different subsets of the
population towards specific legal measures that can increase
protections for individuals affected by obesity.'' \23\ Pollard, et
al., also contend that it is important to survey public opinion or
community perception, especially when the policy in question involves
what may be thought of as government ``interference'' in issues
concerning food (labeling, advertising, and supply of environmentally
friendly food).\24\ But are such opinions always important? When
assessing public opinion is warranted, which methodologic issues are
involved? And, are there actually circumstances when assessing public
opinion would be quite inappropriate? Because this article is primarily
about evidence for effectiveness, we consider these questions only
briefly here.
Are scientific assessments of public opinions about policies always
important? Throughout the history of the United States, political
leaders have wrestled with the pursuit of what seems morally right
based on fundamental principles and doing what is popular. One such
example is the famous Lincoln-Douglas debates about slavery. In one of
the debates, Lincoln famously said, ``In this and like communities,
public sentiment is everything. With public sentiment, nothing can
fail; without it nothing can succeed. Consequently he who moulds public
sentiment, goes deeper than he who enacts statutes or pronounces
decisions. He makes statutes and decisions possible or impossible to be
executed.'' \25\ It is noteworthy that Lincoln, like some modern day
authors interested in obesity policy,\26\ is talking about ``moulding''
public opinion to enable what one has already determined is right and
just, and not assessing public opinion to determine what is right and
just.
If Lincoln had conducted a public opinion poll and found that most
pre-Civil War Americans favored retaining slavery in the United States,
would he have judged that pertinent evidence as to whether the practice
should be abolished? Would we? The answer is evidently no. When
something is judged to be morally wrong, it is wrong and should be
``off the table'' for discussion regardless of its popularity. Consider
the recent posting from Ted Kyle on a ``UK Proposal for Explicit Weight
Discrimination in Healthcare.'' \27\ Kyle argues that a proposed policy
was a grossly unjust form of discrimination against persons with
obesity in terms of health care access. Or, consider proposed policies
that entail institutionalized ``fat shaming'' \28\ or a failed/
withdrawn Mississippi bill to limit access of persons with obesity to
restaurants.\29\ Many, including the current authors, would consider
such proposals morally indefensible, and if one adopts such a position,
then no public opinion polls are needed. If moral opinion has superior
authority relative to public opinion, this invites important questions
of who or how many determine the moral authority and on what basis.
When public opinion assessment is warranted, which methodologic
issues are involved? The above notwithstanding, situations certainly
exist where public opinion is important, such as to determine whether a
policy which is neither morally indefensible nor a moral imperative is
desired by the citizenry. In such situations, it will be important to
rely on good principles of designing and interpreting opinion surveys
and to keep in mind that who is surveyed \30\ and how questions are
worded \31\ can both be used to manipulate the answers one receives.
Extensive discussions on these and other methodologic points are
covered in standard textbooks on survey and sampling methods.
Are there actually circumstances when assessing public opinion
would be quite inappropriate? Finally, we suggest that in some
circumstances, assessing public opinion is not only unnecessary, but
inappropriate. Specifically, in situations where a proposed approach is
morally indefensible, to admit the value of public opinion surveys on
determining whether a policy should be enacted invites a ``tyranny of
the majority.''
32-33
An interesting corollary of this is
that empirical evidence on the harm or lack of benefit for some morally
indefensible practice might also be seen as not only unnecessary, but
counterproductive, because the very act of considering the empirical
evidence implies that the practice under consideration might be worthy
of adoption if the evidence came out a particular way. For example,
consider this headline from an Internet posting: ``Science Says Fat
Shaming Backfires--So Can We Finally Stop It?'' \34\ The article seems
to be referencing an observational study \35\ that is interpreted to
show that perceived weight discrimination leads to greater future
obesity in the person experiencing the discrimination. The answer to
the headline's rhetorical query, So Can We Finally Stop It?, in our
opinion is that we unequivocally should stop fat shaming, but not
because of this (or any other) study but rather because it is wrong.
Even if one accepts our view that fat shaming is wrong a priori, might
one ask where the harm is of buttressing the position with some
empirical support. The harm is that the empirical support, like all
empirical support, is subject to differential interpretation,
criticism, and being overturned. In the observational study in this
example, it would be easy to point out many limits, most notably that
the study cannot show cause and effect. This may lead others to
conclude, ``Well, if the wrongness of fat shaming depended in part on
the empirical evidence and the empirical evidence has holes in it, I
guess fat-shaming may not be wrong after all.'' If this example is not
stark enough, we can ask ourselves would we take seriously the need for
studies to show deleterious effects of policies that institutionalized
racial or religious discrimination as justifications for eliminating
such heinous policies?
How Might Evidence for Obesity Policies Be Generated?
We now turn from the question of what evidence we want to the
question of how such evidence can be generated. In doing so, we
emphasize that we are focusing in this section on questions regarding
the effects of potential policies on outcomes and do not consider
questions about assessing other things such as public opinion about
policies. In considering the generation of evidence regarding the
effects of potential policies, we are considering questions of cause
and effect and readers may find the videos available from an annual
short course on this topic of interest (see:
http://www.norc.uab.edu/courses/shortcourse).
Here, we divide the types of research to be considered into three
categories: (1) research that can be determinative of the causal
effects of policies; (2) research that can contribute to an overall
assessment of the causal effects of policies, but cannot on its own
determine causation; and (3) research that formally synthesizes
multiple sources of information to estimate the causal effects of
policies.
Research That Can Be Determinative of the Causal Effects of Policies
Role of Randomized Controlled Trials
Empirical evidence derived from RCTs aimed at identifying factors
that increase or decrease the risk or magnitude of obesity can provide
the strongest evidence to guide the development of obesity
policies.\36\ RCTs are regarded as the gold standard in the hierarchy
of research designs because they are the most reliable method for
determining causality.\37\ Evidence generated from RCTs has been used
to guide the development of several types of obesity policies such as
dietary recommendations, sugar-sweetened beverage taxes, and food
pricing.
38-40
Despite the acknowledgement that RCTs offer
the strongest inferences about cause and effect, several arguments are
commonly offered against reliance on RCTs for causal inference in
policy research. We very briefly review these arguments here.

1.  RCTs are imperfect. Some authors note that RCTs are imperfect.
They can be designed and executed with flaws. Like all
empirical studies, they are subject to stochastic
variation. Finally, they often entail subject selection
criteria and/or study conditions that limit
generalizability of the results owing to the broader
population and more ``real-life'' circumstances. These are
all legitimate criticisms, but two things are noteworthy.
First, these weaknesses are all surmountable. RCTs can be
designed and executed well and can be executed in large
enough samples and tested with small enough nominal type 1
error levels to minimize stochastic errors. Finally,
pragmatic controlled trials offer investigators the ability
to conduct a study that examines the effectiveness and
efficacy of an intervention in the real world by allowing
for the inclusion of a diverse sample of the population and
by enabling the intervention to be adapted to local
settings.\41\ For example, the Moving to Opportunity study
found that certain social programs involving housing
vouchers providing the ``opportunity to move from a
neighborhood with a high level of poverty to one with a
lower level of poverty was associated with [caused] modest
but potentially important reductions in the prevalence of
extreme obesity and diabetes.'' \42\

2.   RCTs are sometimes impractical or impossible. We agree that RCTs
are sometimes impractical or impossible, but this has no
bearing on the extent to which RCTs and other designs can
or cannot provide strong inferences or causation. The
argument that (a) RCTs are sometimes impractical or
impossible, (b) such that if we relied on only them for
strong causal inferences we would not be able to make
strong causal inferences in some situations in which we
wished to make strong causal inferences, and (c) therefore
we should not make strong causal inferences solely from
RCTs is simply a special case of Argumentum ad
Consequentiam.\43\

3.  There are no RCTs showing that parachutes work. It is sometimes
noted that we accept many propositions as true on the basis
of some evidence and intuitive obviousness such as that
smoking causes lung cancer or that parachutes save lives
among skydivers.\44\ This is an example of argument by
analogy.\45\ Arguments by analogy can be useful foils to
provoke thought, but in and of themselves prove or disprove
nothing.

4.  We cannot wait for perfect data. It is sometimes argued that we
cannot (or more aptly should not) wait for perfect data to
take certain actions, such as enact certain policies. We
agree with this proposition. However, the statement ``we
cannot (or more aptly should not) wait for perfect data to
take certain actions'' is not equivalent to ``we cannot (or
more aptly should not) wait for perfect data to draw strong
conclusions about causation.'' Taking actions and drawing
causal conclusions are distinct processes and the need and
justification to take prudent action in the face of
uncertainty is not a justification for denying that the
uncertainty exists.
19, 46-47

5.  Inadvertently Promoting a False Dichotomy. Majumdar and Soumerai
\48\ have cogently noted that ``some contend that only
randomized controlled trials produce trustworthy evidence.
Unfortunately, such a position discounts valid
nonrandomized or quasi-experimental study designs, even
though health policy randomized controlled trials are
rarely feasible. Such a constrained view inappropriately
lumps together valid evidence from strong nonrandomized
designs (that is, before-after studies with concurrent
controls or the interrupted time series study in which a
policy causes a sudden, visible change in trend) with
evidence from weak designs that permit little causal
inference (that is, the commonly conducted cross-sectional
analysis that looks at outcomes only after a policy has
been implemented).'' We agree that there is a continuum of
non-RCT designs that vary in the strength of causal
inferences they justify. We also agree that the stronger
designs are underutilized as we discuss later in this
article. However, these recognitions do not affect the
validity of propositions that randomization is key to valid
causal inference.\49\ If we accepted otherwise, we would
again be engaging in Argumentum ad Consequentiam.\43\
Research That Can Contribute to an Overall Assessment of the Causal
Effects of Policies
Having emphasized the critical role of RCTs in humans on the policy
under question and for the outcomes under question in drawing strong
causal inference, we also note that with such information often
unavailable and sometimes unattainable, it is frequently necessary to
make decisions about actions without drawing firm conclusions about
causation. In doing so, we must commonly integrate multiple sources of
information, none of which alone is unequivocally dispositive about a
conclusion of causation, to make informed decisions about what might
reasonably be expected to work. Several sources of evidence can
contribute to such decisions.
Role of Model Organism Evidence
Model organisms are used to generate information regarding casual
relationships that cannot be derived through human studies. For
example, exposure to environmental obesogens, such as endocrine-
disrupting chemicals, has been identified as a possible factor that
increases the risk of obesity.
50-51
Such studies are vital
in policy decisions, for example, to approve or disapprove use of a
food additive, but cannot offer unequivocal conclusions about causation
in humans because of the possible heterogeneity of effects across
species.\52\
Role of Observational Evidence: of Ordinary Association Tests (OATs)
and Extended Assoc[i]ation Tests (EATs)
Observational evidence generally plays a vital role in assessing
the likely value of proposed policies. Observational studies are useful
in generating hypotheses that can inform the conduct of more rigorous
studies (i.e., randomized trials) to begin to establish causality. With
regard to policies developed to address the obesity epidemic,
observational studies have been used to investigate associations
between the initiations of policies and relevant outcomes. That said,
not all observational evidence is of equal value. Here we distinguish
between two broad classes of observational evidence which we will call
Ordinary Association Tests (OATs) and Extended Association Tests
(EATs).
Ordinary Association Tests. We define ordinary association tests
(OATs) to be observational studies on samples of individuals in which
the sole or primary means of controlling for potential confounding
factors is inclusion of measures of some potential confounding factors
as covariates in statistical models (or stratifying by measures of such
factors). OATs are heavily relied upon in thinking about plausible
effects of polices, but have also been heavily criticized in general

53-54
and in the obesity and nutrition domains in particular

55-57
for multiple reasons. We refer the reader to those
references for details.
Extended Association Tests. Most dialogue and research in obesity
does not consider the evidence continuum between OATs, which do not
offer strong assessments of causal effects, and RCTs, which do offer
strong inferences, but cannot be done in all circumstances. In contrast
to this polarized view, there are techniques that we refer to as
extended association tests (EATs) that lie intermediary between
ordinary association tests and RCTs, including but not limited to
quasi-experimental studies and natural experiments. Such designs are
increasingly used, especially in the disciplines of economics and
genetics, but are rarely used in obesity research. However, the ability
to draw causal inferences in obesity research could be strengthened by
increased judicious use of such approaches. In-depth understanding and
appropriate use of the full continuum of these methods requires input
from disciplines including statistics, economics, psychology,
epidemiology, mathematics, philosophy, and in some cases behavioral or
statistical genetics. The application of these techniques, however,
does not involve routine well-known ``cookbook'' approaches but
requires understanding of underlying principles so the investigator can
tailor approaches to specific and varying situations.
Some of the key methods in use for situations where standard RCTs
may not be available include natural experiments, quasi-experiments,
and experiments in which true randomization is used but subjects are
not randomized directly to levels of the independent variable, as
described with examples in Table 1.
Natural experiments are a useful type of observational study that
can be used to investigate the impact of environmental changes on
obesity, that is, changes that the investigator did not manipulate. In
this case, investigators merely measure outcomes before and after the
implementation of a new policy, regulation, or other factor that has
changed. Within the context of efforts at obesity modification, natural
experiments have been used to assess the effectiveness of new policies
(e.g., inclusion of calorie information on menus, implementation of
environmental elements thought to promote physical activity [i.e.,
parks, bike lanes, walking trails], use of school-based obesity
screening and BMI report cards).
61, 68-70

A prime example comes from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
which implemented regulations requiring franchise restaurant chains
with 20 or more locations to provide calorie information on their menus
and menu boards. In a natural experiment conducted in New York City,
receipts were collected from patrons of fast food restaurants before
and after menu labeling was implemented. The investigators found that
adding calorie information to the menus did not appear to influence the
food choices of parents or adolescents.\61\ Natural experiments such as
this are a cost-effective way to evaluate the effects of obesity
policies, as well as provide information that might inform
modifications to existing policies.
The existence of EATs seems to be less well known to many
investigators in public health, medicine, psychology, and related
fields. We believe that many questions about behavioral, psychological,
and economic influences on obesity-related variables and many applied
questions about the effects of extant or proposed interventions can be
addressed more informatively and more rigorously if more investigators
availed themselves of these evolving methodologies related to causal
inference from a basis of a sound understanding of fundamental
principles.
Research That Formally Synthesizes Multiple Sources of Information To
Estimate The Causal Effects of Policies
Apart from the need to embrace and use the range of potential
design strategies available, it is also essential to ``step back'' and
synthesize the multiple and varied sources of information to evaluate
what they can tell us about the causal effects of policies.
Role of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
As a result of the growing rates of obesity around the world, the
volume of evidence from obesity research has burgeoned. However, owing
to variations in the quality and type of study design, implementation,
and the outcomes measured, determining effects from various studies can
be challenging. Debates on obesity policies are often fueled by the
contradictory findings of empirical studies, such as those regarding
the influence of sugar-sweetened beverage consumption on childhood
obesity.\40\ As such, high-quality systematic reviews and meta-analyses
can be useful when attempting to evaluate the state of the evidence
related to a particular intervention or policy with objective
approaches to identifying and integrating evidence.\71\ That said, as
Ingram Olkin once wrote, ``Doing a meta-analysis is easy. Doing one
well is hard,'' \72\ and we have found that errors in obesity-related
meta-analyses abound.\73\ Hence, while meta-analyses are vital, our
field needs to improve their execution, and meta-analyses should be as
critically reviewed as are any other studies.
Role of Modelling
One drawback of RCTs, noted above, is that they often are not large
enough to capture the entire spectrum of effects (both desired and
undesired) that a policy may have.\74\ Mathematical and computational
models of health policies are tools that can be used to predict the
outcomes of an obesity policy and to identify implementation barriers
before the policy is adopted.\75\ Moreover, the modelling of obesity
policy enables policymakers to estimate the costs of implementing
policies and to determine the resource allocation required to implement
a given policy.
76-78
For example, a dynamic weight loss
model was used to estimate the effects of a tax on sugar-sweetened
beverages on the prevalence of obesity in New York City.\79\ The model
suggested that there would be decreases in obesity prevalence over a 10
year period.\79\ The model also estimated the magnitude of the
projected reductions in obesity prevalence, allowing readers to better
judge the potential public health impact of such a policy.\79\
Models are also valuable for monitoring the effects of policies
over time. Evidence has shown that the effects of health policies can
increase or diminish with the passage of time.\78\ Therefore, new data
concerning the effects of a policy should be continually generated to
estimate its effects in order to allow policymakers to revise or even
discontinue implementation of the policy if it is shown to be
ineffective.\74\
Despite the benefits of using models in the development and
refinement of health policies, some challenges and limitations must be
recognized. For example, health policy modellers are not often
integrated into the health policymaking process. Therefore, models are
seen as ``one-offs'' rather than as tools that should be used during
the lifecycle of the policy to ensure that it retains its value.
Perhaps most importantly, models offer projections of effects, not
demonstrations of effects. Such projections can be heavily dependent on
the input parameters (i.e., assumptions) of the model, and some
published modelling activities (e.g.,\80\) are so heavy on assumptions
of efficacy of the policies considered that the modelling can be seen
as an instance of petitio principii.\81\
Standards for Evidence and Related Factors Influencing Policy Decisions
According to Donaldson and colleagues, most obesity prevention
bills enacted between 2010 and 2013 were based on initiating strategies
(e.g., ``initiated farmer[s'] markets, increased access to walking
trails, local menu labeling'') that had little to no evidence of
benefit.\82\ But is this wrong? A vital consideration, often not made
explicit a priori, concerns the standards for evidence that will used
to both generate a policy decision and to evaluate its effect once
implemented. In general, the standards of evidence for a scientific
conclusion are thought to be far more rigorous, because they are based
on long-established methodologies that are considered to be objective,
repeatable, and relatively immune to biases of the individuals
conducting the study. In contrast, the evidence (if any) needed to
reach a policy decision (which is distinct from reaching a scientific
conclusion) depends on many factors and is not constant across
circumstances. Opinions can also vary. For example, the Society for
Prevention Research states, ``To be ready for broad dissemination, a
program must not only be of proven effectiveness, but it must also meet
other criteria . . .'' (emphasis added).\83\ This stands in marked
contrast to the statement of District Judge Richard J. Holwell quoted
above that ``even if there are no data demonstrating conclusively that
Regulation 81.50 will be effective, conclusive proof is not re-
quired . . .'' and in the context of the legal proceedings, his
interpretation of law is what determined the evidence standard. There
are yet other standards in different contexts and so no universal rule
about how much evidence is or is not needed for policymaking can be
given. This stands in contrast to occasional statements from academics
that seem to state from no formal basis of authority that a particular
amount of evidence is or is not needed to enact a policy.
The four quotations listed (see Box 1) are from discussions and
presentations involving policies directed at curbing sugar intake in
the public. They reflect the varying perspectives of differing
standards of evidence among researchers. The first two
84-85

put rigor of evidence aside and instead emphasize that the decision to
develop policy is the priority based on a decision that seems to have
already been committed to based upon some combination of suggestive
evidence or intuition. In contrast, the third and fourth statements
progress from needing ``a strong sense that it will be effective'' \86\
to confidently requiring ``strong evidence'' prior to any public policy
decision.\87\ Thus, disagreement on the amount and rigor or evidence
needed to enact a policy exists even among researchers discussing a
particular target (sugar) of public policy. They illustrate the
subjectivity of the standards of evidence for decision making.
In Summation
In closing, our field will benefit from a greater emphasis on
probative research. Probative research would meaningfully move us
forward in our ability to state that a given treatment or prevention
strategy does or does not have a particular effect.\88\ This is in
contrast to studies that merely continue to draw attention to the
plausibility of some treatment having some effect but do not increase
our knowledge that such an effect actually exists.\88\ Finally, the
quest for rigorous evidence and scrupulous truthfulness in reporting is
fully compatible with the quest for beneficence and passionate pursuit
of action for the betterment of others. Recognizing these
comparabilities (see Box 2) may pave the way for public health dialogue
in obesity that is both more honest and more collegial.

References

1. Taxation by weight. Br. Med. J. 1904; I 1904: 1094.
2. Holwell R.J. Case 1:08-cv-01000-RJH. [Memorandum Opinion and
Order]. Doc 42. 04/16/2008. 2008: 1-27.
3. Cawley J. Does anything work to reduce obesity? (Yes, modestly).
J. Health Polit. Policy Law. 2016; (Feb): 26.
4. Essington M., Hertelendy A.J. Legislating weight loss: are
antiobesity public health policies making an impact? J. Health Polit.
Policy Law. 2016; (Feb): 26.
5. Dhurandhar E.J., Kaiser K.A., Dawson J.A., Alcorn A.S., Keating
K.D., Allison D.B. Predicting adult weight change in the real world: a
systematic review and meta-analysis accounting for compensatory changes
in energy intake or expenditure. Int. J. Obes. 2015; 39: 1181-1187.
6. Wang Y.C., Hsiao A., Orleans C.T., Gortmaker S.L. The caloric
calculator: average caloric impact of childhood obesity interventions.
Am. J. Prev. Med. 2013; 45: e3-e13.
7. Thaler R.H., Sunstein C.R. Nudge: Improving Decisions About
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. Yale University Press: New Haven, CT,
2008.
8. Rozin R., Scott S., Dingley M., Urbanek J.K., Jiang H.,
Kaltenbach M. Nudge to nobesity I: minor changes in the accessibility
decrease food intake. Judgement and Decision Making. 2011; 6: 323-332.
9. Hanks A., Wansink B., Just D., et al. From Coke to Coors: a field
study of a fat tax and its unintended consequences. J. Nutr. Educ.
Behav. 2013; 45: S40.
10. Matjasko J.L., Cawley J.H., Baker-Goering M.M., Yokum D.V.
Applying Behavioral Economics to Public Health Policy: Illustrative
Examples and Promising Directions. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2016; 50 (5S1):
S13-S19.
11. Howlett M. Matching Policy Tools & Their Targets: Beyond Nudges
and Utility Maximation in Policy Design. Presented at: European
Consortium for Political Research; April 24-28, 2016, 2016; Pisa,
Italy.
12. Marlow M.L. Market test or government guess? Are government
efforts to ``nudge'' us to lose weight really based on science?
Regulation. 2014; Winter 2014-2015: 48-54.
13. Kaiser K.A., Brown A.W., Bohan Brown M.M., Shikany J.M., Mattes
R.D., Allison D.B. Increased fruit and vegetable intake has no
discernible effect on weight loss: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014; 100: 567-576.
14. Ledoux T.A., Hingle M.D., Baranowski T. Relationship of fruit
and vegetable intake with adiposity: a systematic review. Obes. Rev.
2011; 12: e143-150.
15. Mook D.G. In defense of external invalidity. Am. Psychol. 1983;
38: 379-387.
16. Reynolds S., Streiner D. Why we do not abstract analogue studies
of treatment outcome and scale development. Evid. Based. Ment. Health.
1998; 1: 101-102.
17. Epstein L.H., Dearing K.K., Roba L.G., Finkelstein E. The
influence of taxes and subsidies on energy purchased in an experimental
purchasing study. Psychol. Sci. 2010; 21: 406-414.
18. Patsopoulos N.A. A pragmatic view on pragmatic trials. Dialogues
Clin. Neurosci. 2011; 13: 217-224.
19. Allison D.B. Evidence, discourse and values in obesity-oriented
policy: menu labeling as a conversation starter. Int. J. Obes. 2011;
35: 464-471.
20. Brown A.W., Allison D.B. Unintended consequences of obesity-
targeted health policy. Virtual Mentor. 2013; 15: 339-346.
21. Ramos Salas X. The ineffectiveness and unintended consequences
of the public health war on obesity. Can. J. Public Health. 2015; 106:
e79-81.
22. Gendall P., Hoek J., Taylor R., Mann J., Krebs J., Parry-Strong
A. Should support for obesity interventions or perceptions of their
perceived effectiveness shape policy? Aust N.Z.J. Public Health. 2015;
39: 172-176.
23. Suh Y., Puhl R., Liu S., Milici F.F. Support for laws to
prohibit weight discrimination in the United States: public attitudes
from 2011 to 2013. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014; 22: 1872-1879.
24. Pollard C.M., Daly A., Moore M., Binns C.W. Public say food
regulatory policies to improve health in Western Australia are
important: population survey results. Aust. N.Z.J. Public Health. 2013;
37: 475-482.
25. Zarefsky D. ``Public Sentiment Is Everything'': Lincoln's View
of Political Persuasion. Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association.
1994; 15: 23-40.
26. Robbins R.N.J., Lundell H., Meyerson J. Views of city, county,
and state policy makers about childhood obesity in New York State, 2010-
2011. Prev. Chronic. Dis. 2013; 10: E195.
27. Kyle T. UK Proposal for Explicit Weight Discrimination in
Healthcare. http://conscienhealth.org/2016/09/uk-proposal-explicit-
weight-discrimination-healthcare/. Accessed 5 Sept. 2016.
28. Abrams L. A Case for Shaming Obese People, Tastefully. The
Atlantic. Published January 23, 2013. http://www.theatlantic.com/health/
archive/2013/01/a-case-for-shaming-obese-people-tastefully/267446/.
Accessed 8 Sept. 2016.
29. Obesity Action Coalition. Obesity Action Coalition Calls on the
State of Mississippi House of Representatives to Withdraw House Bill
282 Discriminating Against Those Affected by Obesity. Published
February 1, 2008. http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/obesity-
action-coalition-calls-on-the-state-of-mississippi-house-of-
representatives-to-withdraw-house-bill-282-discriminating-against-those-
affected-by-obesity-56763767.html. Accessed 8 Sept. 2016.
30. Gelman A. Tracking public opinion with biased polls. The
Washington Post. Published April 8, 2014. https://
www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2014/04/09/tracking-public-
opinion-with-biased-polls/. Accessed 8 Sept. 2016.
31. Newport F. The Scientific Approach to Question Wording
Differences. Gallup. Published September 5, 2003. http://www.gallup.com/
poll/9193/scientific-approach-question-wording-differences.aspx.
Accessed 8 Sept. 2016.
32. Adams J., American Imprint Collection (Library of Congress). A
Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of
America. London printed, Boston re-printed and sold by Edmund Freeman,
1788.
33. Mill J.S. On Liberty. Vol. 25. 1909 ed. The Internet Wiretap:
Harvard Classics, P.F. Collier & Son.
34. M.K. Science Says Fat Shaming Backfires--So Can We Finally Stop
It? Self. Published September 15, 2014. http://www.yourtango.com/
2014225975/love-your-body-science-says-fat-shaming-backfires-so-can-we-
finally-stop-it. Accessed 8 Sept. 2016.
35. Jackson S.E., Steptoe A., Beeken R.J., Croker H., Wardle J.
Perceived weight discrimination in England: a population-based study of
adults aged 50 years. Int. J. Obes. 2015; 39: 858-864.
36. Swinburn B.A., Caterson I., Seidell J.C., James W.P. Diet,
nutrition and the prevention of excess weight gain and obesity. Public
Health Nutr. 2004; 7: 123-146.
37. Byar D.P., Simon R.M., Friedewald W.T., et al. Randomized
clinical trials. Perspectives on some recent ideas. N. Engl. J. Med.
1976; 295: 74-80.
38. Mozaffarian D., Ludwig D.S. Why is the Federal Government afraid
of fat? New York Times. Published July 9, 2015. http://www.nytimes.com/
2015/07/09/opinion/why-is-the-federal-government-afraid-of-
fat.html?_r=0. Accessed 8 Sept. 2016.
39. Mozaffarian D., Ludwig D.S. The 2015 U.S. Dietary Guidelines:
lifting the ban on total dietary fat. JAMA. 2015; 313: 2421-2422.
40. Keller A., Bucher Della Torre S. Sugar-sweetened beverages and
obesity among children and adolescents: a review of systematic
literature reviews. Child. Obes. 2015; 11: 338-346.
41. Peikes D., Geonnotti K., Wang W. Using Pragmatic Clinical Trials
to Test the Effectiveness of Patient-Centered Medical Home Model in
Real-World Setting. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality; 2013.
42. Ludwig J., Sanbonmatsu L., Gennetian L., et al. Neighborhoods,
obesity, and diabetes--a randomized social experiment. N. Engl. J. Med.
2011; 365: 1509-1519.
43. Van Eemeren F.H., Grootendorst R. Fallacies in pragma-
dialectical perspective. Argumentation. 1987; 1: 283-301.
44. Smith G.C., Pell J.P. Parachute use to prevent death and major
trauma related to gravitational challenge: systematic review of
randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2003; 327: 1459-1461.
45. Cummings L. Argument from Analogy. Reasoning and Public Health:
New Ways of Coping with Uncertainty. Springer International Publishing:
Cham, Switzerland, 2015: 93-120.
46. Hill A.B. The environment and disease: association or causation?
Proc. R. Soc. Med. 1965; 58: 295-300.
47. Grutters J.P., van Asselt M.B., Chalkidou K., Joore M.A. Healthy
decisions: towards uncertainty tolerance in healthcare policy.
Pharmacoeconomics. 2015; 33: 1-4.
48. Majumdar S.R., Soumerai S.B. The unhealthy state of health
policy research. Health Aff. (Millwood). 2009; 28: w900-w908.
49. Rubin D.B. Practical implications of modes of statistical
inference for causal effects and the critical role of the assignment
mechanism. Biometrics. 1991; 47: 1213-1234.
50. Ouadah-Boussouf N., Babin P.J. Pharmacological evaluation of the
mechanisms involved in increased adiposity in zebrafish triggered by
the environmental contaminant tributyltin. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.
2016; 294: 32-42.
51. Grun F., Blumberg B. Environmental obesogens: organotins and
endocrine disruption via nuclear receptor signaling. Endocrinology.
2006; 147 (suppl.): S50-S55.
52. Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence. 3rd ed. The National
Academies Press:Washington, D.C., 2011.
53. Albert R.K. ``Lies, damned lies . . .'' and observational
studies in comparative effectiveness research. Am. J. Respir. Crit.
Care Med. 2013; 187: 1173-1177.
54. Taubes G. Epidemiology faces its limits. Science. 1995; 269: 164-
169.
55. Schoenfeld J.D.I.J., Ioannidis J.P. Is everything we eat
associated with cancer? A systematic cookbook review. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 2013; 97: 127-134.
56. Bohan Brown M.M., Brown A.W., Allison D.B. Nutritional
epidemiology in practice: learning from data or promulgating beliefs?
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013; 97: 5-6.
57. Young S.S., Karr A. Deming, data and observational studies: A
process out of control and needing fixing. Significance. 2011; 8: 116-
120.
58. Metzger M.W., McDade T.W. Breastfeeding as obesity prevention in
the United States: a sibling difference model. Am. J. Hum. Biol. 2010;
22: 291-296.
59. Nelson M.C., Gordon-Larsen P., Adair L.S. Are adolescents who
were breast-fed less likely to be overweight? Analyses of sibling pairs
to reduce confounding. Epidemiology. 2005; 16: 247-253.
60. Fontaine K.R., Robertson H.T., Holst C., et al. Is socioeconomic
status of the rearing environment causally related to obesity in the
offspring? PLoS One. 2011; 6: e27692.
61. Elbel B., Gyamfi J., Kersh R. Child and adolescent fast-food
choice and the influence of calorie labeling: a natural experiment.
Int. J. Obes. 2011; 35: 493-500.
62. Gibson J., McKenzie D., Stillman S. What happens to diet and
child health when migration splits households? Evidence from a
migration lottery program. Food Policy. 2011; 36: 7-15.
63. Yakusheva O., Kapinos K., Weiss M. Peer effects and the freshman
15: evidence from a natural experiment. Econ. Hum. Biol. 2011; 9: 119-
132.
64. Braakmann N. The causal relationship between education, health
and health related behaviour: evidence from a natural experiment in
England. J. Health Econ. 2011; 30: 753-763.
65. Jones-Smith J.C., Dow W.H., Chichlowska K. Association between
casino opening or expansion and risk of childhood overweight and
obesity. JAMA. 2014; 311: 929-936.
66. Voss J., Allison D.A., Webber B.J., Otto J.L., Clark L.L. Lower
obesity rate during residence at high altitude among a military
population with frequent migration: a quasi experimental model for
investigating spatial causation. PLoS One. 2014; 9: e93493.
67. Allison D.B., Paultre F., Heymsfield S.B., Pi-Sunyer F.X. Is the
intra-uterine period really a critical period for the development of
adiposity? Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 1995; 19: 397-402.
68. Naylor P.J., Olstad D.L., Therrien S. An intervention to enhance
the food environment in public recreation and sport settings: a natural
experiment in British Columbia, Canada. Child. Obes. 2015; e-pub ahead
of print 19 May 2015.
69. Benjamin Neelon S.E., Namenek Brouwer R.J., Ostbye T., et al. A
community-based intervention increases physical activity and reduces
obesity in school-age children in North Carolina. Child. Obes. 2015;
11: 297-303.
70. Madsen K.A. School-based body mass index screening and parent
notification: a statewide natural experiment. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc.
Med. 2011; 165: 987-992.
71. Crombie I., Davies H. What is Meta-Analysis? Hayword Medical
Communications: London, 2009.
72. Shuster J.J., Gieser P.W. Meta-analysis and prospective meta-
analysis in childhood leukemia clinical research. Ann. Oncol. 1996; 7:
1009-1014.
73. George B.J., Beasley T.M., Brown A.W., et al. Common scientific
and statistical errors in obesity research. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2016; 24: 781-790.
74. Metcalf C.J., Edmunds W.J., Lessler J. Six challenges in
modelling for public health policy. Epidemics. 2015; 10: 93-96.
75. Hawkes C., Smith T.G., Jewell J., et al. Smart food policies for
obesity prevention. Lancet. 2015; 385: 2410-2421.
76. Backholer K., Beauchamp A., Ball K., et al. A framework for
evaluating the impact of obesity prevention strategies on socioeconomic
inequalities in weight. Am. J. Public Health. 2014; b: e43-e50.
77. Dietz W.H., Bland M.G., Gortmaker S.L., Molloy M., Schmid T.L.
Policy tools for the childhood obesity epidemic. J. Law Med. Ethics.
2002; 30 (suppl.): 83-87.
78. Levy D.T., Mabry P.L., Wang Y.C., et al. Simulation models of
obesity: a review of the literature and implications for research and
policy. Obes. Rev. 2011; 12: 378-394.
79. Ruff R.R., Zhen C. Estimating the effects of a calorie-based
sugar-sweetened beverage tax on weight and obesity in New York City
adults using dynamic loss models. Ann Epidemiol. 2015; 25: 350-357.
80. Gortmaker S.L., Wang Y.C., Long M.W., et al. Three interventions
that reduce childhood obesity are projected to save more than they cost
to implement. Health Aff. (Millwood). 2015; 34: 1932-1939.
81. Cummings L. Informal fallacies as cognitive heuristics in public
health reasoning. Informal Log. 2014; 34: 1-37.
82. Donaldson E.A., Cohen J.E., Villanti A.C., Kanarek N.F., Barry
C.L., Rutkow L. Patterns and predictors of state adult obesity
prevention legislation enactment in U.S. states: 2010-2013. Prev. Med.
2015; 74: 117-122.
83. Society for Prevention Research. Standards of Evidence. Criteria
for Efficacy, Effectiveness, and Dissemination. http://
www.preventionresearch.org/StandardsofEvidencebook.pdf. Accessed 8
Sept. 2016.
84. National Public Radio (Producer). (2016, Dec. 19). How Much Is
Too Much? New Study Casts Doubts On Sugar Guidelines. Retrieved from:
http://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/
transcript.php?storyId=505867535.
85. National Academy of Medicine (Panel). (2016, Oct 24). 2016
Annual Meeting Session 3 Question and Answer: Evidence of Preventing
Obesity and Diabetes at the Population Level and Promising New
Directions. Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=I8RyxGfQyWg&list=PLqRL5HO_hA8faH-DrOXZV7sAHuGMdktom&index=26.
86. Nancy Kass (Presenter). (2016, Nov. 8). Obesity Prevention
policies in the United States: which approaches make the most ethical
sense? UT Southwestern Health Sciences Digital Library and Learning
Center. Retrieved from: https://repositories.tdl.org/utswmed-ir/handle/
2152.5/3892.
87. Bradford Hill, Austin (Presenter). (1965, Jan. 14) President's
Address Section of Occupational Medicine: The Environment and Disease:
Association or Causation? 295-300. Retrieved from: https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1898525/pdf/procrsmed00196-
0010.pdf.
88. Casazza K., Allison D.B. Stagnation in the clinical, community
and public health domain of obesity: the need for probative research.
Clin. Obes. 2012; 2: 83-85.
89. Mehta T., Allison D.B. From measurement to analysis reporting:
grand challenges in nutritional methodology. Front. Nutr. 2014; 1:6.
90. Allison D.B., Bassaganya-Riera J., Burlingame B., et al. Goals
in nutrition science 2015-2020. Front. Nutr. 2015; 2: 26.
91. Allison D.B., Brown A.W., George B.J., Kaiser K.A.
Reproducibility: a tragedy of errors. Nature. 2016; 530: 27-29.
92. Dietz, T. Bringing values and deliberation to science
communication. PNAS. 2013; 110: 14081-14087.

Table 1. Examples of Extended Association Tests (EATs) in Obesity
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Topic Under Study          Design                Finding         Ref.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Effects of            Co-Sib Control        Mixed                  58 59
Breastfeeding on
Offspring Obesity
Effects of            Adoption Study        Consistent with a       \60\
Socioeconomic                               causal effect, but
Status of Rearing                           only \1/2\ of
Parents on Child                            ordinary
BMI                                         association
Effects of Menu       Quasi-Experiment      No support              \61\
Labeling on
Calories Purchased
Effects of Migrating  Natural Experiment    Some evidence for       \62\
from Tonga to New                           BMI increase in
Zealand                                     some ages
Effects of Roommate   Packet Randomized     Association             \63\
Characteristics on    Experiment            suggesting that
Freshman Weight                             being assigned to
Gain                                        higher BMI roommate
leads to less
weight gain
Effect of Education   Quasi-Experiment      No support              \64\
on Food Choice
Effect of Casinos     Quasi-Experiment      Association             \65\
(as Economic                                suggestive of
Boosters) on Child                          beneficial effect
Obesity
Effects of Altitude   Quasi-Packet-         Association             \66\
of Residence on       Randomized            suggestive of
Obesity               Experiment            beneficial effect
Effects of            Co-Twin Control       No support              \67\
Environmental
Factors Influencing
Birthweight on
Adult BMI
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Box 1: Contrasting Ideas on the Amount and Rigor of Evidence Regarding
Policies Targeted at Sugar Consumption
[emphases added below].
------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
``It's a classic example. It's industry-funded authors saying that
the dietary guidelines recommendations about sugar aren't based on
science. I'm laughing because what kind of evidence do you need? Sugar
is calories and no nutrients and everybody would be healthier eating
less of it.''--Marion Nestel \84\
``I would be very surprised if any one pot policy had any effect on
obesity. And in some ways I think it's a trap to expect it to do that
because so many things are driving the problem. So many things are
affecting the food supply, levels of physical activity, and [ . . . ]
structural things like poverty, education, and access to healthcare. To
expect any one policy to turn that around I think is wishful thinking.
But it is certainly important that it be studied as much as it can so
that you know at the end of the day, so that you know [ . . . ] where
you get the biggest impact per dollar of policy change'' --Kelly
Brownell \85\
``In public health, when someone is going to act, particularly for
something that is a public policy my goodness, we have to have some
pretty strong sense that it's going to be effective. Public policy
cannot be enacted simply based on a good idea. There has to be reason
that it's going to make a difference and a difference relative to
public interest.''--Nancy E. Kass \86\
``But we should need very strong evidence before we made people burn
a fuel in their homes that they do not like or stop smoking the
cigarettes and eating the fats and sugar that they do like.''--Sir
Austin Bradford Hill \87\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Box 2: Clarification Within Two Domains: Evidence for scientific
conclusions and for Advocacy Of Policy Decisions
------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evidence for Scientific Conclusions
Greater candor in
scientific presentations 89 92

Acceptance by empirically
minded scientists that action can
sometimes legitimately precede
without strong evidence

Articulating distinctions
between our values and our
assessments of empirical evidence
\91\
Evidence for Advocacy of Policy
Eschewing fallacious
Decisions                            rhetorical arguments

Acceptance by advocates
that advocacy neither requires nor
justifies making evidence seem
stronger than it is
------------------------------------------------------------------------

attachment 8
Will Reducing Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption Reduce Obesity?
Evidence Supporting Conjecture Is Strong, But Evidence When
Testing Effect Is Weak
Pro v. Con Debate: Role of Sugar Sweetened Beverages in Obesity
K.A. Kaiser,
[1]
J.M. Shikany,
[2]
K.D.
Keating,
[1]
and D.B. Allison
[1]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Office of Energetics, Dean's Office, School of Public Health,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
\[2]\ Division of Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
Address for correspondence: Dr. D.B. Allison, Ryals Public Health
Building, Rm 140J, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1665 University
Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. E-mail:
[emailprotected]
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Received 12 February 2013; revised 25 April 2013; accepted 26 April
2013.
Obesity Reviews (2013) 14, 620-633.

2013 The Authors
Summary
We provide arguments to the debate question and update a previous
meta-analysis with recently published studies on effects of sugar-
sweetened beverages (SSBs) on body weight/composition indices (BWIs).
We abstracted data from randomized controlled trials examining effects
of consumption of SSBs on BWIs. Six new studies met these criteria: (i)
human trials, (ii) %3 weeks duration, (iii) random assignment to
conditions differing only in consumption of SSBs and (iv) including a
BWI outcome. Updated meta-analysis of a total of seven studies that
added SSBs to persons' diets showed dose-dependent increases in weight.
Updated meta-analysis of eight studies attempting to reduce SSB
consumption showed an equivocal effect on BWIs in all randomized
subjects. When limited to subjects overweight at baseline, meta-
analysis showed a significant effect of roughly 0.25 standard
deviations (more weight loss/less weight gain) relative to controls.
Evidence to date is equivocal in showing that decreasing SSB
consumption will reduce the prevalence of obesity. Although new
evidence suggests that an effect may yet be demonstrable in some
populations, the integrated effect size estimate remains very small and
of equivocal statistical significance. Problems in this research area
and suggestions for future research are highlighted.
Introduction
The proposition we have been asked to address and for which we
evaluate the available evidence is as follows:

`There is sufficient scientific evidence that decreasing
sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption will reduce the
prevalence of obesity and obesity-related diseases.'
What We Are Debating
In examining the proposition, it is useful to carefully consider
several of its components as follows:
Sufficient Evidence
The word sufficient invites the question, sufficient for what? As
the remainder of the proposition indicates, the answer is for drawing a
conclusion that decreasing SSB consumption will reduce the prevalence
of obesity and obesity-related diseases. This must be distinguished
from the question of sufficiency for taking public health action or
guiding public health policy. What constitutes sufficiency for actions
(as opposed to drawing conclusions) is not a purely scientific question
that can be answered objectively. Such decisions depend only in part on
scientific evidence of the likely effects of those actions and also
depend on other inputs including but not limited to legal authority,
moral values and personal tastes, none of which are determined by
empirical evidence. The question `Is there sufficient evidence for
action?' is inherently subjective and depends on which action, in which
regulatory context and according to whose tastes and moral values. As
Sir Austin Bradford Hill wrote, `The evidence is there to be judged on
its merits and the judgment . . . should be utterly independent of what
hangs upon it--or who hangs because of it'.
(1)

Scientific Evidence
We are not asked for conjecture, but rather whether empirical
evidence exists showing that decreasing SSBs has the effects stated. We
therefore examine the highest quality evidence available in the form of
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Because such trials are ethically
possible and have been performed, we assert that this type of
scientific evidence supersedes correlation or cohort
studies.
(2)
When RCTs are not possible, other evidence must
be amassed to attempt to inform causation. However, RCTs are possible
to address this question and data are available. Hence, we rely on
these results in the present case as they are probative (by probative,
we mean studies which can generate evidence which settles questions by
proving or disproving propositions, as opposed to simply influencing
the strength of speculation) with respect to causation.
(3)

Decreasing
We cannot assume that the effects of decreasing consumption are the
opposite (direction and magnitude) of the effects of increasing
consumption. Therefore, we provide examinations of available
experimental reports that evaluate both interventions so as to quantify
the observed effects in each case.
Reduce the Prevalence of Obesity and Obesity-Related Diseases
As to `obesity-related diseases,' one must first demonstrate an
effect on obesity to suggest an effect on obesity-related diseases.
Else in what way can the diseases be said to be obesity-related? We
therefore focus our present meta-analysis on studies of the effect on
body weight or body composition.
What We Are Not Debating
Just as we have clarified the proposition being debated, it is
equally important to not be distracted by questions that we have not
been asked to address. For example, we have not been asked to address
whether obesity is a crisis, if fructose is toxic, are some sugars
worse than others, are food company marketing budgets too large, have
portion sizes increased to absurd levels, do SSBs affect dental caries,
are pictures of an average American's sugar consumption dramatic, is
liberty better than paternalism (or vice versa), is food marketing like
tobacco marketing, or do we sometimes need to take public health
actions in the absence of strong evidence. Although these are
provocative questions, they are not germane to the necessary evaluation
of evidence regarding the question we have been asked to debate. Yet we
mention them because they and similar questions are often introduced
into such discussions and serve as emotion-raising distractions to an
evaluation of the pertinent evidence.
There Is Evidence To Support Conjecture
We freely concede that there is evidence to support the conjecture
that reducing SSB consumption might reduce obesity and obesity-related
diseases. However, many of these data are not probative in terms of
causation. Specifically, there are three forms of human evidence
supporting this conjecture.
First, we address ecological correlation. SSB consumption has risen
just as obesity rates have risen.
(4)
This is the weakest
form of evidence available. Other beverage consumption patterns (e.g.,
bottled water
(5)
depicted in Fig. 1) have also demonstrated
a strong correlation with the obesity epidemic in the United
States.
(6-7)

Second, we note an association in some observational
studies.
(8-10)
Whereas there is an ever-growing body of
epidemiologic studies, some of which demonstrate statistically
significant associations, it is well known that association does not
establish causation. Moreover, the association is weak,
(11)

inconsistent
(12-13)
and biased,
(14)
as we will
discuss later. Again, as Dr. Hu (our debate opponent) wrote, `Although
the overall results were not entirely consistent, the weight of
epidemiologic and experimental evidence indicates greater consumption
of sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with weight gain and obesity
in children and adults. However, the existing studies suffer from many
methodological limitations, including cross-sectional design, small
sample size, short follow-up, inadequate dietary assessment, and a lack
of repeated measures of diet and lifestyle. . . . any single dietary
factor is unlikely to have a large effect on body
weight'.
(13)

For the third and final point which supports conjecture, we
acknowledge that lesser compensation with liquid versus solid calories
has been found in some in short-term feeding studies.
(15-17)

By compensation, we refer to the definition provided by Mattes

(18)
whereby later energy intake may be reduced to
compensate for preloads or added calories from some other intervention.
It must also be acknowledged that compensation for added intake may
also take the form of altered energy expenditure, which can offset the
intake component of energy balance. Few feeding studies examine this
component. Additionally, short-term feeding effects are by no means
equivalent to long-term weight effects.
(19)
Moreover, the
short-term effects are inconsistent, with some studies showing near
perfect compensation for liquid calories
(11, 20-21)
and
others showing imperfect but equivalent (between forms) compensation to
solid calories.
(22)
Finally, there is far more than zero
compensation as implied by common and exaggerated public statements
such as, `When we drink sugary beverages, we simply do not compensate
by eating less food'
(23)
or `Liquid calories don't register
with our appetite controls'.
(24)

Figure 1

Rise in obesity rates
(6)
(round markers) and
bottled water consumption
(5)
(square markers),
United States. BMI, body mass index, kg m^\2\.

We agree with Dr. Pan and Dr. Hu's statement in 2011 that `. . .
the isolated tests in the laboratory may not be directly reproduced in
real life because the effect of any food or food component on satiety
could be influenced by other dietary factors. Thus, results from short-
term, well-controlled interventions may not be representative of a
real-life setting, and long-term clinical trials on different physical
forms of carbohydrates on energy intake and weight management are still
lacking'.
(25)
Later in this article, we provide even more
compelling evidence from longer-term trials on weight that some
compensation for added liquid calories indeed occurs.
Evaluation of Evidence To Draw Scientifically Supported Conclusions
When randomized trials can be performed ethically and safely (which
they have been), these study results are the strongest level of
evidence of independent effects. Many scientists who have gone on
record on the question we now debate have acknowledged the limitations
of association studies and the need for well-designed randomized
trials.
(13, 26-28)
If these same scientists are calling for
well-designed trials, it is curious that strong statements are then
made about weaker forms of evidence. Use of Hill's guidelines

(1)
is irrelevant in the instance of the effects of SSBs on
weight because randomized trials can be done (and have been done). In
such situations, the `totality' of the evidence, including evidence
that is not probative, should not be relied upon for drawing
conclusions of causation in favour of the probative studies. More
recent trials have taken steps to reduce the level of bias

(29-30)
and future studies may advance this effort further.
Specific Questions We Address By Use of the Best Available Evidence
1.  Does an increase in SSB intake increase body weight or body mass
index (BMI) in humans?

2.  Does reduction of SSB intake reduce body weight or BMI in humans?

We now evaluate and summarize the currently available evidence that
could potentially be probative with respect to drawing conclusions
about the effects of SSB reduction on weight or obesity.
Methods
See supporting information for details of the updated literature
review, study selection and data extraction methods. As the present
paper was in review, an additional study meeting our criteria became
public as a conference abstract.
(31)
This trial tested the
effects of home water delivery and an educational programme to reduce
SSB consumption in overweight, adult, Mexican women as compared to the
education-only control group. Based on the available information in the
abstract, we were unable to formally include this study result in our
meta-analysis, but we discuss the possible effects on our conclusions
using estimates from data reported in the abstract in the next section
on results.
Results
The Extent of the Data Available: Studies Included and Excluded
Table 1 contains a brief listing and description of the six new
studies
(29-30, 32-36)
added for meta-analysis. We provide
more details of each study in the supporting information online.
Supporting Information Figure S1 contains a flow chart of the screening
and selection of recently published studies.
In the three new studies in which SSBs were added [90 to 500 kcal
day^\1\ to the diets of adults (30,34); 158 kcal day^\1\ in children

(36)
], statistically significant weight gain was observed in
both adult trials, ranging from 0.39 to 1.14 kg (Supporting Information
Table S1). No significant difference in weight gain was observed in the
study in children between the treatment and control
participants.
(36)
When we compared observed weight gain to
theoretical weight gain from added SSBs in all RCTs published to date
(Fig. 2), compensation appeared to occur in longer-term studies.
In the one new study of adults
(35)
and the two new
studies of children
(29, 32-33)
in which participants who
drank some amount of SSBs at baseline were asked to eliminate or reduce
their SSB consumption, standardized mean differences (SMDs) in
percentage weight loss or BMI reduction ranged from 0.13 to 0.33
(Supporting Information Table S2). The overall results for added SSBs
(small but statistically significant weight gain; Fig. 3) or for
reduced SSBs in subjects of all weight ranges (small and not
statistically significant weight loss; Fig. 4) did not differ greatly
from our earlier analysis.
(37)

In new studies in which all participants were overweight or obese
at baseline, SMDs ranged from 0.13 to 0.73 (Supporting Information
Table S3). In combination with earlier studies or subgroup analysis of
the effects of reducing SSBs on overweight subjects (Fig. 5), the
overall SMD was 0.25 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.13 to 0.38
standard deviations, P
(31)
the authors reported no significant effect with a
P-value of 0.50. Assuming this is a two-tailed P-value, the reported
sample size yields an effect size of either ^0.086 or +0.086. The means
were not reported so we cannot determine the direction. If the sample
effect size were +0.086, then the summary statistic would not change at
all from the summary estimate and CI shown in Fig. 4. Alternatively, if
the sample effect size was ^0.086, the summary estimate would be
reduced towards zero (from 0.06 to 0.05) and remain statistically non-
significant. Similarly, for the analysis shown in Fig. 5 for subjects
overweight at baseline, the addition of this study would shift the
overall estimate from 0.25 to 0.21, or as low as 0.17 depending on
direction of observed effect.
Assessment of Study-Level Risk of Bias
Supporting Information Figure S2 summarizes our cumulative
assessment of potential areas of bias of the pertinent studies to date.
The most important areas for risk of bias overall come from lack of
participant blinding and selective reporting. Some study designs failed
to adequately isolate treatment effects from the attention researchers
paid to some groups. Additionally, only two studies' protocols

(29, 34)
had an objective measure of participant compliance
(returned containers, urinary sucralose measures), making cross
comparisons and estimates of true effects difficult. Failure to mention
whether assessors were blinded was common (ten out of 15 studies),
further clouding assessment of potential sources of bias.
Assessment of Publication Bias
Supporting Information Figures S3-S5 are funnel plots

(38)
for the assessment of potential publication bias from
only the published studies and analyses for each of the three groups of
designs or populations we analysed (excluding some analyses we
performed on data not published but received upon request). We also
evaluated potential publication bias by using the rank correlation
test.
(39)
We found no present evidence of publication bias
for studies on the effects of adding SSBs;

(30, 34, 36, 40-42)
P = 0.805), for studies on the effects
of reducing SSBs in all weight categories;

(29, 33, 35, 43-46)
P = 0.976), or for studies on the
effects of reducing SSBs in subjects who were overweight at baseline;

(33, 35, 43, 44, 46)
P = 0.858).
Sensitivity Analysis
Age differences. There was unequal representation of age groups
among the types of trials. The added SSB studies were all on adults
except one,
(36)
and the reducing studies were predominantly
in children with two exceptions.
(35, 47)
Therefore, we
evaluated the overall summary effects by excluding the studies
referenced above. The overall SMD for the added SSB studies (adults
only) increased by 0.06 (to 0.34; 95% CI: 0.15 to 0.54). The overall
SMD for the reduction of SSBs in children of all weight categories was
reduced by 0.01 (to 0.07; 95% CI: ^0.01 to 0.15). The overall SMD for
the reduction studies in children only who were overweight or obese at
baseline increased by 0.05 (to 0.30; 95% CI: 0.13 to 0.46). These
results are not largely different from the combined analysis reported
in Figs 3-5. Per the convention put forth by Cohen,
(48)

these standardized effects would all be categorized as `small.'

Table 1  Studies Published Since January 2009 Meeting the Original Inclusion Criteria (37)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question that can be
Reference       addressed regarding the       How meta-analysed        Primary outcome(s) and analysis as
effects of SSBs on weight                               stated in trials registry and paper
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Njike, et al.,      Added two servings per     Meta-analysed all          Trial registry: NCT00538083
2011 (30)           day of sugar-free cocoa,   response data for all     Primary--Endothelial function
sugared cocoa, or          phases (author provided   Secondary--Blood pressure, lipid
placebo cocoa in obese     raw data on request)--     profile, low-density lipoprotein
adults in a crossover      combined both caloric      (LDL) oxidation, lipid hydroperoxide,
trial, 6 weeks each        groups (sugared cocoa      C-reactive protein (CRP), glucose,
phase.                     and placebo cocoa) and     body weight, waist circumference,
subtracted sugar-free      endothelin
group.                    Paper:
Primary--Endothelial function
Secondary--Blood pressure, lipid
profile and fasting glucose, food
intake, endothelin, CRP, oxidized
LDL, lipid hydroperoxide,
anthropometric measures (body weight,
body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference)
Missing data handling: Intention to
treat analysis
Vaz, et al., 2011   Added choco-malt beverage  Meta-analysed untreated    Trial registry: NCT00876018
(36)                mix to water and gave      control group versus      Primary--Physical fitness and
one serving per day to     unfortified group.*        performance
children in a parallel                               Secondary--Nutritional status, muscle
trial.                                                strength and endurance
Paper:
Primary--Within participant change in
physical performance: whole-body
endurance, aerobic capacity, speed
and visual reaction time
Secondary--Nutritional status, muscle
strength, endurance in forearm flexor
muscle group
Missing data handling: Complete case
analysis
Maersk, et al.,     Added 1 litre per day of   Meta-analysed regular      Trial registry: NCT00777647
2012 (34)           milk, regular cola, diet   cola group versus diet    Primary--Body weight, magnetic
cola or water in           group.                     resonance spectroscopy, magnetic
overweight/obese adults                               resonance imaging, dual-energy x-ray
in a parallel trial for                               absorptiometry scan
6 months.                                            Secondary--Circulating metabolic
parameters, blood pressure
Paper:
Primary--Intrahaepatic fat and
intramyocellular fat
Secondary--Fat mass, fat distribution,
metabolic risk factors
Missing data handling: Complete case
analysis except for two cases who
dropped out at 5 months, for whom
last observation was carried forward
Ebbeling, et al.,   Multicomponent programme   Meta-analysed weight       Trial registry: NCT00381160
2012 (33)           to reduce/replace SSBs     change at end of 1 year   Primary--BMI change at 2 years
with non-caloric           intervention period.      Secondary--none stated
beverages in                                         Paper:
adolescents.                                         Primary--Change in mean BMI at 2 years
(1 year post-intervention)
Secondary--Differences between
ethnicities, change in body fat as a
percentage of total weight
Missing data handling: Imputed--
baseline and last observation carried
forward in separate analyses
de Ruyter, et al.,  Provided school children   Considered an SSB          Trial Registry: NCT00893529
2012 (29)           identically labelled SSB   reduction study as        Primary--BMI Z-score at 6, 12 and 18
or non-caloric             inclusion criteria was     months
equivalent to consume      current SSB consumers.    Secondary--Body composition using
one can day^\1\.                                      skinfolds, bioelectrical impedance
analysis (BIA), waist-to-height
ratio, dental health, sensory
evaluation (satiety and liking of
study drink)
Paper:
Primary--Z-score of BMI for age at 18
months.
Secondary--(all pre-specified) waist-
to-height ratio, sum of the four
skinfold thickness measurements and
fat mass (BIA). Additional outcomes
were weight, height, z score for
height, waist circumference and
weight change adjusted for height
change
Missing data handling: Multiple
imputation and complete case analysis
Tate, et al., 2012  Substituted SSBs with      Meta-analysed water and    Trial registry: NCT01017783
(35)                artificially sweetened     artificially sweetened    Primary--Weight change at 3 and 6
equivalent or water in     groups together versus     months
obese adults who drink     SSB group.                Secondary--Urine specific gravity,
two or more servings per                              fasting glucose
day at baseline.                                     Paper:
Primary--Weight change at 6 months.
Secondary--Compare the non-caloric
beverage groups with the control
group on criterion measures of weight
loss, waist circumference, blood
pressure, glucose, and urine
osmolality from 0 to 3 and 0 to 6
months
Missing data handling: Multiple
imputation for continuous variables,
complete cases for 5% weight loss
criterion analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* We originally excluded any types of beverages that had growth promotion as a function, but the unfortified
beverage met our original inclusion criteria and is included in this analysis. SSB, Sugar-sweetened Beverage.

Figure 2

Observed
(30, 34, 40-42, 62)
versus theoretical

(63)
weight gain effect of mandatory sugar-sweetened
beverage (SSB) consumption.
Notes: For observed values on the Y axis, weight change was
determined by the change of those drinking more SSBs minus
those drinking less. The X axis was determined by multiplying
the added kcal per day times the duration of the study divided
by 1,000. Fit lines were generated by setting the origin to
zero and by using the linear regression (least squares) options
in Microsoft
'
Excel. The theoretical values (round
markers) were generated by entering mean baseline values for
each study sample into the NIDDK body weight simulator

(63)
and adding the same number of calories per day
for the same number of days as reported in the
studies.
(30, 34, 40-42, 62)
Activity settings in the
simulator were at the lowest level of sedentary and no activity
or dietary changes over the study duration were entered into
the simulator. Observed data represent an average energy
compensation rate of 85% (range = 57-110% compensation).
Figure 3

Forest plot comparing studies of added sugar-sweetened
beverage (SSB) consumption.
Note: R square values were calculated from the overall
standardized mean difference estimate (d) per the method found
in.
(64)

Study heterogeneity in reduction studies. Because the heterogeneity
statistic was significant (Fig. 4) in the reduction studies in both
weight groups, we evaluated which study exerted the most influence for
its effects on the overall SMD.
(46)
Exclusion of this study
resulted in a non-significant heterogeneity statistic (x\2\

(6)
= 10.15, P = 0.12, I\2\ = 41%) and an increased overall
SMD of 0.13 (95% CI: 0.04 to 0.22). These analyses shifted the overall
statistics by relatively small amounts when considering the observed
shifts in body weight among the analysis groups.
Interpreting the magnitude of effects. At this juncture, it may be
helpful to express the estimated effect sizes for SSB reduction on BMI
in some additional metrics which may ease interpretation. One such
metric is the probability that a randomly selected person from a
hypothetical population in which SSB reduction was implemented will be
better off (with respect to BMI) than a randomly selected person from a
hypothetical population that is the same in all ways except that SSB
reduction has not been implemented. Without intervention, the
probability is 0.50 that a person from one population weighs more than
a person from the other population. After the interventions included in
our analysis, these probabilities would change slightly. The
probability that a randomly selected person from the reduced SSB
population will have lower BMI than a person randomly selected from the
control population would be 0.52. The probability that a randomly
selected overweight person from the reduced SSB population will have a
lower BMI than an overweight person randomly selected from the control
population would be 0.57.
Figure 4

Forest plot comparing studies of reduced sugar-sweetened
beverage (SSB) consumption; subjects in all weight categories
included.
Note: R square values were calculated from the overall
standardized mean difference estimate (d) per the method found
in.
(64)

Figure 5

Forest plot comparing studies of reduced sugar sweetened
beverage (SSB) consumption; only subjects overweight/obese at
baseline included.
R square values were calculated from the overall
standardized mean difference estimate (d) per the method found
in.
(64)

Another way to place the effect sizes in perspective is to consider
the g\2\ metric shown in Figs 3-5. Increasing consumption of SSBs
explains 1.92% of the variance in body weight or BMI change. Reducing
consumption of SSBs in persons of all weight categories explains 0.09%
of the variance in body weight or BMI change. Among persons who are
overweight or obese at baseline, reducing the consumption of SSBs
explains 1.54% of the variance in body weight or BMI change. It is
possible to apply other methods such as risk analysis for evaluating
potential effects on population levels of obesity,
(49)
but
that is beyond the scope of the present analysis.
Additional Considerations
Having demonstrated that, although the conjecture that decreasing
SSB consumption will decrease obesity and obesity-related diseases is
reasonable, the pertinent data testing the hypothesis are equivocal
(i.e., the pooled results are nearly but not quite statistically
significant), we now address several related questions.
If the data are as weak as we have shown, why do some members of the
public and the scientific community seem to perceive that the
proposition has been proven?
We suggest three major reasons for this confusion.
Emotion-Raising Language
Emotion-raising language has often been used in discussions of SSBs
and obesity. Some authors have used words like `plague',
(50)

`toxic',
(51-52)
`hazardous'
(4, 53)
and `deadly'

(4, 54)
when describing SSBs or the sugars they contain and
have tried to promote perceived connections between SSB marketers and
the worst behaviour of tobacco marketers.
(55)
Although such
words may help to advance an agenda,
(56)
they do not educate
or inform the public. Moreover, they likely raise emotions and impair
logical reasoning.
(57)
As Kersh and Morone
(56)

wrote, `Scientific findings never carry the same political weight as
does a villain threatening American youth. If critics successfully cast
portions of the industry in this way, far-reaching political
interventions are possible, even likely. When an industry becomes
demonized, plausible counter-arguments (privacy, civil liberties,
property rights, and the observation that ``everyone does it'') begin
to totter.'
Figure 6

Comparison of weight gain attributed to consumption of sugar-
sweetened beverages for 1 year from various sources.
Note: For the Haub study, the weight change shown above is
adjusted by subtracting the control group weight change.
* Body mass index of 27.8 kg m^\2\ (NHANES 2010 50th
percentile for both men and women in the United States

(65)
entered into NIDDK body weight
simulator.
(63)

+
(66)
#
(67)
$
(68)
.
Distortion of Scientific Information
A second factor that has likely contributed to misperceptions in
this area is the distortion of scientific information by some authors
and commentators. Table 2 lists some of the types of distortion that
have occurred with quantitative or anecdotal documentation. Figure 6
depicts disparities in projected versus actual outcomes of the effects
of added SSBs over 1 year. Clearly, such practices mislead and have
likely contributed to misperceptions in the scientific and lay
communities about the strength of the evidence regarding the
proposition debated here.
The Mere Exposure Effect
The final factor that we believe has led to the erroneous
perception that the evidence showing that the proposition of this
debate has been unequivocally proven is the `mere exposure effect.' The
mere exposure effect is the label psychologists use for the phenomenon
that the more a person is exposed to an idea, the more they come to
like and accept it. As the Nobel Prize-winning economist Daniel
Kahneman described, `A reliable way to make people believe in falsehood
is frequent repetition, because familiarity is not easily distinguished
from truth. Authoritarian institutions and marketers have always known
this fact. But it was psychologists who discovered that you do not have
to repeat the entire statement of a fact or idea to make it appear
true'.
(58)

The number of articles on SSBs and obesity and the number of
statements that SSBs are especially problematic in obesity are
extraordinary, especially in comparison to the modest amount of
probative data.
(3)
Thus, opinions about SSBs may have been
offered so often that these opinions have become accepted as fact by
many in the scientific community, media and lay public.

Table 2  Some types of Distortion of Information that Have Occurred Regarding Sugar-Sweetened Beverages (SSBs) and Obesity
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Type of distortion                  Where it occurs                      Documentation of occurrence                         Comments
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Papers citing original randomized          In the scientific peer-   Cope and Allison (14) documented in a quantitative          This is not a criticism
controlled trials (RCTs) that              reviewed literature       analysis of the literature that this exaggerated            of the original RCTs,
investigated the effect of SSB reduction                             reporting was the norm rather than an exception.            but rather the manner
on weight exaggerated the extent of the                                                                                          in which subsequent
evidence supporting a beneficial effect                                                                                          authors cite them.
Association studies are described by       In the scientific peer-   `A new study . . . suggests a key way to reduce childhood   `Cravings' were not
using language that indicates a cause      reviewed literature       obesity could be to limit your child's salt intake. The     mentioned in the
and effect relationship has been found     [e.g.,(69)], in           study looked at 4,000 children in Australia and found       published study,(74)
government-sponsored      kids who ate more salt also had more cravings for sugary-   which did not
newsletters               sweetened drinks like soda and juice.' (72)                 overstate the
[e.g.,(70)], and in                                                                   findings, but were
mass media articles                                                                   exaggerated in media
(71 73)                                                                               coverage. This
misleading practice is
common in the obesity
field overall.(75)
Public statements that contradict          Communications from       In 2010, [T]he New York Times ran an article in which,      See Figure 6 for
available evidence                         public health agencies    through e-mails obtained under the Freedom of Information   details and specific
Act, they showed that the New York City (NYC) Department    references.
of Health was knowingly making exaggerated statements
about the amount of weight gain expected from drinking
SSBs. Even after this expose (September 2012), the NYC
Department of Health made even more exaggerated and
evidence-contradicted statements about the amount of
weight gain expected from drinking SSBs.
Changing what is considered the primary    In the scientific peer-   An example (34) of this occurred in an RCT published in     This does not conform
endpoint or analysis in an RCT             reviewed literature       the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition (AJCN). In the   to the CONSORT
paper, the authors state `Our main aim was to test the      guidelines for
hypothesis that sucrose-sweetened cola increases ectopic    publishing RCTs to
fat including VAT4, total body fataccumulation, and         which authors
metabolic risk factors . . . ,' whereas the registration    publishing in AJCN are
in ClinicalTrials.gov states `Primary Outcome Measures:     expected to adhere.
Body Weight; MR spectroscopy; MRI; DEXA scan.' Similarly,
in ClinicalTrials.gov, the title of the trial is `Effect
of Carbonated Soft Drinks on the Body Weight,' whereas in
the article the title is `Sucrose-sweetened beverages
increase fat storage in the liver, muscle, and visceral
fat depot: a 6-mo randomized intervention study.' The
fact that there was no significant effect on weight was
not mentioned in the abstract of the paper.
Conclusion statements from paper do not    In peer-reviewed papers,  An example from the peer-reviewed literature occurred in a  Although a trained
match the results                          press releases, and       paper in AJCN (35) in which the results section of the      scientist carefully
mass media interviews     abstract stated `Mean (RSEM) weight losses at 6 months      reading the original
were ^2.5 R0.45% in the DB group, ^2.03 R0.40% in the       papers will understand
Water group, and ^1.76 R0.35% in the AC group; there were   the results,
no significant differences between groups.' Yet, the        journalists,
conclusion section of the abstract stated `Replacement of   regulators, clinicians
caloric beverages with non-caloric beverages as a weight-   and scientists who
loss strategy resulted in average weight losses of 2% to    only rapidly read an
2.5%.' Given the non-significant result, it does not seem   abstract are likely to
justifiable to state there is any weight loss as a result   be misled.
of the treatment. Even if point estimates were being
provided in a merely descriptive manner, the unbiased
estimates of treatment effects in an RCT are the control-
subtracted means, not the raw means in the treatment
group. Examples from press releases and media interviews
can be found in (14, 76) and in these sources.(77,78)
Publication bias                           In the scientific peer-   Cope and Allison (14) showed that in observational          This is why we wrote
reviewed literature       epidemiologic studies of the association of SSB             earlier in this paper
consumption and obesity, a standard test of publication     that the observed
bias was significant, suggesting that investigators are     magnitude of
more likely to publish positive statistically significant   association is likely
findings than to publish null findings.                     biased upwards.
Interestingly, Cope
and Allison found that
this publication bias
seemed to occur among
non-industry-funded
authors and not among
industry-funded
authors.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 3  Quotations Illustrating that Others Do Not Believe the Benefits of Interventions Aimed at SSB Reduction on Weight Have Been Established
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Person(s) or body offering statement                                              Statement                                          Reference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States Department of Agriculture Dietary      `Thus, there are mixed results on this topic. RCTs report that added sugars are not            (12)
Guidelines Advisory Committee                        different from other calories in increasing energy intake or body weight.
Prospective studies report some relationship with SSB and weight gain, but it is
not possible to determine if these relationships are merely linked to additional
calories, as opposed to added sugars per se. The systematic reviews in this area
are also inconsistent, probably based on different measures used to determine
added sugars intake or intake of SSB.' [We should] `Conduct well-controlled and
powered research studies testing interventions that are likely to improve energy
balance in children at increased risk of childhood obesity, including dietary
approaches that reduce . . . sugar-sweetened beverages' [because] `very few solid
data are available on interventions in children.'
European Food Safety Authority                       `The Panel concludes that a cause and effect relationship has not been established             (79)
between total sugar intake and body weight gain, and that a cause and effect
relationship has not been established between the consumption of foods and
beverages in which sugars have been replaced by intense sweeteners and
contribution to the maintenance or achievement of a normal body weight.'
Lisa Te Morenga, Simonette Mallard, Jim Mann         `Trials in children, which involved recommendations to reduce intake of sugar                  (80)
sweetened foods and beverages, had low participant compliance to dietary advice;
these trials showed no overall change in body weight.'
German Nutrition Society                             `From two of the four available meta-analyses the conclusion is drawn that                     (81)
increased consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages in children and adolescents is
associated with a higher risk of obesity. In contrast, another meta-analysis
judges the effect as almost zero. The cohort studies published since then verify
this risk-increasing effect only in part. The most recent meta-analysis concludes
that the risk-increasing effect is limited to individuals with initially already
increased BMI or existing overweight, respectively.'
Thomas Baranowski                                    `Another concern is the behavior or behaviors targeted for change. Many obesity                (82)
prevention interventions have targeted increasing fruit and vegetable intake and
decreasing sweetened beverage intake. Systematic reviews, however, showed no
consistent evidence that increased fruit and vegetable intake protected against
obesity or that sweetened beverage intake contributed to it.'
Joint statement from American Heart Association and  `At this time, there are insufficient data to determine conclusively whether the               (83)
the American Diabetes Association                    use of NNS [non-nutritive sweeteners] to displace caloric sweeteners in beverages
and foods reduces added sugars or carbohydrate intakes, or benefits appetite,
energy balance, body weight, or cardiometabolic risk factors.'
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Are we alone in the view that a beneficial effect of SSB reduction on
obesity has not been demonstrated?
In a word, no. As the quotations in Table 3 reveal, our views are
concordant with those of other individual scientists and authoritative
expert panels.
What would it take to shift the balance of evidence?
In a possibly apocryphal interchange, a devotee of Karl Popper's
philosophy of science once challenged the great mathematical geneticist
J.B.S. Haldane to specify what it would take to change his views about
the validity of evolutionary theory. Haldane reportedly retorted
`Fossil rabbits in the Precambrian!' Although a poetic retort, Haldane
was effectively specifying objective empirical evidence that would be
sufficient for him to change his view, something any scientist
addressing empirical questions should be prepared to do.
In the debate at The Obesity Society Meeting (September 20, 2012),
the senior author [DBA] stated:

`The day that multiple RCTs are published that

are well designed, executed, and analyzed;

show statistically significant outcomes in preplanned
analyses of the total randomized sample on measures of
total body weight, BMI, or total body fat and clearly
support the value of reducing SSBs; and

are sufficient in inferential weight to outweigh the
existing RCT data;

I will be delighted to modify my opinion.'

The day after the debate (September 21, 2012), two new RCTs were
published.
(29, 33)
These two publications together met some
(but not all) of the criteria specified above as we discussed earlier.
Most notably, their collective evidential weight moved the integrated
meta-analytic estimate for the effects of SSB reduction very close to
the border of the conventional 0.05 level of statistical significance.
For this reason, we believe that these two new studies can be described
as `tilting the needle' in the direction of demonstrating the obesity-
reducing benefit of SSB reduction, but that the data remain equivocal.
Nevertheless, we remain open-minded that future RCTs (and according to
ClinicalTrials.gov some will be forthcoming) may fulfil the criteria
above and offer unequivocal support for the proposition.
We also suggest that the following approaches can increase the
transparency of, and confidence in, RCTs in this area: (i) registering
all RCTs in advance in ClinicalTrials.gov; (ii) making the raw data
from all RCTs publicly available for common and open analyses,
regardless of the source of funding; (iii) providing documentation via
ClinicalTrials.gov as to which analyses are (were) pre-planned; and
(iv) publishing all results regardless of outcome. These are laudable
practices in all situations, but especially important in an area that
has become so contentious.
How does the strength of evidence for conclusions relate to support for
actions?
As we mentioned earlier, we are not addressing whether any
particular policy or programme should or should not be implemented.
Rather, our sole purpose has been to present a synthesis of the
currently available literature that provides an estimate of the degree
of evidence for the debate proposition. Moreover, it is important to
note that our paper assessed the evidence for effect of reducing SSB
consumption, which should not be conflated with the effects of
particular policies (e.g., taxes, bans, advertising campaigns, etc.)
intended to reduce SSB consumption. The effects of any such policies
represent a different question and not one for which we have evaluated
the evidence.
The question of whether the available evidence is sufficiently
strong to justify a particular action is a subjective one subject to
societal perceptions, values, goals and the plausibility of unintended
consequences.
(59-60)
This is illustrated by quotations from
two authoritative sources on this point as food for thought:

`Since taking office, the President has emphasized the need
to use evidence and rigorous evaluation in budget, management,
and policy decisions to make government work effectively. . . .
Where evidence is strong, we should act on it. Where evidence
is suggestive, we should consider it. Where evidence is weak,
we should build the knowledge to support better decisions in
the future.'
(61)

`On fair evidence we might take action on what appears to be
an occupational hazard, e.g., we might change from probably
carcinogenic oil to a non-carcinogenic oil in a limited
environment and without too much injustice if we are wrong. But
we should need very strong evidence before we made people burn
a fuel in their homes that they do not like or stop smoking the
cigarettes and eating the fats and sugar that they do like.'

(1)

Conclusions
Our updated meta-analysis shows that the currently available
randomized evidence for the effects of reducing SSB intake on obesity
is equivocal. Even if statistical significance is ignored, the point
estimates of effects on BMI reduction are small, accounting for only
1.5% of the variance observed in those who were overweight at baseline.
Therefore, we conclude that the debate proposition cannot be supported
at this time. Of course, absence of evidence is not evidence of
absence. The lower limit of the confidence interval around the
estimated effect of SSB reduction is very close to the border of
statistical significance. It is certainly possible that additional,
larger or otherwise stronger studies will in the future provide clear
and convincing evidence that lowering SSB consumption will reduce
obesity and obesity-related disease prevalence. We are certainly not
arguing against the common-sense recommendation that for individuals
who wish to lose weight and who presently drink large amounts of SSBs,
reducing intake of these and other sources of energy seems wise.
We greatly respect our debate opponent, Dr. Hu, for addressing
these issues in a manner that is both thoroughly scientific and equally
collegial. We are hopeful that this debate may be seen not only as a
careful consideration of the evidence regarding SSBs and obesity, but
also as an exemplar of and call to a more informed, unexaggerated,
open-minded, rational and civil dialogue on the many public health
issues around obesity that, like SSB-related issues, have become so
contentious.

Author Contributions

KAK performed an updated systematic review, reviewed papers for
inclusion criteria, extracted data from papers, wrote summaries of new
studies included in appendix, checked meta-analysis calculations,
assessed risk of bias for newly included studies, generated tables,
generated figures and wrote a significant portion of the text. KDK
extracted data from papers, analysed supplemental data received from
authors, generated new meta-analysis statistics and verified prior data
reported. JMS reviewed papers for inclusion criteria, assessed risk of
bias for newly included studies, wrote summaries of new studies
included in appendix and reviewed and edited text. DBA conceived of the
project scope, developed debate arguments, directed meta-analysis
methods, reviewed papers for inclusion criteria, edited and wrote a
significant portion of the text.

Conflict of Interest Statement
In the last 36 months, Dr. Allison has received consulting fees from
Kraft Foods. The University of Alabama at Birmingham has received gifts
and grants from multiple organizations including but not limited to The
Coca-Cola Company, PepsiCo, Red Bull and Kraft Foods. Drs. Kaiser,
Keating and Shikany have no competing interests to report.

Ethical Approval

Not required.

Acknowledgements

Supported in part by NIH grant P30DK056336. The opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIH or any
other organization with which the authors are affiliated. This paper is
based on a debate held at The Obesity Society 2012 Annual Meeting. The
authors thank Sigrid Gibson; Drs. Michelle Bohan Brown, Richard
Forshee, Richard Mattes and Douglas Weed for their suggestions on
drafts of this manuscript. The authors also thank Dr. Marc Reitman for
the use of Fig. 1. The authors are also grateful to those who kindly
responded to our request for additional data about their studies: Dr.
Valentine Njike, Dr. David Katz, Dr. Mario Vaz, Dr. Tinku Thompson, Ms.
Janne de Ruyter, Dr. Sonia Hernandez-Cordero and Dr. Martijn Katan.

Supporting Information

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version
of this article, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/obr.12048.
Figure S1. Study screening and selection process of new studies
added since the original meta-analysis (21)
Figure S2. Methodological quality summary; review authors' judgments
about each methodological quality item for each included study (1 6,
20, 25 32)
Figure S3. Funnel plot of published studies of added sugar-sweetened
beverage (SSB) consumption (3 4, 6, 27, 30, 32)
Figure S4. Funnel plot of published studies on reduced sugar-
sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption in subjects of all weight
categories (1 2, 5, 20, 26, 28, 31)
Figure S5. Funnel plot of published studies of reduced sugar-
sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption in subjects overweight/obese at
baseline (2, 5, 20, 26, 31)
Table S1. Unstandardized effect sizes of new studies assessing the
effects of adding mandatory SSB consumption to persons diets
Table S2. Standardized effect sizes from new studies assessing the
effect of attempting to get people to reduce or eliminate SSB
consumption on body composition/adiposity indicators
Table S3. Standardized effect sizes from new studies assessing the
effect of attempting to get people to reduce or eliminate SSB
consumption on body mass index (BMI) only for subjects overweight/obese
at baseline or above the top of tertile of baseline BMI
Appendix S1. Updated literature review, selection and data
extraction methods

References

1. Hill A.B. The environment and disease: association or causation?
Proc. R. Soc. Med. 1965; 58: 295-300.
2. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force Procedure Manual, 2008.
3. Casazza K., Allison D.B. Stagnation in the clinical, community,
and public health domain of obesity: the need for probative research.
Clin. Obes. 2012; 2: 83-85.
4. Bray G.A. Fructose: pure, white, and deadly? Fructose, by any
other name, is a health hazard. J. Diab. Sci. Technol. 2010; 4: 1003-
1007.
5. Earth Policy Institute. Bottled Water Consumption Per Person in
the United States, 1976-2007. Posted: 12-7-2007. [WWW document]. URL
http://www.earth-policy.org/index.php?/data_center/C21/ (accessed
December 2012).
6. Ogden C.L., Carroll M.D. Prevalence of Overweight, Obesity, and
Extreme Obesity Among Adults: United States, Trends 1960-1962 Through
2007-2008. Posted: 2010. [WWW document]. URL http://www.cdc.gov/NCHS/
data/hestat/obesity_adult_07_08/obesity_adult_07_08.pdf (accessed
December 2012).
7. Ogden C.L., Carroll M.D., Kit B.K., Flegal K.M. Prevalence of
obesity and trends in body mass index among U.S. children and
adolescents, 1999-2010. JAMA 2012; 307: 483-490.
8. Malik V.S., Willett W.C., Hu F.B. Sugar-sweetened beverages and
BMI in children and adolescents: reanalyses of a meta-analysis. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2009; 89: 438-439.
9. Malik V.S., Popkin B.M., Bray G.A., Despres J.P., Willett W.C.,
Hu F.B. Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk of metabolic syndrome and
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2010; 33: 2477-2483.
10. Mozaffarian D., Hao T., Rimm E.B., Willett W.C., Hu F.B. Changes
in diet and lifestyle and long-term weight gain in women and men. N.
Engl. J. Med. 2011; 364: 2392-2404.
11. Drewnowski A., Bellisle F. Liquid calories, sugar, and body
weight. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007; 85: 651-661.
12. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. Report of the DGAC on the
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010: Part D--Section 5:
Carbohydrates. Posted: 2010. [WWW document]. URL http://
www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/DietaryGuidelines/2010/DGAC/Report/D-5-
Carbohydrates.pdf (accessed December 2012).
13. Hu F.B. Obesity Epidemiology. Oxford University Press: New York,
NY, 2008.
14. Cope M.B., Allison D.B. White hat bias: examples of its presence
in obesity research and a call for renewed commitment to faithfulness
in research reporting. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2010; 34: 84-88.
15. DiMeglio D.P., Mattes R.D. Liquid versus solid carbohydrate:
effects on food intake and body weight. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab.
Disord. 2000; 24: 794-800.
16. Tieken S.M., Leidy H.J., Stull A.J., Mattes R.D., Schuster R.A.,
Campbell W.W. Effects of solid versus liquid meal-replacement products
of similar energy content on hunger, satiety, and appetite-regulating
hormones in older adults. Horm. Metab. Res. 2007; 39: 389-394.
17. Cassady B.A., Considine R.V., Mattes R.D. Beverage consumption,
appetite, and energy intake: what did you expect? Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2012; 95: 587-593.
18. Mattes R.D. Dietary compensation by humans for supplemental
energy provided as ethanol or carbohydrate in fluids. Physiol. Behav.
1996; 59: 179-187.
19. McKiernan F., Hollis J.H., Mattes R.D. Short-term dietary
compensation in free-living adults. Physiol. Behav. 2008; 93: 975-983.
20. Almiron-Roig E., Chen Y., Drewnowski A. Liquid calories and the
failure of satiety: how good is the evidence? Obes. Rev. 2003; 4: 201-
212.
21. Almiron-Roig E., Flores S.Y., Drewnowski A. No difference in
satiety or in subsequent energy intakes between a beverage and a solid
food. Physiol. Behav. 2004; 82: 671-677.
22. Houchins J.A., Burgess J.R., Campbell W.W., et al. Beverage vs.
solid fruits and vegetables: effects on energy intake and body weight.
Obesity (Silver Spring) 2012; 20: 1844-1850.
23. Kulze A.G. Eat Right for Life: Chapter 5--Drink the Right
Beverages. Posted: 2013. [WWW document]. URL http://www.welcoa.org/
store/resources/documents/er-sample-chapter.pdf (accessed December
2012).
24. Liebman B. Nutrition Action Healthletter: Pour Better or Pour
Worse. Posted: 6-1-2006. [WWW document]. URL http://www.cspinet.org/nah/
06_06/beverage.pdf (accessed December 2012).
25. Pan A., Hu F.B. Effects of carbohydrates on satiety: differences
between liquid and solid food. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care.
2011; 14: 385-390.
26. Bray G.A., Nielsen S.J., Popkin B.M. Consumption of high
fructose corn syrup in beverages may play a role in the epidemic of
obesity. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004; 79: 537-543.
27. Malik V.S., Schulze M.B., Hu F.B. Intake of sugar-sweetened
beverages and weight gain: a systematic review. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2006; 84: 274-288.
28. Vartanian L.R., Schwartz M.B., Brownell K.D. Effects of soft
drink consumption on nutrition and health: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am. J. Public Health 2007; 97: 667-675.
29. de Ruyter J.C., Olthof M.R., Seidell J.C., Katan M.B. A trial of
sugar-free or sugar-sweetened beverages and body weight in children. N.
Engl. J. Med. 2012; 367: 1397-1406.
30. Njike V.Y., Faridi Z., Shuval K., et al. Effects of sugar-
sweetened and sugar-free cocoa on endothelial function in overweight
adults. Int. J. Cardiol. 2011; 149: 83-88.
31. Hernandez-Cordero S., Barquera S., Rodriguez-Ramirez S., et al.
Water intake and metabolic syndrome risk: a randomized clinical trial.
Experimental Biology Conference, Boston. Abstract presented 4-22-2013.
32. de Ruyter J.C., Olthof M.R., Kuijper L.D., Katan M.B. Effect of
sugar-sweetened beverages on body weight in children: design and
baseline characteristics of the Double-blind, Randomized INtervention
study in Kids. Contemp. Clin. Trials 2012; 33: 247-257.
33. Ebbeling C.B., Feldman H.A., Chomitz V.R., et al. A randomized
trial of sugar-sweetened beverages and adolescent body weight. N. Engl.
J. Med. 2012; 367: 1407-1416.
34. Maersk M., Belza A., Stodkilde-Jorgensen H., et al. Sucrose-
sweetened beverages increase fat storage in the liver, muscle, and
visceral fat depot: a 6-mo randomized intervention study. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 2012; 95: 283-289.
35. Tate D.F., Turner-McGrievy G., Lyons E., et al. Replacing
caloric beverages with water or diet beverages for weight loss in
adults: main results of the Choose Healthy Options Consciously Everyday
(CHOICE) randomized clinical trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012; 95: 555-
563.
36. Vaz M., Pauline M., Unni U.S., et al. Micronutrient
supplementation improves physical performance measures in Asian Indian
school-age children. J. Nutr. 2011; 141: 2017-2023.
37. Mattes R.D., Shikany J.M., Kaiser K.A., Allison D.B. Nutritively
sweetened beverage consumption and body weight: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized experiments. Obes. Rev. 2011; 12: 346-365.
38. Review Manager (RevMan) [Computer Program] Version 5.1.6.
Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre. The Cochrane Collaboration,
2011.
39. Begg C.B., Mazumdar M. Operating characteristics of a rank
correlation test for publication bias. Biometrics 1994; 50: 1088-1101.
40. Haub M.D., Simons T.R., Cook C.M., Remig V.M., Al-Tamimi E.K.,
Holcomb C.A. Calcium-fortified beverage supplementation on body
composition in postmenopausal women. Nutr. J. 2005; 4: 21. e-pub 1-6
(DOI:10.1186/1475-2891-4-21).
41. Reid M., Hammersley R., Hill A.J., Skidmore P. Long-term dietary
compensation for added sugar: effects of supplementary sucrose drinks
over a 4-week period. Br. J. Nutr. 2007; 97: 193-203.
42. Tordoff M.G., Alleva A.M. Effect of drinking soda sweetened with
aspartame or high-fructose corn syrup on food intake and body weight.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1990; 51: 963-969.
43. Albala C., Ebbeling C.B., Cifuentes M., Lera L., Bustos N.,
Ludwig D.S. Effects of replacing the habitual consumption of sugar-
sweetened beverages with milk in Chilean children. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2008; 88: 605-611.
44. Ebbeling C.B., Feldman H.A., Osganian S.K., Chomitz V.R.,
Ellenbogen S.J., Ludwig D.S. Effects of decreasing sugar-sweetened
beverage consumption on body weight in adolescents: a randomized,
controlled pilot study. Pediatrics 2006; 117: 673-680.
45. James J., Thomas P., Cavan D., Kerr D. Preventing childhood
obesity by reducing consumption of carbonated drinks: cluster
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2004; 328: 1237. e-pub 1-6 (DOI:
10.1136/bmj.38077.458438.EE).
46. Sichieri R., Paula T.A., de Souza R.A., Veiga G.V. School
randomised trial on prevention of excessive weight gain by discouraging
students from drinking sodas. Public Health Nutr. 2009; 12: 197-202.
47. Munoz D. The efficacy of two brief interventions to reduce soda
consumption in a college population (Doctoral dissertation). Albany,
New York State University of New York. 2006.
48. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.
Academic Press: New York, NY, 1988.
49. Forshee R.A., Storey M.L., Ginevan M.E. A risk analysis model of
the relationship between beverage consumption from school vending
machines and risk of adolescent overweight. Risk Anal. 2005; 25: 1121-
1135.
50. Popkin B.M. Sugary beverages represent a threat to global
health. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2012; 23: 591-593.
51. Lustig RH, Gupta S. Is sugar toxic? [WWW document]. URL http://
www.cbsnews.com/8301-18560_162-57407294/is-sugartoxic/ (accessed
December 2012).
52. Lustig R.H., Schmidt L.A., Brindis C.D. Public health: the toxic
truth about sugar. Nature 2012; 482: 27-29.
53. Bray G.A. Soft drink consumption and obesity: it is all about
fructose. Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 2010; 21: 51-57.
54. Yudkin J.S. Pure, White and Deadly. Penguin Books: London, 1986.
55. Brownell K.D., Warner K.E. The perils of ignoring history: Big
Tobacco played dirty and millions died. How similar is Big Food?
Milbank Q. 2009; 87: 259-294.
56. Kersh R., Morone J. The politics of obesity: seven steps to
government action. Health Aff. (Millwood) 2002; 21: 142-153.
57. Schmeichel B.J., Vohs K.D., Baumeister R.F. Intellectual
performance and ego depletion: role of the self in logical reasoning
and other information processing. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 2003; 85: 33-
46.
58. Kahneman D. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus & Giroux:
New York, NY, 2011.
59. Sharpe K.M., Staelin R., Huber J. Using extremeness aversion to
fight obesity: policy implications of context dependent demand. J.
Consum. Res. 2008; 35: 406-422.
60. Wansink B., Hanks D., Just D.R., et al. From Coke to Coors: A
Field Study of a Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax and its Unintended
Consequences. Posted: 5-26-2012. [WWW document]. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.2079840 (accessed December 2012).
61. Zients J.D. Memorandum to the Heads of Executive Departments and
Agencies. Posted: 2012. [WWW document]. URL http://www.whitehouse.gov/
sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2012/m-12-14.pdf (accessed December
2012).
62. Addington E.A. Aspartame- or sugar-sweetened beverages. Effects
on food appetites and mood in young adults (Doctoral dissertation).
Manhattan, Kansas: Kansas State University. 1998.
63. Hall K.D. Body Weight Simulator. Posted: 4-4-2012. [WWW
document]. URL http://bwsimulator.niddk.nih.gov/ (accessed December
2012).
64. Hedges L.V., Olkin I. Statistical Methods for Meta-Analysis.
Academic Press: Orlando, FL, 1985.
65. Flegal K.M., Carroll M.D., Kit B.K., Ogden C.L. Prevalence of
obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass index among U.S.
adults, 1999-2010. JAMA 2012; 307: 491-497.
66. Hartocollis A. E-Mails Reveal Dispute Over City's Ad Against
Sodas. Posted: 10-28-2010. [WWW document]. URL http://www.nytimes.com/
2010/10/29/nyregion/29fat.html?pagewanted=all (accessed December 2012).
67. New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Man
Drinking Fat. NYC Health Anti-Soda Ad. Are You Pouring on the Pounds?
Posted: 12-14-2009. [WWW document]. URL http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-
F4t8zL6F0c (accessed December 2012).
68. Kansangra S. Maximum Size For Sugary Drinks: Proposed Amendment
of Article 81--Response to Comments. Posted: 9-13-2012. [WWW document].
URL http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/boh/article81-response-to-
comments-ppt.pdf (accessed December 2012).
69. Davis J.N., Whaley S.E., Goran M.I. Effects of breastfeeding and
low sugar-sweetened beverage intake on obesity prevalence in Hispanic
toddlers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012; 95: 3-8.
70. Norton A. Could Kids' Salt Intake Affect Their Weight? Posted:
2012. [WWW document]. URL http://consumer.healthday.com/
Article.asp?AID=671410 (accessed December 2012).
71. Azuz C. Lots of salt means lots of soda. Posted: 12-10-2012.
[WWW document]. URL http://www.cnn.com/video/?hpt=he_mid#/video/health/
2012/12/10/hm-salt-and-soda.cnn (accessed December 2012).
72. Mackey L. Lowering salt intake may be key to lowering childhood
obesity rates. Posted: 12-10-2012. [WWW document]. URL http://wtvr.com/
2012/12/10/lowering-salt-intake-may-be-key-tolowering-childhood-obesity-
rates/ (accessed December 2012).
73. McKenzie A. Study says salt may be a catalyst for childhood
obesity. Posted: 12-13-2012. [WWW document]. URL http://
triad.news14.com/content/top_stories/676361/study-says-salt-may-be-a-
catalyst-for-childhood-obesity (accessed December 2012).
74. Grimes C.A., Riddell L.J., Campbell K.J., Nowson C.A. Dietary
Salt Intake, Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption, and Obesity Risk.
Pediatrics 2012; 13: 14-21. e-pub (DOI: 10.1542/peds.2012-1628).
75. Cofield S.S., Corona R.V., Allison D.B. Use of causal language
in observational studies of obesity and nutrition. Obes. Facts 2010; 3:
353-356.
76. Cope M.B., Allison D.B. White hat bias: a threat to the
integrity of scientific reporting. Acta. Paediatr. 2010; 99: 1615-1617.
77. James G. Are Diet Drinks The Key To Weight Loss? Posted: 2-15-
2012. [WWW document]. URL http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/02/15/
diet-drinks-water-key-to-weightloss_n_1279488.html (accessed December
2012).
78. Lane P. Press Release: Weighing the difference: switching to
water, diet beverages can tip the scales. Posted: 2012. [WWW document].
URL http://uncnews.unc.edu/content/view/5088/71 (accessed December
2012).
79. European Food Safety Authority. Scientific Opinion on the
substantiation of health claims related to intense sweeteners and
contribution to the maintenance or achievement of a normal body weight.
Posted: 2012. [WWW document]. URL http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/
efsajournal/doc/2229.pdf (accessed December 2012).
80. Te Morenga L., Mallard S., Mann J. Dietary sugars and body
weight: systematic review and meta-analyses of randomised controlled
trials and cohort studies. BMJ 2013; 346: e7492.
81. Hauner H., Bechthold A., Boeing H., et al. Evidence-based
guideline of the German Nutrition Society: carbohydrate intake and
prevention of nutrition-related diseases. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2012; 60
(Suppl. 1): 1-58.
82. Baranowski T. School-based obesity-prevention interventions in
low- and middle-income countries: do they really work? Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 2012; 96: 227-228.
83. Gardner C., Wylie-Rosett J., Gidding S.S., et al. Nonnutritive
sweeteners: current use and health perspectives: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association and the American Diabetes
Association. Circulation 2012; 126: 509-519.

attachment 9
Liquid Calories, Energy Compensation, and Weight: What We Know and What
We Still Need To Learn
Invited Commentary
David B. Allison *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Office of Energetics, Nutrition Obesity Research Center,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0022, USA, e-
mail
[emailprotected]
.
doi:10.1017/S0007114513003309.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
British Journal of Nutrition (2014), 111, 384-386

'
The Author 2013
(First published online 28 October 2013)

Roughly 10,000 years ago, sugar was first domesticated in New
Guinea. Roughly 8,000 years ago, it was transplanted to India. Sometime
around the seventh century, cultivation and some industrial production
began in southern Europe, and the crusades subsequently acquainted more
Europeans with sugar imported from Arab lands. Until the sixteenth
century, sugar was often viewed by Europeans as having medicinal
properties. Colonisation of the New World led to mass production and
distribution of sugar as a major foodstuff.
(1-5)
By 1713, a
writer in a scholarly journal was extolling the health virtues of high
levels of sugar consumption, including in beverages.
(6)
In
1893, Harley
(7)
conducted self-experiments and concluded
that consumption of 250 g (approximately 4184 kJ or approximately 1000
kcal) of sugar greatly increased muscular work capacity. In 1899, a
controlled trial involving soldiers reported that those given a ration
of sugar were in better health, felt more vigorous and gained more
weight (presumably judged to be a good thing at the
time).
(8)
As the century turned, Gardner
(9)

described sugar as a nutritional necessity that increased the health
and vigour of populations. Yet, the positive health halo of sugar could
not last. A generation later, authors of scientific papers did write
about `The social problem growing out of the overconsumption of sugar'
and described school-based programmes to teach children to consume less
sugar.
(10)

Sugar consumed in liquid form has come to be seen by some as
especially deserving of scrutiny. In 1990, Tordoff & Alleva

(11)
published seminal trial results showing that persons
required to consume additional sugar in the form of a beverage gained
more weight than did a control group given a non-energetic beverage.
After 13 years, suspicion was increasing that metabolisable energy,
perhaps especially sugar, consumed as liquids promoted less satiety,
less energy compensation and more weight gain than did the same energy
consumed in solid form.
(12)
The topic has become
controversial to say the least,
(13)
and there is substantial
evidence that the strength of the supporting data has often been
exaggerated and distorted.
(14,15)

Newspaper articles offer statements such as `People who drink
sugary soft drinks do not appear to compensate by reducing calories
somewhere else in their diets, so they tend to pack on extra pounds'

(16)
and `Study after study has shown that like experimental
animals, people do not compensate for extra liquid calories by eating
less food'.
(17)
This concept that people do not adjust their
energy intake (or expenditure) to compensate for energy consumed as
liquids is at the heart of the matter. Yet, is it true? Although
opinions on matters of energy compensation in response to various forms
of sugar intake and/or liquid energy have been offered for over 70
years,
(18,19)
convincing data on these issues have been
scarce.
In this issue of the British Journal of Nutrition, Reid, et
al.,
(20)
offer a new and valuable piece of evidence on this
question. In a study of obese adult women, those consuming sugar in
liquid form at a level of 1,800 kJ (approximately 430 kcal) per d
gained far less weight than expected and no more weight than did women
in a control group drinking zero-energy beverages. The study has
several strengths. It was a controlled trial that was run for long
enough to observe weight changes and that was at least partially
conducted in a blinded fashion. It also has several limitations,
including a modest sample size, incomplete blinding and the fact that
it was not strictly randomised. I will not belabour those points here
as Reid and colleagues discuss them in their article. It should also be
noted that the study concerns only adult women and cannot necessarily
tell us about the effects in men or children.
What does the study show?
The study's essential finding concerns the question of compensation
for liquid energy. The sucrose group gained no appreciable weight. This
shows that over an extended period, at least in conditions similar to
those of this study, women do compensate for additional energy consumed
in the form of a sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB). Moreover, that the
weight gained in the sucrose group was significantly less than that
predicted by an established mathematical model based on the amount of
energy consumed in the form of SSB further indicates that the vast
majority of the energy consumed was compensated for. Reid, et al.,
state that `Obese women who received 1,800 kJ sucrose per day in soft
drinks for 4 weeks gained a mean of 1.72 kg less than predicted by the
model.' Interestingly, the model predicted a total weight gain for a
woman with the average characteristics listed in Reid, et al.,'s Table
1 of only about 1.8 kg.
Are the findings consistent with those of other studies?
Yes. Kaiser, et al.,
(15)
meta-analysed other studies in
which adults were required to consume additional energy in SSB in
randomised controlled trials (RCT), and found that, on average, such
required SSB consumption did indeed cause weight gain, but that the
amount of weight gained was far less than \1/2\ the amount one would
have predicted to be gained by use of the same mathematical model used
by Reid, et al. (see Kaiser, et al.,'s Fig. 2). This indicates that, as
Reid, et al., found, over extended periods of time, the majority of the
energy consumed as SSB is indeed compensated for.
Do the findings inform us about the effects of reducing sugar-sweetened
beverage consumption among adult women?
No. Though tempting, we cannot necessarily infer the effects of
reducing SSB consumption from studies of the effects of increasing SSB
consumption. That said, as Kaiser, et al.,
(15)
reported, no
RCT of adults reported to date has found a statistically significant
effect of reducing SSB consumption on weight.
Do the findings inform us about the differential effects (if any) of
consuming liquid v. solid energy on weight?
No. The results of Reid, et al., only show what happens with SSB.
From these data alone, we have no way of knowing whether the same
results would have been obtained if the women were required to consume
1,800 kJ of food in some solid form. Returning to the literature at
large, there is evidence from a recent meta-analysis that in short-term
(typically single-day) studies with food intake as the outcome, liquid
energy is less well compensated for than is solid
energy.
(21)
Yet, we cannot assume that individuals will not
adapt to dietary changes over time. Long-term effects on weight cannot
be reliably inferred from short-term effects on food intake. Indeed, to
my knowledge, there are only two human RCT comparing the effects of
liquid v. solid foods on weight over an extended period of time, and
neither found a statistically significant difference between the liquid
and solid conditions when the entire samples were
analysed.
(22-23)

In conclusion, what we know from the overall literature is that
when adults are required to consume additional energy in the form of
SSB, on average, they gain some weight. What we also know from the
overall literature and this new study is that, on average, adults gain
far less weight than they would be expected to gain if they did not
compensate. Thus, people clearly do compensate for liquid energy,
although they do so incompletely. What we do not know, despite all the
drama and vituperation surrounding SSB, is whether, over extended
periods of time, people compensate any differently for liquid v. solid
energy. It is high time we learned.

Acknowledgements

The present work was supported in part by National Institutes of
Health (NIH) grant P30DK056336. The opinions expressed are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the NIH or any other organisation.
The author received grants and gifts to his university and
consulting fees from multiple for-profit and not-for-profit
organisations with interests in obesity, sugar and SSB.

References

1. Anonymous (1853) History of sugar. The Illustrated Magazine of
Art, vol. 2, no. 2, p. 147. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20538093
(accessed August 2013).
2. Baru S. (1987) Sugar in history: sweetness and power. Review of
Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History by Sidney W.
Mintz. Economic and Political Weekly vol. 22, no. 33 (15 August 1987),
pp. 1391-1393. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4377370 (accessed August
2013).
3. Levi L. (1864) On the Sugar Trade and Sugar Duties. A Lecture
Delivered at King's College, London, February 29, 1864. London:
Effingham Wilson, Royal Exchange. http://www.jstor.org/stable/60101270
(accessed August 2013).
4. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service (1971)
A History of Sugar Marketing. Agriculture Economic Report No. 197.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
5. Galloway J.H. (1977) The Mediterranean sugar industry. Geographic
Rev. 67, 177-194. http://www.jstor.org/stable/214019 (accessed August
2013).
6. Slare F. (1713) Part of a letter from Dr. Fred Slare to Dr. Hans
Sloane; concerning a person who had a new set of teeth after 80 years
of age; with some observations upon the virtues and properties of
sugar. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. (1683-1775) 28, 273-274.
7. Harley V. (1893) Sugar as a food in the production of muscular
work. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 54, 480-487.
8. Anonymous (1899) Sugar as a ration. Br. Med. J. 1, 105.
9. Gardner H.W. (1901) The dietetic value of sugar. Br. Med. J. 1,
1010-1013.
10. Sollins I.V. (1930) Sugar in diet: an experiment in instruction
in candy consumption. J. Educ. Sociol. 3, 546-555.
11. Tordoff M.G. & Alleva A.M. (1990) Effect of drinking soda
sweetened with aspartame or high-fructose corn syrup on food intake and
body weight. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 51, 963-969.
12. Almiron-Roig E., Chen Y. & Drewnowski A. (2003) Liquid calories
and the failure of satiety: how good is the evidence? Obes. Rev. 4, 201-
212.
13. Slavin J. (2012) Beverages and body weight: challenges in the
evidence-based review process of the Carbohydrate Subcommittee from the
2010 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. Nutr. Rev. 70, Suppl. 2,
S111-S120.
14. Cope M.B. & Allison D.B. (2010) White hat bias: examples of its
presence in obesity research and a call for renewed commitment to
faithfulness in research reporting. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 34, 84-88.
15. Kaiser K.A., Shikany J.M., Keating K.D., et al. (2013) Will
reducing sugar-sweetened beverage consumption reduce obesity? Evidence
supporting conjecture is strong, but evidence when testing effect is
weak. Obes. Rev. 14, 620-633.
16. Hellmich N. (2007) Soda drinkers consume more calories. USA
Today. http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/health/2007-03-25-soda-
drinkers_N.htm (accessed August 2013).
17. Brody J.E. (2010) A tax to combat America's sugary diet. New
York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/06/health/06brod.html?_r%0
(accessed August 2013).
18. Anonymous (1942) Sugar rationing called a ``Godsend'' to
national health. Science News-Letter vol. 41, no. 11 (14 March 1942),
p. 164. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3918542 (accessed August 2013).
19. Anonymous (1944) Advice given to go easy on use of chocolate
milk. Science News-Letter vol. 45, no. 25 (17 June 1944), p. 398.
20. Reid M., Hammersley R., Duffy M., et al. (2014) Effects on obese
women of the sugar sucrose added to the diet over 28 days, a quasi-
randomised, single-blind, controlled trial. Br. J. Nutr. 111, 563-570.
21. Almiron-Roig E., Palla L., Guest K., et al. (2013) Factors that
determine energy compensation: a systematic review of preload studies.
Nutr. Rev. 71, 458-473.
22. DiMeglio D.P. & Mattes R.D. (2000) Liquid versus solid
carbohydrate: effects on food intake and body weight. Int. J. Obes.
Relat. Metab. Disord. 24, 794-800.
23. Houchins J.A., Burgess J.R., Campbell W.W., et al. (2012)
Beverage vs. solid fruits and vegetables: effects on energy intake and
body weight. Obesity (Silver Spring) 20, 1844-1850.

attachment 10
Corporate Funding of Nutrition Research and Unjustified Conclusions
JAMA Internal Medicine, May 2016, Volume 176, Number 5

To the Editor In her Viewpoint about corporate funding of food and
nutrition research, Dr Nestle criticizes the food industry and
scientists who associate with it.\1\
Dr. Nestle claims that scientists who receive industry-derived
research grants ``often fail to realize that food-industry funding may
affect their work.''.\1\
(p. 13)
She cites newspaper
articles that ``illustrate the concerns about biases introduced by
industry funding.'' \1\
(p. 13)
She also cites reports

2-3
showing that there are relatively few studies funded by
industry whose results are contrary to the funders' interest and
discusses her work on the subject including reference to her Food
Politics blog.\4\
The study by Massougbodji, et al.,\2\ also determined that the
quality of the methods of the studies reviewed did not explain the
orientation of the authors' conclusions, nor was there any relationship
between the source of funding and the overall quality of the studies
examined. The study by Lesser, et al.,\3\ did not examine any aspect of
the studies that were reviewed other than funding source. The newspaper
stories did not describe any flaw in the research of the scientists
profiled. In addition, the authors of a great number of the presumably
tainted industry-sponsored studies discussed on the blog written by Dr.
Nestle \4\ explicitly stated that the funding source was not involved
in the design, conduct, data analysis and interpretation, or manuscript
preparation. Although Dr. Nestle also states that the quality of
dietary advice is adversely affected by the source of research funds,
many believe that the real problem is the overall poor quality of
nutrition research.\5\ Before guilt by association is established,
criticisms by Dr. Nestle deserve much more analysis.
It would certainly be helpful, if not essential, for Dr. Nestle or
others to show that industry-funded studies have more design flaws,
inappropriate analyses, or unjustified conclusions relative to similar
studies funded by other sources. Furthermore, in addition to financial
conflicts of interest, there are nonfinancial conflicts resulting from
career self-interest or unbounded intellectual passion that can be just
as worrisome. Conflicts of interest in science can affect anyone, and
are relevant to proponents of any point of view.

Richard Kahn, Ph.D.

Author Affiliation: Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Corresponding Author: Richard Kahn, PhD, Department of Medicine,
University of North Carolina, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-
7005 (
[emailprotected]
).
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Additional Information: Dr. Kahn served as the Chief Scientific and
Medical Officer of the American Diabetes Association.

[References]

1. Nestle M. Corporate funding of food and nutrition research:
science or marketing. JAMA Intern. Med. 2016; 176(1): 13-14.
2. Massougbodji J., Le Bodo Y., Fratu R., DeWals P. Reviews
examining sugar-sweetened beverages and body weight: correlates of
their quality and conclusions. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014; 99(5): 1096-
1104.
3. Lesser L.I., Ebbeling C.B., Goozner M., Wypij D., Ludwig D.S.
Relationshipbetween funding source and conclusion among nutrition-
related scientific articles. PLoS Med. 2007; 4(1): e5.
4. Nestle M. Food Politics Blog. http://www.foodpolitics.com/.
Accessed March 2, 2016.
5. Ioannidis J.P. Implausible results in human nutrition research.
BMJ. 2013; 347: f6698.

In Reply: Dr. Kahn requests evidence that nutrition research funded
by food companies is of lesser quality than studies funded by
independent agencies or performed by investigators with nonfinancial
conflicts of interest. Concerns about such issues are relatively
recent; few published studies address them directly. Instead, concerns
about industry sponsorship of nutrition research derive from
comparisons with the results of studies of funding by tobacco,
chemical, drug, or medical device companies. This research typically
finds industry-sponsored studies to report results more favorable to
the products of the sponsor than studies not funded by industry. It
identifies subtle rather than substantive differences in the quality of
this research; industry-funded studies are more likely to underreport
unfavorable results and interpret neutral results more positively.\1\
When results are negative, they are less likely to be published.\2\
Between March 2015 and March 2016, I identified 166 industry-funded
nutrition research studies and posted and discussed them on my blog.\3\
Of these, 154 reported results favorable to the interest of the
sponsor; only 12 reported contrary results. The few studies
systematically examining the influence of industry funding on nutrition
research tend to confirm results obtained from other industries. For
example, a systematic review comparing industry-funded and nonindustry-
funded trials of probiotics in infant formula reported no association
of funding source with research quality. Industry-funded studies,
however, seemed more likely to report favorable conclusions unsupported
by the data.\4\
Dr. Kahn states that sponsored studies often specify that the
funder had no role in the study. Only recently have some journals
required such statements, and I am unaware of research on the extent of
this practice or authors' adherence to it. Among the 166 industry-
funded studies that I reviewed, few disclosed involvement of a sponsor.
Dr. Kahn asks whether industry funding is any more biasing than
career self-interest or intellectual passion. Unlike industry funding,
self-interest and passions are intrinsic to every scientist who
conducts research, are a matter of public record, cannot be eliminated,
and have not been shown to consistently bias research results in the
same ways as industry funding.\5\ Fortunately, nutrition societies and
research institutions are developing policies to manage financial
relationships with industry.\6\ Such policies hold promise for
preventing financial conflicts of research in nutrition research.

Marion Nestle, Ph.D., M.P.H.

Author Affiliation: New York University, Nutrition, Food Studies,
and Public Health, New York, New York.
Corresponding Author: Marion Nestle, PhD, MPH, New York University,
Nutrition, Food Studies, and Public Health, 411 Lafayette, 5th Floor,
New York, NY 10003-7035 (
[emailprotected]
).
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr. Nestle's salary from New York
University supports her research, manuscript preparation, website, and
blog at http://www.foodpolitics.com. She also earns royalties from
books and honoraria from lectures to university and health professional
groups about matters relevant to this letter and the Viewpoint to which
it refers.

[References]

1. Lundh A., Sismondo S., Lexchin J., Busuioc O.A., Bero L. Industry
sponsorship and research outcome. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2012;
12: MR000033.
2. Rising K., Bacchetti P., Bero L. Reporting bias in drug trials
submitted to the Food and Drug Administration: review of publication
and presentation. PLoS Med. 2008; 5(11): e217.
3. Nestle M. Food Politics Blog. http://www.foodpolitics.com/.
Accessed March 2, 2016.
4. Mugambi M.N., Musekiwa A., Lombard M., Young T., Blaauw R.
Association between funding source, methodological quality and research
outcomes in randomized controlled trials of synbiotics, probiotics and
prebiotics added to infant formula: a systematic review. BMC Med. Res.
Methodol. 2013; 13: 137.
5. Bero L. What is in a name? Nonfinancial influences on the
outcomes of systematic reviews and guidelines. J. Clin. Epidemiol.
2014; 67(11): 1239-1241.
6. Charles Perkins Centre. Engagement with Industry Guidelines 2015.
University of Sydney, 2015. https://intranet.sydney.edu.au/perkins/
research-support/engaging-with-industry.html. Accessed March 2, 2016.

attachment 11
The Limits of Sugar Guidelines
Is there a danger in governments offering too-specific advice on sugar
consumption?
The Atlantic
Nina Teicholz
Jan. 17, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Sugary drinks on display in New York City in 2012, at a news
conference about a proposed ban on all soft drinks over 16
ounces in the city's restaurants and stores Andrew Burton/
Reuters.

A firestorm recently erupted over a paper in the Annals of Internal
Medicine (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27992898) that found
official advice limiting sugar in diets to be based on ``low'' or
``very low'' quality evidence. Because a food-industry group had funded
the study, a slew of critics accused the authors of distorting the
science to undermine nutrition guidelines and make sugar seem less
harmful than it actually is. One prominent nutrition professor called
the paper (http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2016/12/19/505867535/
how-much-is-too-much-new-study-casts-doubts-on-sugar-guidelines)
``shameful.'' ``It was really an attempt to undermine the scientific
process,'' said another (http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2016/12/
19/505867535/how-much-is-too-much-new-study-casts-doubts-on-sugar-
guidelines).
Lost in this torrent of criticism was any significant discussion of
the science itself. Regardless of its funding source, was the paper
correct in saying that there is insufficient evidence to recommend
limiting sugar? And do official guidelines even matter, since we pretty
much know that sugar is bad for us?
The Annals paper examined a dozen guidelines on sugar passed by
governments around the world since 2002, including the Dietary
Guidelines for Americans, which last year recommended limiting sugar
intake to ten percent of calories. One would assume that such advice is
based on an ample body of rigorous research. But the Annals study,
which included all the papers listed in the various guidelines'
bibliographies themselves, claimed that reviews to date had overstated
the evidence.
In the most rigorous review on sugar and weight (http://
www.bmj.com/content/bmj/346/bmj.e7492.full.pdf), for instance, only
five trials lasting 6 months or longer could be found, on a total of
just 1,245 people. According to the Annals authors, this review
portrayed the data as more consistent than it actually was and failed
to adequately account for evidence indicating that studies in which
sugar was shown to have no detrimental effect may have been suppressed
from publication.
Moreover, less rigorous data from observational studies was widely
found to be ``inconsistent.'' Sometimes sugar was associated with
health problems--weight gain, Type 2 diabetes, and tooth decay--but
sometimes it wasn't.
``Overall, I would say the guidelines are not trustworthy,''
Bradley Johnston (http://ihpme.utoronto.ca/faculty/bradley-c-johnston/
), the study's lead author and an assistant professor of clinical
epidemiology and biostatistics at McMasters University told me.
The study's finding should come as a surprise to anyone who has
been avoiding sugar for years already. Sugar is a potent source of
glucose, which, over time, does appear to wreak havoc on one's
metabolism and pave a direct path to obesity and diabetes. A large body
of trial evidence has shown (http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/11/opinion/
sunday/before-you-spend-26000-on-weight-loss-surgery-do-this.html?_r=0)
that when carbohydrate consumption is reduced, these diseases start to
reverse themselves. Also, given all the recent headlines about sugar's
ill effects, from Katie Couric's movie Fed Up to the passage of soda
taxes in several cities, one could be forgiven for assuming that the
evidence condemning sugar must be a done deal.
Clinical trials on sugar are possible; it's just that very few have
been done.
Yet here were the Annals authors saying it's not. Reaction to the
paper from nutrition experts and advocacy groups was swift, with
criticism focused on the paper's Achilles heel: It had been paid for by
the International Life Sciences Institute, which receives 60 percent of
its funding from 400 industry members, including some, like Coca-Cola,
PepsiCo, and Mars, that very much stand to benefit from a study
questioning caps on sugar.
``This is a classic example of industry-funded research aimed at
one purpose and one purpose only: to cast doubt on the science linking
diets high in sugars to poor health,'' Marion Nestle, a prominent
professor of nutrition at New York University, told National Public
Radio (http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2016/12/19/505867535/how-
much-is-too-much-new-study-casts-doubts-on-sugar-guidelines). Dean
Schillinger, the chief of the division of general internal medicine at
San Francisco General Hospital, told the New York Times (http://
www.nytimes.com/2016/12/19/well/eat/a-food-industry-study-tries-to-
discredit-advice-about-sugar.html?_r=0): ``They're hijacking the
scientific process in a disingenuous way to sow doubt and jeopardize
public health.''
Schillinger, with his colleague Cristin Kearns, also penned an
editorial in Annals (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27992900),
which likened the sugar-review authors to lackeys hired by the tobacco
industry to be ``merchants of doubt'' about the health hazards of
smoking.
Industry manipulation of the science is obviously an ongoing,
serious concern. It was, in part, why the editor-in-chief of Annals,
Christine Laine, invited this editorial. ``I wanted to show both sides
of the issue,'' she told me, although she said that she considered the
editorial to be unusually ``strident and hostile'' for an academic
journal. Indeed, Schillinger and Kearns both part-time advocates
against sugar; they write articles (http://www.sugarscience.org/sugar-
papers-reveal-industry-role-in-shifting-focus.html#.WGdB-M6PTyA) and do
other work for Sugar Science (http://www.sugarscience.org/), a group
devoted to educating the public about sugar's health dangers. ``It's
shown me that conflicts of interest are not only financial but also
intellectual,'' said Laine, who added disclosures about the authors'
Sugar Science affiliations to the editorial after a reader brought them
to her attention, she says.
Ironically, undercutting a scientific paper by focusing on its
funding source has mainly been used in the past to shoot down sugar
skeptics. For instance, when the British nutrition professor John
Yudkin suggested sugar as a dietary culprit in the early 1970s, the
University of Minnesota researcher Ancel Keys, a key defender of the
competing hypothesis, that dietary fat was responsible for chronic
health issues, accused Yudkin of issuing ``propaganda,'' linked to
``commercial backers [who] are not deterred by the facts.''
Now that the nation's top nutrition authority, the U.S. Dietary
Guidelines, has backed off caps on total fat and begun to condemn sugar
instead, the public debate is also increasingly focusing on the sugar
industry--indeed, so much so that other industry actors are escaping
scrutiny. One has to ask, for instance, why there was no similar
outrage over another recent paper (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
27881409), in The BMJ, with favorable findings for vegetable oils,
nearly \1/2\ of whose authors were actual employees of the giant
vegetable-oil manufacturer Unilever. This would be like workers at
Mars, Inc. publishing a study on the health benefits of sugar. Yet this
sizable conflict of interest largely got a pass by the many journalists
covering the story (https://pubpeer.com/publications/DF70B2D23429
0DF834A8F183BB6F8C#fb114267).
To be clear, industry funding absolutely can deter good science;
tobacco promotion will always be the epitome of that. But the influence
of funding isn't invariable: While one meta-analysis found that funding
sources do influence the conclusions of nutrition papers (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17214504), another, by a fierce critic of
industry (http://www.smh.com.au/technology/sci-tech/cocacolas-secret-
plan-to-monitor-sydney-university-academic-lisa-bero-20161020-
gs6m4a.html) funding, paradoxically did not (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27802480). A healthy dose of skepticism
over funding from all sources--including governments and other
institutions, which may have their own pet hypotheses--is warranted, so
long as it doesn't sideline the science or shut down legitimate debate.
Schillinger and Kearns were right to raise doubts. Sugar defenders
have, since the early part of the 20th century, worked diligently to
promote their product, such that President Franklin Roosevelt, in the
mid-1930s, was quoted as saying the sugar lobby was ``the most powerful
pressure group that had descended on the national capitol'' during his
lifetime. The extent of industry manipulation, through ad campaigns and
efforts to twist the science are described by the journalist Gary
Taubes in his new book, The Case Against Sugar.
Yet Taubes believes that any industry with a PR budget has
attempted pretty much the same. And he is up-front about the lack of
rigorous evidence against sugar, stating in the introduction of his
book, ``I'm going to concede in advance a key point that those who
defend the role of sugar in our diet will invariably
make. . . . [I]t cannot be established definitively, with the science
as it now stands, that sugar is uniquely harmful.''
Clinical trials on sugar are possible; it's just that very few have
been done. Emerging evidence suggests (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25756179) that the sugar industry may have stifled those
inquiries (https://therussells.crossfit.com/2016/09/15/did-big-soda-
derail-the-governments-cancer-research/), but Taubes believes more
evidence supports the explanation that for decades, a monolith of
nutrition scientists has just genuinely and obsessively had a
preoccupation with fat and cholesterol which simply blotted out
everything else. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) spent billions
of dollars on large clinical trials, all trying to pin chronic disease
on dietary fat and cholesterol. In fact, sugar was such a non-suspect
for so many years that the major, NIH-funded observational studies took
few pains even to measure it.
While the evidence to date shows zero benefit from sugar and a
clear signal of harm, there hasn't been enough time to fund and conduct
definitive trials. Meanwhile, governments naturally feel they can't
wait. Facing panic over the continued, relentless climb in obesity and
diabetes rates with no solution in sight, they've gone ahead and passed
sugar guidelines pinned to exact thresholds, of ten percent or five
percent of calories. This advice is clearly well-intentioned. Yet if,
as the Annals paper concludes, experts are skirting scientific norms by
passing guidelines based on weak evidence, the whole process of
guideline-making is effectively watered down. And the need for reliable
guidance is no abstract question; indeed, everything from our
waistlines to whether we might eat eggs for breakfast depends upon it.
As Americans well know, there have been many reversals in our
guidelines in recent years--on dietary cholesterol, on total fat, on
whether to eat breakfast to maintain a healthy weight. These were all
official guidelines based on weak evidence that, when actually tested
in clinical trials, were found to be unjustified. It turned out that
people had been avoiding egg yolks, lobster, and fat, generally, to no
avail, and that skipping breakfast altogether might actually be the
best option (https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/08/10/
the-science-of-skipping-breakfast-how-government-nutritionists-may-
have-gotten-it-wrong/?utm_term=.ca4
bb87d6c30) for weight loss.
It's worth at least considering criticism of the potentially
``low'' quality evidence behind existing nutrition advice.
Instances of flip-flopping on nutritional advice not only erode the
public trust, but make people think that the basic science itself is
flawed--which, for the most part, it's not. Instead, the central
problem has been that experts and policy makers have passed judgment
before that good science was done. And once a judgment is codified as
policy, it's hard to repeal. This was the case, for instance, with the
low-fat diet, which although adopted as a U.S. guideline in 1980,
wasn't actually studied in trials for another decade-plus. This kind of
mistake, at its very worst, is potentially deadly: Indeed, the low-fat
advice, by shifting consumption to carbohydrates such as grains and
sugar, is now regarded as a probable cause of the obesity and diabetes
epidemics.
When the Senate first passed the government's warnings against fat
and cholesterol in the late 1970s, officials argued that the urgency of
responding to public-health crises overrode any concerns about
insufficient scientific evidence. ``Undoubtedly there will be people
who have said we have not proven our point,'' said Harvard's Mark
Hegsted (https://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=1759
572&content=PDF), an advisor to the report, at the time of its release.
Yet, citing the epidemics of heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and
hypertension, he stated, ``We cannot afford to temporize. We have an
obligation to assist the public in making correct food choices. . . .
To do less is to avoid our responsibility.''
These are the same arguments being made today, on sugar. It makes
sense to have a strong hunch that sugar is bad. Sugar has no
nutritional value. It's a direct shot of glucose to the blood stream
and fructose to the liver. The historical evidence against it presented
by Taubes in his book is compelling. Personally, I try hard to avoid
it. But I also tend to avoid refined carbohydrates, such as white bread
and cereals. Based on the existing data, I suspect that too much
fructose from today's highly sweetened fruit crops is bad, and that the
40+ percent increase in our consumption of grains since 1970 (https://
www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=44220) have simply
overloaded us in carbohydrates altogether (http://
www.nutritionjrnl.com/article/S0899-9007%2815%2900077-5/abstract).
The NIH should fund rigorous trials to sort out these issues.
Meanwhile, in the absence of more definitive science, it's worth at
least considering criticism of the potentially ``low'' quality evidence
behind existing nutrition advice. Maybe the government should be
issuing a strong cautionary note, based on the existing, emerging
evidence, rather than a specific formal ``Guideline''--since basing
guidelines on hunches that are probably right unavoidably opens up the
possibility for guidelines based on hunches that are wrong.
An educated guess is not enough, warned the late Senator Charles
Percy, in objecting to the government's original dietary advice, 35
years ago. He thought it paved over limitations in the data with
excessive confidence. ``The best way to [provide dietary guidance] is
to fully inform the public not only about what is known but also what
remains controversial,'' he said.
He was talking about fat and cholesterol; today's Annals paper is
talking about sucrose, glucose, fructose. We've been down this road
before, with experts, pressed into urgency on behalf of the public
health, convincing themselves that insufficient evidence could suffice.
Therefore, in the matter of national guidelines, it's worth being
cautious--and not immediately dismissing those who send up cautionary
flags.
attachment 12
Do Financial Conflicts of Interest Bias Research? An Inquiry into the
``Funding Effect'' Hypothesis
Sheldon Krimsky
[1]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Department of Urban & Environmental Policy & Planning, Tufts
University, Medford, MA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Sheldon Krimsky, Department of Urban & Environmental Policy &
Planning, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA. E-mail:

[emailprotected]
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Science, Technology, & Human Values, 38(4) 566-587

The Author(s) 2012
Reprints and permission: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0162243912456271
sthv.sagepub.com
Abstract
In the mid-1980s, social scientists compared outcome measures of
related drug studies, some funded by private companies and others by
nonprofit organizations or government agencies. The concept of a
``funding effect'' was coined when it was discovered that study
outcomes could be statistically correlated with funding sources,
largely in drug safety and efficacy studies. Also identified in tobacco
research and chemical toxicity studies, the ``funding effect'' is often
attributed, implicitly or explicitly, to research bias. This article
discusses the meaning of scientific bias in research, examines the
strongest evidence for the ``funding effect,'' and explores the
question of whether the ``funding effect'' is an indicator of biased
research that is driven by the financial interests of the for-profit
sponsor. This article argues that the ``funding effect'' is merely a
symptom of the factors that could be responsible for outcome
disparities in product assessment. Social scientists should not suspend
their skepticism and choose as a default hypothesis that bias is always
or typically the cause.
Introduction
The philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce claimed that of all ways of
fixing our beliefs, science is the most dependable. He wrote in 1877,
``Scientific investigation has had the most wonderful triumphs in the
way of settling opinion'' (Peirce, 1877). Not only have we come to
believe in the ``dependability'' of scientific claims, we have come to
depend upon them for making important life decisions. It is generally
understood that the production of scientific knowledge is accompanied
by quality controls that are designed to filter out errors and bias. By
errors I shall mean those assertions or calculations in a study that
are factually incorrect and which would be recognized as such by anyone
trained in the discipline. These can include errors in statistical
analysis, citations, recording of data, or the application of measuring
devices. Bias, on the other, is a more complex term.
As distinguished from error, bias is not as simple as an oversight
or a mistake. Bias can be conscious or unconscious. It can be
structural (by the choice of method) or nonstructural (by the
interpretation of data). By ``structural bias,'' I mean the adoption of
certain norms or methods that would distort (over- or underreport) the
effects being studied. This term has been used in media studies where a
structural bias is said to be the result of a preference of journalists
for some type of story or frame that leads them to pay more attention
to some events over others (van Dalen, 2011).
Bias could involve proper or improper (scientific misconduct)
behavior. In his book The Bias of Science, Brian Martin considers
``biased'' research as synonymous with ``value-laden'' research
``conditioned by social and political forces and dependent on judgments
and human choices'' (Martin, 1979, 7). Under this definition, science,
according to Martin, might never be unbiased or value-free. Resnik
(1998, 85) argues that a bias is an invalid assumption: ``The person
who conducts biased research is more like the person who defends a
hypothesis that is later proven wrong than a person who makes a mistake
or attempts to deceive his audience.''
I am using ``bias'' in a different sense. By research bias, I shall
mean the use of a method, data collection, data analysis, or
interpretation of results that, in the consensus view of scientists of
a discipline, tends to yield results that distort the truth of a
hypothesis under consideration, diminishing or negating the reliability
of the knowledge claim. Bias must be viewed in terms of the current
operating norms of science. Since ``bias'' distorts the truth,
scientists must be aware of its presence and where possible prevent or
diminish it. I leave open the question of whether research considered
unbiased in one time period could be viewed as biased by scientists
during another time period.
The function of our system of peer review is to identify error or
bias before scientific studies are accepted for publication. After a
study is published, it may still be criticized or corrected. Moreover,
if an empirical finding cannot be replicated, the article may be
withdrawn by the journal editors. Unlike other sources of establishing
belief, science is considered to be a self-correcting enterprise where
truth claims are kept open to new evidence. No one doubts, however,
that bias can enter into published scientific work. While bias can be
built into scientific methodology (structural), sometimes its subtlety
can elude even the most careful reviewer and journal editor.
Only recently have government and journals turned their attention
to Conflict of Interest (COI) as a source of bias. The first Federal
guidelines on scientific COI, issued simultaneously by the Department
of Health and Human Services' (DHHS) Public Health Service (PHS) and
the National Science Foundation were titled ``Objectivity in
Research.'' The stated purpose of the regulation was ``to ensure that
the design, conduct, or reporting of research funded under PHS grants,
cooperative agreements or contracts will not be biased by any
conflicting financial interest of those investigators responsible for
the research'' (DHHS, 1995). And while the DHHS focused on financial
COIs (FCOIs), it is generally recognized that interests other than
direct financial interests can also play a potentially biasing role in
science (Levinsky, 2002). Writing in the journal Cell Stem Cell about
the ethics of stem cells, Jeremy Sugarman (2008, 532) noted: ``Both
nonfinancial and financial conflicts of interest may adversely affect
good judgment regarding stem cell research.'' But Sugarman also wrote
that ``financial conflicts of interest in research may be easier to
identify, simply because financial interests can be measured and more
easily described than those associated with nonfinancial interests,
such as the advancement of scientific and professional concerns''
(Sugarman 2008, 532).
Following the maxim ``study what you can measure,'' social
scientists began investigating the relationship between FCOIs and bias
in the mid-1980s, when author disclosures of author FCOIs were still in
their infancy. Most of the studies investigating a link between author
FCOIs and private funding of science were carried out in the field of
medicine, specifically medical pharmacology. The concept of a ``funding
effect'' was coined after a body of research revealed that study
outcomes were significantly different in privately funded versus
publicly funded drug studies (Krimsky, 2006 2010). The funding effect
was also identified in tobacco, pharmacoeconomic, and chemical toxicity
research (Als-Nielsen, et al., 2003). This article examines the
strongest evidence for the ``funding effect,'' and explores the
question of whether the ``funding effect'' is an indicator of
scientific research bias, based on a previously stated criterion of
``bias.'' To begin, I shall discuss sources of evidence behind the
``funding effect.'' I shall argue that the ``funding effect'' is a
symptom of the factors that are responsible for outcome disparities in
product assessments and that social scientists should not, without
further investigation and the elimination of other explanations, chose
bias as the default hypothesis.
Evidence of the ``Funding Effect'' in Science
Beginning in the mid-1980s, scientists began testing the hypothesis
that the source of funding from for-profit companies compared to
nonprofit institutions and government can be correlated with the
outcome of research, such as safety and efficacy in drug studies. This
has been called ``the funding effect'' in science (Krimsky, 2005). The
assumption has been that where there is a ``funding effect'' there must
be bias. I shall begin with the evidence for the ``funding effect,''
largely from a group of studies in drug trials, and then discuss the
possible causes of the effect.
Badil Als-Nielsen, et al. (2003) tested the hypothesis that
industry-sponsored drug trials tend to draw pro-industry conclusions.
The authors selected a random sample of 167 Cochrane reviews and found
25 with meta-analyses that met their criteria. From the meta-analyses,
they studied 370 drug trials. After coding and numerically scoring the
trials' conclusions and applying a logistic regression analysis, the
authors found that ``conclusions were significantly more likely to
recommend the experimental drug as treatment of choice in trials funded
by for-profit organizations alone compared with trials funded by
nonprofit organizations'' (Als-Nielsen, et al., 2003, 925). The authors
ruled out as an explanation of industry favored outcomes both the
magnitude of the treatment effect and the occurrence of adverse events
reported. They also noted that the clinical trial methods between for-
profit and nonprofit organizations were not of the same quality.
``Trials funded by for-profit organizations had better methodological
quality than trials funded by nonprofit organizations regarding
allocation concealment and double blinding'' (Als-Nielsen, et al.,
2003, 925). The authors do not report on the sponsor involvement and
influence on the conduct and reporting of a trial. Such information
could help us understand whether the external funder influences the
scientist running the trial. The effects they observed between funding
and outcome occurred whether the sponsor's contribution was minimal
(provided the drug) or maximal (funded the study).
The authors distinguish between potential biases in the empirical
trial results (collection of data) and in the interpretation of those
results, particularly in the recommendations they make about the
experimental drug. As previously noted, bias can enter into any or all
the stages of a study: the methodology, execution of the study,
interpretation of results and recommendations (whether the experimental
drug is better than the existing drug).
It is also possible that industry-funded studies, having been
identified as being of higher quality, have gone through more internal
(company-sponsored) study and analyses, than one would expect of a
nonprofit organization. This study found statistically significant
outcome differences in a class of studies, but not necessarily bias--
although systemic bias is one hypothesis.
John Yaphe, et al. (2001) selected for their study randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) published between 1992 and 1994 of drugs or
food products with therapeutic properties appearing in five journals:
Annals of Internal Medicine, BMJ, JAMA, Lancet, and NEJM. A total of
314 articles met their inclusion criteria. Of the 209 industry-funded
studies, 181 (87 percent) and 28 (13 percent) had positive and negative
findings, respectively, while of 96 nonindustry-funded studies, 62 (65
percent) and 34 (35 percent) had positive and negative findings,
respectively. What can account for this disparity in the outcomes of
industry and nonindustry trials? Clearly, the bias of an investigator
internalizing the financial interests of the sponsor is one potential
hypothesis.
Paula Rochon, et al., investigated the relationship between
reported drug performance and manufacturer association. They adopted a
broad definition of ``manufacturer association,'' which included
supplying the drug or sponsoring a journal supplement where the
publication of the study appeared. The authors selected as their study
sample randomized drug trials (identified in MEDLINE between 1997 and
1990) of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs used in the treatment of
arthritis (Rochon, et al., 1994). The authors found 1,008 articles
published within that period but only 61 articles representing 69
individuals met their inclusion criteria. All the trials in their study
had a ``manufacturer association,'' because they reported there was a
scarcity of nonmanufacturer-associated trials. Therefore, they could
not compare trials funded/supported by private companies with those
funded/supported by nonprofit organizations. The authors also used
several rating systems to estimate drug efficacy. The critical outcome
measure was whether the drug being tested was superior, the same, or
inferior to a comparison drug.
The results of the study showed the ``the manufacturer-associated
drug is always reported as being either superior to or comparable with
the comparison drug'' and that ``these claims of superiority,
especially with regard to side-effect profiles, are often not supported
by trial data'' (Rochon, et al., 1994, 158). It is logically possible
that head-to-head testing of new versus old drugs always shows the new
drug superior. After all, that is the impetus for developing new drugs.
But in this case, the framing of the tests can bias the outcome. Marcia
Angell explains the process with an illustration from statins--drugs
that lower blood cholesterol levels. ``There is little reason to think
one is any better than another at comparable doses. But to get a
toehold in the market, me-too statins were sometimes tested for
slightly different outcomes in slightly different kinds of patients,
and then promoted as especially effective for those uses'' (Angell,
2004, 81).
In a study by Benjamin Djulbegovic, et al. (2000), the
investigators explored whether the reports of pharmaceutical-industry
sponsored randomized trials result in biased findings. They selected
113 articles published from 1996 to 1998 that described 136 randomized
trials on multiple myeloma (Djulbegovic, et al., 2000, 637). The
authors compared the new therapy versus the standard therapy in the
trials and then analyzed the outcome according to whether the sponsors
were nonprofit or for-profit organizations. Nonprofit organizations
showed a 53 percent versus 47 percent support for new therapies, but
when the trials were sponsored by for-profit organizations the ratio
was 74 percent to 26 percent, a statistically significant difference.
Friedman and Richer (2004) investigated whether sources of funding
could be correlated to reported findings. The authors analyzed original
contributions in NEJM and JAMA published in 2001. They classified the
presentation of results as positive (statistically significant clinical
benefit from a treatment or absence of suspected side effects), mixed
(clinical benefits but adverse side effects), negative (absence of
clinical benefits), or other (unclear significance). They located 193
original articles in NEJM, 76 (39.4 percent) with a COI and 205
articles in JAMA, 76 (37.1 percent) with COI. The authors found 119
studies that investigated drug treatments and 174 studies for all
treatments. They observed a ``strong association between positive
results and COI among all treatment studies'' with an odds ratio of
2.35 and for drug studies alone an odds ratio of 2.64. The odds ratio
is the ratio of probability of an event occurring in one group to the
probability of it occurring in another group. An odds ratio of 2.35 for
the drug studies is the probability of a positive result in a drug
treatment study conducted by individuals with a FCOI divided by the
probability of a positive result from a similar drug treatment
conducted by individuals without a financial conflict of interest. In
other words, an odds ratio of 2.35 means that investigators with an
FCOI are more than twice as likely to produce positive results in a
drug treatment study.
Another interesting finding is that the probability of reporting
negative results in cases where an author had a FCOI was very low. One
negative study of the 60 drug studies with FCOIs versus 21 negative
studies of the 59 drug studies without FCOIs were reported. The authors
conclude that ``the odds are extremely small that negative results
would be published by authors with COI'' (Friedman and Richter, 2004,
53).
The authors cannot provide an explanation for their observed
association between FCOI and reported findings in medical treatments.
They can only theorize about the cause. ``One could surmise that drug
companies are selective and only want to invest in treatments proven to
produce positive results and that early clinical trials filter out the
most promising treatments, which could explain the small number of
studies funded by private corporations presenting negative findings''
(Friedman and Richter, 2004, 55). But they also consider the
possibility of bias and ``spin.'' The question arises as to whether an
investigator with a conflict of interest may be more inclined to
present findings in order to gain favor with the sponsor or achieve any
other extraneous objective--for example, to ``spin'' (Friedman and
Richter, 2004, 55). Notwithstanding the fact that the cause of the
association is not apparent in their data, they state that:

The observation that negative findings are less commonly
reported among studies funded by private corporations raises
troublesome ethical questions. Researchers appear to be failing
to promote both the benefits and negative side effects of
commercial products they review or simply failing to submit
negative studies for publication because they are viewed as
uninteresting. (Friedman and Richter, 2004, 55)

For social scientists studying the funding effect, the issue in
this case is less a question of bias in the reported studies than it is
an issue of bias in a failure of reporting negative studies, that is,
in subverting the complete scientific record.
Not all studies testing a hypothesis that there is an association
between trial outcome or study quality and funding source reached
positive findings. Tammy Clifford, Barrowman, and Moher (2002) selected
a convenience sample of RCTs published between 1999 and 2000 by hand-
searching five high impact general medical journals--Annals of Internal
Medicine, BMJ, JAMA, The Lancet, and NEJM. The quality of the trial
report was evaluated according to the Jadad scale, which included
randomization, allocation concealment, and withdrawals. The authors
classified the trials according to funding source in four categories:
entirely industry, entirely no[t]-for-profit, mixed, and not reported.
Sixty-six of the hundred trials reviewed were funded in whole or in
part by industry; six did not disclose their source of funding. Of the
100 trials, 67 favored the new therapy, six favored conventional
treatments, 19 reported neutral findings, and for eight the outcome was
unclear. Of the 67 trials that favored the new treatment, 30 came from
``industry only,'' 15 came from ``not-for-profit only,'' and 16 came
from mixed sources; of the six trials that favored the conventional
treatment, four came from ``industry only,'' one came from ``not-for-
profit only,'' and one came from mixed sources.
The numbers for ``favored conventional'' were so low that
statistical findings were not relevant. Also, this study only focused
on funding and not on the financial ties of individual faculty
associated with the trials. The authors noted limitations of their
results. ``Our failure to detect any significant association may result
from a type 2 error that indicates inadequate statistical power.
Although our results do not even hint at a trend . . . the potential
for type 2 error is real'' (Clifford, Barrowman, and Moher, 2002, 21).
Perhaps one conclusion can be drawn: of the 100 trials, 66 percent were
funded in whole or in part by industry and 67 percent favored the new
therapy. Thus, it appears that industry trials are dominant and driving
the advocacy of new drugs over old treatments even without adding
author FCOI.
Finally, I shall summarize the first meta-analysis that explored
the ``funding effect.'' Bekelman, et al., culled 1,664 original
research articles and ended up with 37 studies that met their criteria.
They concluded: ``Although only 37 articles met [our] inclusion
criteria, evidence suggests that the financial ties that intertwine
industry, investigators, and academic institutions can influence the
research process. Strong and consistent evidence shows that industry
sponsored-research tends to draw proindustry conclusions'' (Bekelman,
Li, and Gross, 2003, 463). Bekelman, et al., were convinced that the
``funding effect'' is real.
I shall now turn to the relationship between FCOI and
pharmacoeconomics, defined as the discipline that evaluates the
clinical, economic, and humanistic aspects of pharmaceutical products,
services, and programs.
Pharmacoeconomic Studies
A few studies have examined whether the results of economic
analyses of drugs are correlated with the funding source. Because there
is greater discretion in developing the methodology for economic
studies of drugs, any inferences of bias must be addressed through the
modeling, the stakeholder interests, and the specific parameters used
in cost-benefit analysis rather than the omission or manipulation of
clinical data. Johnson and Coons (1995, 165) note that ``Many different
guidelines have been proposed for conducting pharmacoeconomic studies.
The differences among the various versions reflect the diverse and
sometimes conflicting views of those who specialize in economic
evaluations.''
Mark Friedberg, et al. (2010) searched the Medline and Health Star
databases for articles published between 1985 and 1998 on cost or cost-
effectiveness analyses of six oncology drugs. The found forty-four
eligible articles whose texts were analyzed for qualitative and
quantitative conclusions and the funding source, based on predetermined
criteria. Of the forty-four articles, twenty-four were funded by
nonprofit organizations and twenty were funded by drug manufacturers.
The authors found a statistically significant relationship between
funding source and qualitative conclusions. Unfavorable conclusions
were found in 38 percent (\9/24\) of the nonprofit-sponsored studies
and five percent (\1/20\) of company-sponsored studies.
Studies funded by pharmaceutical companies were almost eight times
less likely to reach unfavorable qualitative conclusions than
nonprofit-funded studies and 1.4 times more likely to reach favorable
qualitative conclusions.
C.M., Bell, et al. (2006) undertook a systematic review of
published papers on cost-utility analyses. The authors found that
industry-funded studies were more than twice as likely to report a
cost-utility ratio below $20,000 per quality adjusted life year (QALY)
as compared to studies sponsored by nonindustry sources. A similar
study reported in the International Journal of Technology Assessment in
Health Care assessed the relation between industry funding and findings
of pharmacoeconomic analyses (Garattini, Rolova, and Casasdei, 2010).
The authors searched Pub Med for articles on cost-effectiveness and
cost utility, performed during 2004-2009 on single drug treatments.
They found 200 articles that met their criteria. They divided the
articles into two groups based on whether or not the authors had
financial support from the pharmaceutical industry. ``Studies co-signed
by at least one author affiliated to a pharmaceutical company and/or
studies that declared any type of company funding were considered
sponsored'' (Garattini, Rolova, and Casasdei, 2010, 331). The authors
also classified the main conclusions as favorable, doubtful, or
unfavorable toward the drug. Of the 200 articles, 138 (69 percent) were
sponsored by a pharmaceutical company. Sponsored articles reported a
favorable conclusion 95 percent of the time as against 50 percent of
the time for nonsponsored articles. They claimed that ``the presence of
a pharmaceutical sponsorship is highly predictive of a positive
conclusion'' (Garattini, Rolova, and Casasdei, 2010, 331). According to
Krimsky, 1999, 1475):

The differences observed between [pharmacoeconomic] studies
funded by industry and nonprofit organizations may be the
result of methods chosen, prescreening, or bias due to the
source of funding. By following the traditions of professional
societies, such as those of engineering and psychiatry in
setting guidelines of practice, pharmacoeconomists can attain a
special role in the health care policy community in developing
independent studies that are based on accepted canons that meet
the highest standards of the profession. Canada and the United
Kingdom have developed national guidelines for cost
effectiveness studies.

K.S. Knox, et al. (2000) reported on data collected in Friedberg,
et al., in comparing practices of pharmaceutical-sponsored and
nonprofit-sponsored pharmacoeconomic studies. They found that nonprofit
studies more likely make an explicit statement of the significance of
the findings (38 percent vs. 20 percent), provide a source of cost data
(67 percent vs. 45 percent), and make a clear statement about the
reproducibility of the findings in other settings (58 percent vs. 35
percent). As in Friedberg, et al., Knox, et al., considered only one
type of economic relationship between industry and researchers, namely,
direct funding of a study and omitted many other types of financial
relationships. Had they broadened their criteria, some of the 42
pharmacoeconomic analyses they studied might be reclassified as
``pharmaceutical associated'' thus changing the statistical results.
Some of the authors who found a ``funding effect'' were cautious
about inferring a bias from the data, although it was included in the
list of hypotheses they considered. The next section explores
alternative explanations.
Explanations of the ``Funding Effect'' Other than Bias
In Yaphe, et al., the authors note that ``the higher frequency of
good outcomes in industry supported trials may stem from a decision to
fund the testing of drugs at a more advanced stage of development''
(Yaphe, et al., 2001, 567). In other words, industry has already done a
lot of internal studies weeding out ineffective drugs. Thus, by the
time a private company funds a trial, it would likely do better than a
drug has not gone through its internal review. To fully understand this
process, we need to know the extent to which companies test and reject
drugs internally before funding a study by an academic group and
whether the outcome results of ``new drugs are always better'' would be
found in trials of the same drugs but funded by nonprofit
organizations.
The methodologies of industry-funded as compared to nonprofit-
funded trials may differ. For example, comparison of new drugs with a
placebo may be more prevalent among industry-financed studies compared
to nonindustry-financed studies. ``Comparison with placebo may produce
more positive results than comparison with alternative active
treatment'' (Yaphe, et al., 2001, 567). Unless we have a profit
organization and nonprofit organization using the same or very similar
methods to test the same drugs, drawing an inference about bias can
yield false conclusions. The appearance of low negative outcomes from
private sponsors could be the result of company screening for low
probability drugs before they sponsor the trial or the ``reticence of
investigators to submit negative findings for publication, fearing
discontinuation of future funding'' (Yaphe, et al., 2001, 567). These
caveats speak against a conclusion that bias can be inferred from the
data that show outcome differences.
Some tests use different doses of the new drugs and compare them to
lower doses of the old drugs. This is corroborated by Rochon, et al.,
in their study. ``When we evaluated the relative range of dosing of the
manufacturer-associated drug and the comparison agents in the trials on
the basis of the recommended dosage suggested in standard tests, there
was a considerable mismatch. In the majority of cases where the doses
were not equivalent, the drug given at the higher dose was that of the
supporting manufacturer'' (Rochon, et al., 1994, 161).
The authors surmise that higher doses ``bias the study results on
efficacy in favor of the manufacturer-associated drug'' (Rochon, et
al., 1994, 161). This illustrates that bias may enter into the
``funding effect'' in subtle and complex ways that deal with how the
trial is organized.
Some authors try to explain the ``funding effect'' by maintaining
that most industry studies use a placebo and as a result are more
likely to show a positive outcome. Also, the method of drug delivery
used by companies may have been different than that used in nonprofit
sponsor trials.
Others have questioned whether industry trials are of lower quality
and thus are likely to produce more favorable results. Djulbegovic, et
al., rated the trial quality and concluded that ``trials funded solely
or in part by commercial organizations had a trend toward higher
quality . . . than those supported by the governmental or other
nonprofit organizations'' (Djulbegovic, et al., 2000, 637). Thus, the
outcome effect found in the industry-funded work of this group was not
related to poor quality trials.
In Frieberg's pharmacoeconomic study, the authors offer several
possible explanations for the ``funding effect.'' First, for-profit
companies are more likely than nonprofit companies to get ``early
looks'' at the drugs, preliminary trial results, and economic data,
weeding out those that would fail a cost-effectiveness standard.
Companies might censor unfavorable studies by not funding them. Second,
they surmise that funded studies with unfavorable results are less
likely to be submitted for peer review and published. A third
explanation for the disproportionate favorable results could arise from
``unconscious bias that could influence study conclusions'' from
scientists who have a financial conflict of interest--such as being
paid by the company or holding an equity interest in the drug. As
previously noted, the economists engaged in the study may internalize
the values of the study sponsor, which could translate into a
methodology that is more likely to yield a positive economic analysis.
And the final explanation suggested by the authors is that ``the
pharmaceutical companies can collaborate directly with investigators in
devising protocols for economic analyses and indirectly shape the
economic evaluation criteria'' (Friedberg, et al., 2010, 1475). The
assessment of bias requires a standard or norm for pharmacoeconomic
analysis against which one can compare different outcomes (Krimsky,
1999). Several studies have addressed the quality of pharmacoeconomic
analysis of drugs (Sacristan, Soto, and Galende, 1993; Jefferson, et
al., 1988). Currently, no standardization or best practice for
pharmacoeconomic analyses exists. Because the choice of method can have
a significant effect on outcome, a method that systematically yields
outcomes consistent with the private sponsor's financialinterest may be
biased.
Single Product Assessment: Tobacco
The studies of funding effects in pharmaceutical products include
many types of drugs in order to develop aggregate statistics. Companies
may do in-house studies before sponsoring extramural studies. The type
of drug studied is generally considered not relevant to the findings of
a funding effect. However, investigators may have different histories
with the products they are testing. Nonprofit investigators may have
seen the product for the first time. By eliminating product
variability, investigators of the funding effect can more precisely
judge the possible linkage between the source of funding and outcome
findings such as product quality, safety, or economic efficiency. Two
product studies for a funding effect meet these criteria: tobacco and
the chemical bisphenol A (BPA). I shall begin with a discussion of
tobacco research.
Turner and Spilich (1997) investigated whether there was a
relationship between tobacco industry support of basic research and the
conclusions reached by authors of the study. They utilized a
comprehensive review of the literature on tobacco and cognitive
development and used that to obtain their reference studies. Beginning
with 171 citations, the authors selected 91 studies fulfilling their
selection criteria that investigated the effects of tobacco and
nicotine upon cognitive performance. They coded the conclusions of the
papers as positive, negative, or neutral on the question of whether
tobacco enhances performance and segmented the papers into those that
acknowledged corporate sponsorship and those that did not. When one or
more of the authors was an employee of a tobacco company, the article
was coded as industry-supported. All other articles were coded as
``noncorporate sponsorship,'' even in cases where one or more of the
authors had previously received industry support.
For those papers reporting a negative relationship between tobacco
and cognitive performance, sixteen were coded ``nonindustry
supported,'' and one was coded ``industry-supported.'' For those
reporting a positive relationship, twenty-nine came from nonindustry
supported papers and twenty-seven from tobacco industry-supported
papers. Among those papers reporting a neutral effect, eleven were from
nonindustry studies and seven from industry-supported studies. In this
study, the industry/nonindustry demarcation in the papers shows a
disparity in negative results compared to positive results. Why did so
few studies funded by the tobacco industry report negative effects on
performance from tobacco use? Because the study methodologies were
different, we cannot say that investigator bias played a role. It may
just be that the industry-funded studies used a method that yielded
fewer negative outcomes compared with an alternative method(s) used by
the nonindustry-funded studies. There is a phenomenon known as ``bias
in the study design,'' but that was not examined in the study. As
previously mentioned, systematic bias in a study design seeking to test
the toxicity of a chemical would be introduced by animal models that
are inherently insensitive to the chemical in question (Bailar, 2006).
Deborah Barnes and Lisa Bero (1998) investigated whether review
articles on the health effects of passive smoking reached conclusions
that are correlated with the authors' affiliations with the tobacco
companies. Since tobacco is a relatively homogenous product,
differences in outcome cannot be attributed to product variability or
company pre-testing. Just as in pharmacoeconomic studies, there is no
canonical method in undertaking a review article. Authors make a
selection of articles that become part of the review. Some reviewers
make their selection algorithm transparent. Others may not. Any two
studies may use a different selection algorithm and they may weigh
studies differently. ``Ultimately, the conclusion of any review article
must be based on the judgment and interpretation of the author''
(Barnes and Bero, 1998, 1570).
For this study, the authors adopted a search strategy use by the
Cochrane Collaboration to select review articles from 1980 to 1995 on
the health effects of passive smoking from the databases MEDLINE and
EMBASE. They located additional review articles from a database of
symposium articles on passive smoking. Articles were evaluated on
quality and were classified as concluding that passive smoking was
either harmful or not harmful. The authors found that 94 percent (\29/
31\) of reviews by tobacco-industry affiliated authors concluded that
passive smoking is not harmful compared with 13 percent (\10/75\) of
reviews without tobacco industry affiliations. The influence of
tobacco-industry affiliation on the finding of ``safety of passive
smoking'' was very strong. ``The odds that a review article with
tobacco with tobacco industry-affiliated authors would conclude that
passive smoking is not harmful were 88.4 times higher than the odds for
a review article with nontobacco affiliated authors, when controlling
for article quality, peer review status, article topic, and year of
publication'' (Barnes and Bero, 1998, 1569). The authors reported that
the ``only factor that predicted a review article's conclusion was
whether its author was affiliated with the tobacco industry'' (Barnes
and Bero, 1998, 1570). In this study, the authors had no alternative
hypotheses other than the inherent bias of authors with industry
affiliation. Because there is a great deal of discrepancy among authors
in how a review is carried out, including the selection and weighting
of articles that form the basis of the review, there are a number of
ways that the conclusion can be made to favor the funder's interests,
not the least of which is to set a high bar for establishing evidence
of causality. The authors impute conscious intentionality of bias to
the funders in their statement that ``the tobacco industry may be
attempting to influence scientific opinion by flooding the scientific
literature with large numbers of review articles supporting its
position [which they paid for] that passive smoking is not harmful to
health'' (Barnes and Bero, 1998, 1569). From tobacco, I shall now turn
to an industrial chemical used in many products--bisphenol A.
Single Product Assessment: BPA
While there are different variants of tobacco that depend on where
the tobacco plant is grown, and even greater variation in cigarettes
because of chemicals added to the tobacco and the paper, there is still
greater homogeneity in studying tobacco than in studying different
types of drugs. BPA, on the other hand, is a synthetic chemical that
has a precise chemical structure. It was first reported synthesized in
1905 by a German chemist. In 1953, scientists in Germany and the United
States developed new manufacturing processes for a plastic material,
polycarbonate, using BPA as the starting material. In the 1990s,
scientists began studying the toxicological effects of BPA leaching
from plastic food and water containers. Despite the fact that some
scientists claimed there was extensive evidence that BPA can disrupt
mouse, rat, and human cell function at low part per trillion doses and
that disruption at the same low doses is also found in snails [and] has
profound implications for human health (vom Saal, et al., 2005, 249),
other scientists disagreed. Vom Saal and Welshons (2006, 61) divided
the studies into those funded by industry and those funded by nonprofit
organizations. Of the 119 studies funded by the Federal Government, 109
showed harmful toxicological outcomes while ten had outcomes which
showed no harm. Of the studies funded by the chemical companies, there
were zero with outcomes showing harm and 11 with outcomes of no harm.
The authors write: ``Evidence of bias in industry-funded research
on BPA.'' Is it systematic bias and if so what form does it take? Is
industry using a different methodology than most of the federally-
supported studies? If so, is their methodology sound or is it designed
to get a ``no harm'' outcome?
vom Saal and Welshons argue that industry-funded studies have a
built in bias [what I have referred to as structural bias] against
finding positive effects of BPA. They maintain that ``To interpret
whether there is a positive or negative effect of a test chemical, such
as BPA, appropriate negative and positive controls also have to be
examined'' (vom Saal and Welshons, 2006, 62). Vom Saal argues that the
industry-supported tests omitted a positive control and without
positive control findings, one cannot interpret a reason for purely
negative results. The authors also noted that some industry-funded BPA
studies used test animals that had very low sensitivity to exogenous
estradiol and thus would not be expected to exhibit effects from BPA.
Other industry-funded investigators used a type of animal feed, which
because of its estrogenic activity, would give a false result.
``Inclusion of an appropriate positive control . . . would have allowed
a determination of whether the failure to find effects of BPA was due
to the lack of activity of BPA or to a lack of sensitivity of the
animal model and/or estrogenic contamination of the feed that was
used'' (vom Saal and Welshons, 2006, 63).
In his classic work, The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Karl Popper
(1968) developed the philosophical foundations of scientific
methodology. Science, Popper argued, is not an inductivist enterprise,
where truth is built up from data that are consistent with a
hypothesis. Scientists must seek to falsify a hypothesis, and only when
a hypothesis is recalcitrant against a rigorous attempt at
falsification can it be accepted as truth. The critical point is that
deduction and not induction is the logical grounding of empirical
science. In the latter case, scientists would be given: A
1

is B, A
2
is B . . . An is B therefore All A is B. In the
former case, scientists seek to falsify ``All A is B'' by trying to
find a disconfirming instance (Ax is not B).
For example, one can reach the conclusion that ``all crows are
black'' by observing crops in certain parts of Africa. Or you could
imagine a geographical location that would most likely nurture a
nonblack crow--such as the North or South Pole. If after all the
seeking for a falsifying instance none appears, then, under the
Popperian program, you can claim that the hypothesis ``all crows are
black'' is confirmed. vom Saal and Welshons illustrate this point in
the toxicology of BPA.

. . . it is a common event in toxicological studies conducted
by the chemical industry for purposes of reporting about
chemical safety to regulatory agencies to provide only negative
results from a study in which no positive control was included
but from which positive conclusions of safety of the test
chemical are drawn. (von Saal and Welshons 2006, 63)

As Peirce noted, ``We are, doubtless, in the main logical animals,
but are not perfectly so'' (Peirce, 1877). Both he and Popper
understood that knowledge claims drawn inductively can be easily
distorted by the social context of scientists. This is most notably the
case in the field of toxicology, which is composed of academic
scientists and contract toxicologists working on behalf of for-profit
companies. These scientists are usually paid by chemical companies to
fulfill the information needs of their regulatory requirements. The
standards for doing toxicological research may vary, especially in new
subfields like low-dose, endocrine toxicology. Thus, until the norms of
good scientific practices are adopted across the subfield and by the
government regulators, contract toxicologists may perform studies that
have structural biases because they are more likely than not to produce
false negatives. This is the take-home message from the criticism by
vom Saal and Welshons of private-company-sponsored studies. They are
looking to confirm the null (no effect) hypothesis rather than trying
to falsify the null hypothesis, which would provide more confidence in
the claim that the chemical is not harmful.
Conclusion
This analytical review of studies of studies that investigate an
association between funding source and study conclusions has revealed
several important results. First, there is sufficient evidence in drug
efficacy and safety studies to conclude that the funding effect is
real. Industry-sponsored trials are more likely than trials sponsored
by nonprofit organizations, including government agencies, to yield
results that are consistent with the sponsor's commercial interests.
Second, there is some circumstantial evidence that this effect arises
from two possible causes. Either the drugs sponsored by industry have
gone through more internal testing and less-effective drugs are
screened out, or the methods used in industry-sponsored drug testing
have a structural bias that is more likely to yield positive outcomes.
Third, a small number of pharmacoeconomic studies also show
evidence of a funding effect. Without standardization of economic
studies or the use of third-party ``economic auditors'' who have no
economic ties to a company, it is difficult to account for the factors
that explain this effect.
A person who files his income tax is likely to use whatever
discretionary decisions at his disposal to reduce his tax obligation.
Similarly, a company that performs its own economic analysis of a new
drug is likely to choose a model and use inputs that are advantageous
to it. When a company hires an independent agent to undertake the
economic analysis, little is known about what influence the company has
in shaping the study. Also, little is known about drugs that are kept
out of the testing pool by companies because they have already done the
economic analysis.
When we turn to studies of the funding effect on individualized
commodities, the results are less ambiguous. There is an extensive body
of research on tobacco, both primary (smokers) and secondary
(secondhand smoke) exposures. This research shows a clear demarcation
between studies funded by the cigarette industry and studies funded by
nonprofit and governmental organizations. From this body of research,
it is reasonable to conclude that the tobacco industry hired scientists
to play a similar role as their contracted lawyers, namely, to develop
a brief, in this case a scientific argument, that provides the best
case or their interest. If that interpretation of tobacco-funded
research is correct, it could explain the funding effect in tobacco
studies.
The second homogenous product discussed in this article is BPA.
However, with only one study of this compound found that addresses the
funding effect, a generalization cannot be drawn. But the scientists
who published the study help the reader understand why a funding effect
is a probable outcome. They show the systemic bias involved in the
industry-funded studies that ordinarily do not appear in studies funded
by nonprofit organizations.
What I have argued in this article is that the ``funding effect,''
namely the correlation between research outcome and funding source, is
not definitive evidence of bias, but is prima facie evidence that bias
may exist. Additional analyses of the methodology of the studies,
interpretation of the data, interviews with investigators, and
comparison of the products studied can resolve whether the existence of
a funding effect is driven by scientific bias. Social scientists should
follow Robert Merton's norm of ``organized skepticism'' when they frame
an initial hypothesis about the cause behind the ``funding effect''
phenomenon (Merton, 1968, 608). The notion of bias based on possessing
a financial conflict of interest is certainly one viable hypothesis.
But there are others. Social scientists must be equipped to compare the
methods used across a cluster of studies funded by for-profit and not-
for-profit companies to determine whether a particular method biases
the results toward ``no detectable outcome'' while other more sensitive
methods yield positive results. Certain chemical effects may show up in
animal fetuses and not on the adult animals.
In addition, social scientists must gain an understanding of the
entities being tested across a series of studies to determine whether
the differences in the entities can account for the ``funding effect.''
Calcium channel blockers represent a class of drugs. It is important to
understand whether the partition of studies between for-profit and not-
for-profit funders coincides with a random distribution of the entities
being studied. Drugs that have passed a prescreening test are more
likely to show more favorable outcomes than similar drugs that have
not. This potential confounder can be eliminated when the entities are
relatively homogenous, like tobacco or a chemical like BPA.
In some cases, ethnographic studies can determine whether for-
profit companies have made internal decisions about drugs before they
send them out to academic laboratories for study and how that compares
with drug studies funded by not-for-profit organizations. Ethnography
can also help social scientists ascertain when investigators reach
beyond the data when they interpret results and whether the frequency
of such overinterpretation (claiming benefits not found in the data) is
more likely in studies funded by for-profit funders. Interviews with
academic investigators, who are funded by private for-profit companies,
and company executives, can reveal whether and how the funding
organization helps frame the study, contributes to the interpretation
of the data, and plays a role in deciding whether the results get sent
for publication. The ``funding effect'' is merely a symptom of the
factors that could be driving outcome disparities. Social scientists
should not suspend skepticism and choose as the default hypothesis that
``bias'' is always the cause.

Acknowledgment

This research was supported in part by funding from the
International Center forAlcohol Policies.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding

The author received funding for an earlier version of this paper
from the International Center for Alcohol Policies.

References

Als-Nielsen, B., W. Chen, C. Gluud, and L. L. Kjaergard. 2003.
``Association of Funding and Conclusions in Randomized Drug Trials: A
Reflection of Treatment Effect or Adverse Events?'' The Journal of the
American Medical Association 290 (4): 921-28.
Angell, Marcia. 2004. The Truth about the Drug Companies. New York,
NY: Random House.
Bailar, J.C. 2006. ``How to Distort the Scientific Record without
Actually Lying: Truth and the Arts of Science.'' European Journal of
Oncology 11 (4): 217-24.
Barnes, D.E., and L.A. Bero. 1998. ``Why Review Articles on the
Health Effects of Passive Smoking Reach Different Conclusions.'' The
Journal of American Medical Association 279 (19): 1566-570.
Bekelman, J.E., Yan Li, and C.P. Gross. 2003. ``Scope and Impact of
Financial Conflicts of Interest in Biomedical Research: A Systematic
Review.'' The Journal of American Medical Association 289: 454-65.
Bell, C.M., D.R. Urbach, J.G. Ray, A. Bayoumi, A.B. Rosen, D.
Greenberg, and P.J. Neumann . 2006. ``Bias in Published Cost
Effectiveness Studies: Systematic Review.'' British Medical Journal 332
(7543): 699-703.
Clifford, T. J., N.J. Barrowman, and D. Moher. 2002. ``Funding
Source, Trial Outcome and Reporting Quality: Are they Related? Results
of a Pilot Study.'' BMC Health Services Research 2 (18): 1-6.
DHHS (Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service). 1995. ``Objectivity in Research.'' Federal Register s60:
35810-823.
Djulbegovic, B., M. Lacevic, A. Cantor, K.K. Fields, C.L. Bennett,
J.R. Adams, N.M. Kuderer, and G.H. Lyman. 2000. ``The Uncertainty
Principle and Industry-sponsored Research.'' Lancet 356 (9230): 635-8.
Friedberg, M., B. Saffran, T.J. Stinson, W. Nelson and C.L. Bennett.
1999. ``Evaluation of Conflict of Interest in Economic Analyses of New
Drugs used in Oncology''. Journal of the American Medical Association
282 (15): 1453-7.
Friedman, L.S., and E.D. Richter. 2004. ``Relationship between
Conflict of Interest and Research Results.'' Journal of General
Internal Medicine 19 (1): 51-56.
Garattini, L., D. Rolova, and G. Casasdei. 2010. ``Modeling in
Pharamacoeconomic Studies: Funding Sources and Outcomes.''
International Journal of Technology Assessment Health Care 26 (3): 330-
33.
Jefferson, T., R. Smith, Y. Yee, M. Drummond, M. Pratt, and R. Gale
1998. ``Evaluating the BMJ Guidelines for Economic Submissions.'' The
Journal of the American Medical Association 280 (3): 275-77.
Johnson, J.A., and S.J. Coons. 1995. Evaluation in Published
Pharmacoeconomic Studies. Journal of Pharmacy Practice 8 (8): 156-66.
Knox, K.S., J.R. Adams, B. Djulbegovic, T.J. Stinson, C. Tomor, and
C.L. Bennett. 2000. ``Reporting and Dissemination of Industry versus
Non-profit Sponsored Economic Analyses of Six Novel Drugs used in
Oncology.'' Annals of Oncology 11 (12): 1591-95.
Krimsky, Sheldon. 1999. ``Conflict of Interest and Cost
Effectiveness Analysis.'' The Journal of American Medical Association
282 (10): 1474-75.
____. 2005. ``The Funding Effect in Science and its Implications for
the Judiciary.'' Journal of Law and Policy 23 (1): 43-68.
____. 2006. ``Publication Bias, Data Ownership, and the Funding
Effect in Science: Threats to the Integrity of Biomedical Research.''
In Rescuing Science from Politics: Regulation and the Distortion of
Scientific Research, edited by W. Wagner and R. Steinzor, 61-85. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
____. 2010. ``Combating the Funding Effect in Science: What's Beyond
Transparency?'' Stanford Law & Policy Review 21: 101-23.
Levinsky, N.G. 2002. ``Nonfinancial Conflicts of Interest in
Research.'' The New England Journal of Medicine 347: 759-61.
Martin, Brian. 1979. The Bias of Science. Canberra, Australia:
Society for Social Responsibility in Science.
Merton, Robert K. 1968. Social Theory and Social Structure. New
York, NY: The Free Press.
Peirce, Charles S. 1877. ``The Fixation of Belief.'' Popular Science
Monthly 12 (11): 1-15. Accessed October 1, 2010. http://www.peirce.org/
writings/p.107.html.
Popper, Karl. 1968. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York, NY:
Harper &Row.
Resnik, David B. 1998. The Ethics of Science. London, England:
Routledge.
Rochon, P.A., J.H. Gurwitz, R.W. Simms, P.R. Fortin, D.T. Felson,
K.L. Minaker, and T.C. Chalmers. 1994. ``A Study of Manufacture-
supported Trials of Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs in the
Treatment of Arthritis.'' Archives of Internal Medicine 154 (2): 157-
63.
Sacristan, J.A., J. Soto, and I. Galende. 1988. ``Evaluation of
Pharmacoeconomic Studies: Utilization of a Checklist.'' The Annals of
Pharmacotherapy 27: 1126-33.
Sugarman, Jeremy. 2008. ``Human Stem Cell Ethics: Beyond the
Embryo.'' Cell Stem Cell 2 (7): 529-33.
Turner, Christina, and George J. Spilich. 1997. ``Research into
Smoking or Nicotine and Human Cognitive Performance: Does the Source of
Funding make a Difference?'' Addiction 92 (11): 1423-426.
Van Dalen, Arjen. 2012. ``Structural Bias in Cross-National
Perspective: How Political Systems and Journalism Cultures Influence
Government Dominance in the News.'' The International Journal of Press/
Politics 17 (1): 32-55.
vom Saal, F.S., S.C. Nagel, B.G. Timms, and W.V. Welshons. 2005.
``Implications for Human Health of the Extensive Bisphenol A Literature
Showing Adverse Effects at Low Doses: A Response to Attempts to Mislead
the Public.'' Toxicology 212 (2-3): 244-252.
vom Saal, F.S., and W.V. Welshons. 2006. ``Large Effects from Small
Exposures.'' Environmental Research 100 (1): 50-76.
Yaphe, J., R. Edman, B. Knishkowy, and J. Herman. 2001. ``The
Association Between Funding by Commercial Interests and Study Outcome
in Randomized Controlled Drug Trials.'' Family Practice 18 (12): 565-
68.

Author Biography

Sheldon Krimsky is the Lenore Stern Professor of Humanities and
Social Sciences at Tufts University and the Carol Zicklin Visiting
Professor at Brooklyn College. He is author of Science in the Private
Interest.

attachment 13
Judge the Science, Not the Funding Source
Editorial
International Journal of Obesity (2014) 38, 625; doi:10.1038/
ijo.2014.32; published online 18 March 2014

2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights
reserved 0307-0565/14
www.nature.com/ijo

Medical research has long been engaged in debate over the
influences of corporate sponsorship on research findings. These
discussions are a necessary element of our scientific process. However,
recently the issue of `funding source' has taken on a life of its own,
particularly in the realm of obesity research. Discussions about the
merit and objectivity of the underlying science frequently take a back
seat to ad hominem attacks on researchers or accusations of malicious
corporate intent in the absence of any objective scientific appraisal
of the research.
These discussions are based on the faulty logic that somehow direct
corporate funding is inherently bias-producing in otherwise ethical
researchers and that, by implication, public (for example, NIH, USDA)
and/or philanthropic (for example, RWJ, AHA) funding, by way of the
intervening agency, ensures objectivity. A recent controlled study of
over 500 board-certified internists found that the participant's
perception of methodological quality was lower if they believed a trial
was corporate sponsored even when no actual methodological difference
was present.\1\ This suggests a bias against scientifically valid
studies based solely on funding source, which could in fact negatively
impact public health through out-of-hand dismissal of relevant, high-
quality research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Kesselheim A.S., Robertson C.T., Myers J.A., Rose S.L., Gillet
V., Ross K.M., et al. A randomized study of how physicians interpret
research funding disclosures. N. Engl. J. Med. 2012; 367: 1119-1127.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conversely, the implied bias favoring noncorporate trial
objectivity is equally concerning as it may lead us to overlook very
real potential bias from publicly funded trials. For example, it could
be argued that a scientist who is funded by USDA is at similar risk for
being biased in favor of sugar, corn and other agriculture-based
products vs. artificial sweeteners. Moreover, an often overlooked
threat to objectivity is the pressure to find statistically significant
results. This has been found in both corporate- and noncorporate-
sponsored research. A recent examination of over 4,600 scientific
papers from all disciplines published internationally between 1990 and
2007 found that the frequency of positive support for hypotheses has
increased 22%. The author notes that this bias toward publishing
positive results may influence the objectivity of the research
literature both directly and also more subtly by discouraging more
innovative (higher-risk) projects.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Fanelli D. Negative results are disappearing from most
disciplines and countries. Scientometrics 2012; 90: 891-904.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assuming that the well-intentioned yet misguided goal of those
leveling these ad hominem attacks is to keep scientists in check and to
help us avoid moral and scientific pitfalls, there is a far better
model available. When the model works, the public is protected,
scientific discovery and rigor supported, and advances in our knowledge
achieved. At the core of the model is a safe environment that allows
for transparency. This includes full disclosure of all potential
conflicts of interest without fear of judgment or reprisal and peer-
reviewed publication of findings with appropriate methodological detail
to allow for objective analysis and scientific scrutiny. Beyond these
commonly and universally held practices, more consistent application of
additional tools may be useful. For example, a requirement for all
research to be preregistered in Clinicaltrials.gov or a similar
database. Reviewers and journal editors can be encouraged to ensure
that final manuscripts are consistent with the stated a priori
objectives before final acceptance of manuscripts, which could further
add to our protection of scientific integrity. Finally, we should all
aspire to solve the intellectual property and other barriers that limit
our ability to review and replicate studies on the basis of lack of
access to primary data sources in some corporate trials. Although these
barriers are complex and beyond the scope of this paper, we need to
begin to find solutions that will enhance the ways scientific process
can be used to be the judge of all science.
In summary, what are the best practices for ensuring a strong,
unbiased body of obesity research? Certainly not refusing funding from
those who wish to collaborate with scientists in becoming part of the
solution; absolutely not by launching unsubstantiated attacks on
reputable scientists with longstanding records of ethical conduct and
meaningful scientific contribution; rather, it is first by giving
funding source its proper position among many possible and equally
important threats to objectivity and implementing safeguards to protect
against such bias (and worse yet malfeasance). Second, we need to
redouble our efforts to adhere to the basic principles of good science
like reproducibility, replicability and other core evaluative
procedures that ensure objective and reliable scientific reporting.
Finally, we need to work toward open access to data regardless of its
source. This will require the cooperation of those in the scientific
community and among potential sources of funding. Ultimately, this type
of transparency regardless of funding source will deliver a more robust
and complete body of evidence. In short, scientists need to practice
good science, sponsors must commit to transparency and noninfluence,
media needs to practice responsible scientific journalism, and we all
need to base our evaluations on scientific data and not on
predetermined opinions rooted in our own emotion-laden bias for or
against specific funding sources.

Conflict of Interest

Dr. Martin Binks [1 2] reports the following potential conflicts of
interest: Dr. Binks is sole proprietor of Binks Behavioral Health PLLC;
he has also received financial compensation from: The Obesity Society
(Communications & Social Media Consultant), 2011-present; Guidepoint
Global Consulting, 2007-present; AbbVie Men's Health Initiative, 2012;
Everyday Health Inc., 2006-2011; Evolution Health Systems, 2006-2011.
Dr Binks also currently serves in the following volunteer roles: The
Obesity Society, Secretary Treasurer & Development Chair. No funding
from any source is directly associated with the development of this
manuscript.
[1] Department of Nutritional Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock,
TX, USA.
[2] Binks Behavioral Health, PLLC, Hillsborough, NC, USA, E-mail:

[emailprotected]
.

attachment 14
The Obesity Society Encourages Science-Industry Collaborations to
Support Obesity Science, Public Health
New Position Statement Condemns Ad Hominem Attacks on Researchers
Mar. 26, 2014, 11:00 ET from The Obesity Society

The Obesity Society Logo. (PRNewsFoto/The Obesity Society)

Silver Spring, Md., March 26, 2014--PRNewswire-USNewswire--
Collaborations between scientists and industries, including food and
pharmaceuticals, have a strong history of aiding in new scientific
discoveries and supporting public health. For example, earlier this
year, food industry corporations announced success in cutting 1.5
trillion calories from food products, which The Obesity Society
referred to (http://www.obesity.org/news-center/cutting-trillions-of-
calories-from-food-products-can-have-a-significant-impact-on-the-
nations-health.htm) as an effort that could ``make a significant
difference in our nation's weight and health, helping to reverse the
obesity epidemic.''
``It's clear, efforts to combat obesity cannot succeed without the
engagement of the many industries that have the power to positively
impact the health of billions of people,'' said TOS President Steven
Smith, M.D.
However, in recent years, nutrition and obesity researchers have
frequently endured ad hominem attacks, or inappropriate criticisms of
character and ethics on the sole basis of collaborative relationships
and/or funding from Industry. Today, The Obesity Society (TOS) issued a
position statement supporting and encouraging collaborative
relationships between scientists and Industry in the interest of
scientific discovery and public health. The position goes further to
condemn these character attacks against credible and ethical
professionals providing transparency and full disclosure about these
collaborations.
``Many of our members are the obesity and nutrition scientists that
offer valuable insight and spark meaningful dialogue with Industry
leaders, and they deserve to be treated and recognized as the credible
and ethical professionals that they are,'' said Dr. Smith.
``Discrediting the scientific opinions of these professionals based on
their working relationships has no place in the scientific process.''
The position statement, ``Acceptance of Financial Support from
Industry for Research, Education and Consulting,'' authored by members
of TOS leadership, including Advocacy Chair Emily Dhurandhar, Ph.D.,
President-elect Nikhil Dhurandhar, Ph.D., Secretary-Treasurer Martin
Binks, Ph.D., and Advocacy Advisor Ted Kyle, RPh, discourages the
practice of ``dismissing the contributions of individual scientists and
attempting to discredit individuals based on funding source.''
``We have seen too many scientists with long-standing records of
scientific excellence and ethical conduct dragged into the spotlight of
public criticism based solely on a funding source, and despite full
disclosure and transparency,'' said Dr. Dhurandhar, who led the
development of the statement. ``Scientists serve a clear role in these
relationships and must operate with the ability to do their work to
advance public health by engaging in free and open dialogue, offering
expert opinion, and conducting meaningful research to support obesity
treatment and prevention, and advance public health.''
In the new position statement, TOS recognizes that individual
motivations can sometimes create a risk of bias, which can come in many
forms outside of funding source. However, from advisory panels to
scientific publications, policies are in place to ensure transparency
and disclosure of all potential sources of bias, which is common
practice.
``Scientists are very familiar with the importance of making
relevant disclosures and ensuring funding sources do not influence the
design, analysis, interpretation, and publication of the scientific
process,'' said Dr. Dhurandhar.
The Obesity Society has a long-standing commitment to ensuring
ethical and transparent relationships between science and Industry, and
the organization hopes to advance the science behind obesity research,
treatment and prevention through ongoing dialogue on this issue.
Read the full position statement here (http://www.obesity.org/
publications/acceptance-of-financial-support-from-industry-for-
research-education-a-consulting.htm).
About The Obesity Society (http://www.obesityweek.com/)
The Obesity Society (TOS) is the leading professional society
dedicated to better understanding, preventing and treating obesity.
Through research, education and advocacy, TOS is committed to improving
the lives of those affected by the disease. For more information visit:
www.Obesity.org.
attachment 15
White Hat Bias: A Threat to the Integrity of Scientific Reporting
A Different View
Acta Pjdiatrica ISSN 0803-5253
Mark B. Cope,
[1]
David B. Allison
(
[emailprotected]
)
[2]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Solae LLC, St Louis, MO, USA.
\[2]\ Biostatistics and Nutrition & Obesity Research Center,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
Correspondence: David B. Allison, Biostatistics and Nutrition &
Obesity Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA. Tel: 205-975-9169, Fax: 205-975-2540, E-mail:

[emailprotected]

Received: 26 August 2010; accepted 2 September 2010.
DOI:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2010.02006.x

Articles in the series A Different View are edited by Alan
Leviton (
[emailprotected]
) We encourage you
to offer your own different view either in response to A
Different View you do not fully agree with, or on an unrelated
topic.
Background
Like other people, scientific researchers have their own
motivations. Such motivations include, but are not limited to, direct
financial gain, interests in recruiting financial resources to their
institutions, fame, social dominance, being perceived as righteous and
upstanding, and a genuine interest in beneficence and improving the
human condition. Pursuing these motivations may at times suggest
behaviours on the part of scientists that accord with the behaviours
that are generally accepted as sound and honest scientific practice.
Yet in other situations, such motives may conflict with the precepts of
scientific research.
Although the potential for financial conflicts of interests (COIs)
to bias research and research reporting is widely
recognized,
(1)
far less attention has been devoted to other
factors that may contribute to bias in research. Some people within the
research and lay communities appear to think that direct financial COIs
resulting from industry connections are the only factors of significant
concern. For example, Lesser, et al., wrote `We agree that financial
conflict is not the only cause of
bias. . . . long-standing scientific viewpoints, career considerations,
and even political opinions might color study design or interpretation.
However, these types of individual bias tend to cancel themselves out
among large groups of scientists over the long term. While one
investigator's career may rise on a cherished theory, another's may
rise by debunking that theory. We contend that financial conflict of
interest is qualitatively different, producing selective bias that acts
consistently in one direction over time'.
(2)

Another report, evaluating the possible financial competing
interest among researchers who had published clinical studies in the
British Medical Journal, concluded that `authors' conclusions were
positively associated with financial competing interests. Other
competing interests such as personal or academic were not significantly
associated withauthors' conclusions'.
(3)
This study had low
power--only 19 trial reports listed `other competing interests--for
instance, personal, academic, or political.' Also, the reporting of
nonfinancial interests is by no means standard or covered by most
guidelines, so most nonfinancial interests probably go unreported.
Recently, we published a paper describing `White hat bias (WHB),'
which we defined as bias leading to distortion of information in the
service of what may be perceived to be righteous ends.
(4)

Using quantitative evidence, we showed, at least in some areas of
investigation, that WHBs that do not stem from financial connections to
industry, clearly do not `cancel out' over the long run as Lesser, et
al.,
(2)
hypothesized they would. Rather, WHB seemed to be
consistently pushing conclusions in a single direction and
systematically distorting the research record.
In the remainder of this paper, we summarize the results of our
previously reported investigation into WHB, offer a few additional
examples of apparent WHB, often anecdotal, and finally close with some
suggestions to reduce the influence of biases, including WHBs, in
research.
Summary of Our Previous Findings Related to Breastfeeding and Obesity
Some reports that do not agree with main stream opinion (e.g., a
report that sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) \1\ are not associated
with obesity in children or a report that breastfeeding is not
protective against childhood weight gain) may never be published. Other
reports contain secondary references to support a current position, but
incompletely or inaccurately describe the overall results from the
secondary reference cited
(4)
[also labelled as `unbalanced
citations' by Atkinson and Macdonald].
(5)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The term sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) is used for
consistency with common use in the literature to denote any beverage,
which has been sweetened by the addition of a substance containing a
nontrivial amount of metabolizable energy. Thus, SSBs do not include
beverages sweetened with high-intensity `noncaloric' sweeteners such as
sucralose or aspartame, but may include beverages sweetened with
substances not conventionally termed sugar.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One area in which we documented WHB involved the question of the
beneficial effect (or lack thereof) of breastfeeding on the development
of obesity.
(4)
In a review commissioned and published by the
World Health Organization (WHO) on the health benefits related to
breastfeeding, specifically for obesity in the breastfed offspring, the
authors presented evidence about whether breastfeeding protects against
obesity and whether there is evidence of publication bias
(PB).
(6)
PB occurs when the probability of publication
depends on the results of the study.
(7-8)
For example,
positive (statistically significant) results are much more likely to be
reported than statistically insignificant (null)
findings.
(9)

Within the WHO-commissioned report, the authors presented a graph
showing clear evidence consistent with PB, suggesting that the
probability a study was published was positively related to the degree
it showed a statistically significant protective association of
breastfeeding on obesity. To evaluate the impact of industry funding on
such PB, we retrieved and reviewed the papers summarized in this graph.
None of the papers reported any industry funding or were written by
employees of the infant formula industry. Thus, the strong PB in the
literature pertaining to breastfeeding and its relationship to obesity
seems because of the behaviour of nonindustry funded scientists and
does not appear to be fuelled by industry interests.
Research can also be reported in a misleading manner when authors
choose to include incorrect or questionable material and exclude
otherwise pertinent information in their reviews or meta-analyses. In
our review of the WHO report on breastfeeding,
(4)
we cited
several examples where careful study of some of the original papers
revealed that WHO authors selectively included some values from certain
primary papers and thereby generated stronger associations of
breastfeeding with reduced obesity risk and excluded less impressive
values from the same papers without explanation. Misleading reports (or
unexplained exclusion of data) can also occur in other areas of
research.
Some Additional Examples and Evidence
`Spin,' defined as distorted presentation of data, was identified
in reports of randomized clinical trials.
(10)
In each, the
primary outcome was statistically nonsignificant, yet somewhere in the
report (title, abstract, etc.), the experimental treatment was `spun'
in a way to mislead the reader. In an evaluation of reports of 102
randomized clinical trials (122 published journal articles), 62% of
them added a new outcome, had at least one of the primary outcomes
changed, or simply omitted the findings.
(11)

Recently, the Food and Drug Administration of the U.S. Government
issued a docket describing how menu labelling in restaurants would give
people the opportunity to make healthier diet choices when eating
out.
(12)
The docket stated that `the availability of
nutritional information through menu labeling would provide Americans
the opportunity to exercise personal responsibility and make informed
choices about their diets. Studies show that providing nutrition
information at restaurants can help people make healthier choices
[
(13)
, Journal of Consumer Research 2009 36(3): 494-503]'
(14) This cited study actually reported that parents will choose
slightly lower calorie food options for their children in a restaurant
setting; however, the parents did not choose lower calorie foods for
themselves (13). This is an example of an unbalanced citation. Rather
than stating `Studies show that providing nutrition information at
restaurants can help people make healthier choices,' an accurate
statement from that study would have been `A single study (but not all
studies) showed that providing nutrition information at restaurants can
help people make healthier choices when they choose food for other
people, but not when they choose food for themselves.'
What Can We Do?
Faithful reporting, acknowledging study limitations and evaluating
bodies of evidence without selectively excluding information on the
basis of its desirability are a few examples of how paediatricians can
become committed to scientific truthfulness. They are also encouraged
to be sensitive to the possibility of WHB.
Publication bias and exclusion of pertinent data for no apparent
reason are examples of WHB and according to Atkinson and Macdonald

(5)
`all scientists should strive to have the `spin' stop
with them'. `Science itself is the antidote to the poison of bias in
research'.
(15)
We need to encourage, and perhaps require the
publication of reports that minimize publication bias, and to require
that trials and their protocols be registered to enable identification
of omissions or distortions of any key procedures, which would affect
interpretation of results. These and other ways of shoring up the
integrity of the scientific process are not easy steps, will not solve
all problems, will create some new challenges and cannot be implemented
overnight. Yet we should not make the perfect the enemy of the good and
should make the development and implementation of such procedures a
priority.
Conclusion
To reduce the influence of bias in research and in general media
reporting of scientific findings, there will need to be a concerted
effort at all levels from scientist-authors to editors and journalists.
We do not yet know how much of WHB is inadvertent and how much it
results from an anti-industry sentiment, feelings of righteous
indignation, a passionate interest in justifying public health actions,
or yet other factors. Yet regardless of the root of the WHB, medical
professionals, reporters, government policy makers and the public
should be aware of such biases and view scientific literature with a
critical eye.
Drs. Allison and Cope have received grants, book royalties,
honoraria, donations and consulting fees from numerous food, beverage,
dietary supplement, pharmaceutical companies, litigators and other
commercial, government and nonprofit entities with interests in obesity
and nutrition, including interests in breastfeeding and SSBs. Dr. Cope
recently accepted a position with Solae LLC (St Louis, MO, USA).

References

1. Friedman L.S., Richter E.D. Relationship between conflicts of
interest and research results. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 2004; 19: 51-6.
2. Lesser L.I., Ebbeling C.B., Goozner M., Wypij D., Ludwig D.S.
Relationship between funding source and conclusion among nutrition-
related scientific articles. PLoS Med. 2007; 4: e5.
3. Kjaergard L.L., Als-Nielsen B. Association between competing
interests and authors' conclusions: epidemiological study of randomised
clinical trials published in the BMJ. BMJ 2002; 325: 249.
4. Cope M.B., Allison D.B. White hat bias: examples of its presence
in obesity research and a call for renewed commitment to faithfulness
in research reporting. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2010; 34: 84-8; discussion
3.
5. Atkinson R.L., Macdonald I. White hat bias: the need for authors
to have the spin stop with them. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 2010; 34: 83.
6. Horta B., Bahl R., Martines J., Victora C. Evidence of the Long-
Term Effects of Breastfeeding: Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis.
WHO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.
7. Riechelmann R.P., Wang L., O'Carroll A., Krzyzanowska M.K.
Disclosure of conflicts of interest by authors of clinical trials and
editorials in oncology. J. Clin. Oncol. 2007; 25: 4642-7.
8. Friedman C.P., Wyatt J.C. Publication bias in medical
informatics. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 2001; 8: 189-91.
9. Rosenthal R.H. The ``File Drawer Problem'' and Tolerance for Null
Results. Psychol. Bull. 1979; 86: 638-41.
10. Boutron I., Dutton S., Ravaud P., Altman D.G. Reporting and
interpretation of randomized controlled trials with statistically
nonsignificant results for primary outcomes. JAMA 2010; 303: 2058-64.
11. Chan A.W., Hrobjartsson A., Haahr M.T., Gotzsche P.C., Altman
D.G. Empirical evidence for selective reporting of outcomes in
randomized trials: comparison of protocols to published articles. JAMA
2004; 291: 2457-65.
12. Registry F. FDA Docket. 2010; 75: 39026-8.
13. Tandon P.S., Wright J., Zhou C., Rogers C.B., Christakis D.A.
Nutrition menu labeling may lead to lower-calorie restaurant meal
choices for children. Pediatrics 2010; 125: 244-8.
14. Howlett E.A., Burton S., Bates K. and Huggins K. Coming to a
Restaurant Near You? Potential Consumer Responses to Nutrition
Information Disclosure on Menus. Journal of Consumer Research 2009; 36:
494-503.
15. Allison D.B. The antidote to bias in research. Science 2009;
326: 522-3.

attachment 16
White Hat Bias: Examples of Its Presence in Obesity Research and a Call
for Renewed Commitment to Faithfulness in Research Reporting
Commentary
International Journal of Obesity (2010) 34, 84-88; doi:10.1038/
ijo.2009.239; published online 1 December 2009
M.B. Cope
[1]
and D.B. Allison
[2]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[1]\ Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
\[2]\ Section of Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics,
School of Public Health, and Clinical Nutrition Research Center,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
Correspondence: Professor D.B. Allison, Section of Statistical
Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Ryals Public Health Building, 1530
3rd Avenue S, RPHB 327, Birmingham, AL 35294-0022, USA. E-mail:

[emailprotected]
.

`White hat bias' (WHB) (bias leading to distortion of
information in the service of what may be perceived to be
righteous ends) is documented through quantitative data and
anecdotal evidence from the research record regarding the
postulated predisposing and protective effects of nutritively
sweetened beverages and breastfeeding, respectively, on
obesity. Evidence of an apparent WHB is found in a degree
sufficient to mislead readers. WHB bias may be conjectured to
be fuelled by feelings of righteous zeal, indignation toward
certain aspects of industry or other factors. Readers should
beware of WHB, and our field should seek methods to minimize
it.
Introduction
Scientific dialogue is dependent on fair and open presentation of
data and evidence, yet concerns have been raised in recent years about
bias in research practice. We present data and examples pertinent to a
particular bias, a `white hat bias' (WHB), which we define to be bias
leading to distortion of research-based information in the service of
what may be perceived as righteous ends. We evaluate WHB in the context
of two illustrative obesity topics, nutritively sweetened beverage
(NSB) consumption as a postulated risk factor \1\and breastfeeding as a
postulated protective factor.\2\
Example 1--Data on citation bias
If secondary reportings of original research misleadingly cite
papers with statements that inaccurately describe available evidence,
then inaccurate beliefs may inappropriately influence clinical
practice, public policy or future research. Previously,\3\ we observed
that two papers
4-5
had both statistically and non-
statistically significant results on body weight, body mass index (BMI)
or overweight/obesity status, which allowed future writers to
potentially choose which results to cite, and were also widely cited,
permitting a quantitative analysis of citations.
Cited Versus Citing Papers
A Web of Science search (through to October 2008) yielded 195 and
45 papers citing James, et al.,\4\ and Ebbeling, et al.,\5\
respectively. We analyzed those in English (165 and 41, respectively).
James, et al.,\4\ studied an intervention to decrease NSB
consumption and adiposity among children. Dichotomized (overweight or
obese versus neither overweight nor obese) and continuous (change in
BMI) data were analyzed for statistical significance. The authors
wrote:

`After 12 months there was no significant change in the
difference in body mass index (mean difference 0.13, ^0.08-
0.34) or z score (0.04, ^0.04-0.12). At 12 months the mean
percentage of overweight and obese children increased in the
control clusters by 7.5%, compared with a decrease in the
intervention group of 0.2% (mean difference 7.7%, 2.2-13.1%).'

Ebbeling, et al.,\5\ described a randomized controlled trial of a
25 week NSB reduction program in adolescents and wrote:

`The net difference (in BMI), 0.14R0.21 kg/m\2\, was not
significant overall.'

They then report a subgroup finding:

`Among the subjects in the upper baseline--BMI tertile, BMI
change differed significantly between the intervention . . .
and control . . . groups, a net effect of 0.75R0.34 kg/m\2\.'

Ebbeling, et al. (p. 676) label the analysis in the total sample as
the `primary analysis.'

Table 1  Categorization of 165 Papers Citing James, et al.\2\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Score                            A            B            C            D            E            F            G            H
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. of references in each category                         14           74            2           21            2            1            1           50
Proportion (exact CIs) a                                0.127        0.644        0.017        0.183        0.017        0.009        0.009
(0.071-0.19  (0.548-0.72  (0.003-0.06  (0.119-0.26  (0.003-0.06  (0.001-0.05  (0.001-0.05
9)           9)           8)           8)           8)           5)           5)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval.
a Proportions and CIs are calculated with only categories A through to G in the denominator. Scoring key: (A) Accurate--described the non-significant
result on continuous outcome (change in BMI) and described the significant result on the dichotomous outcome (overweight versus non-overweight). (B)
Mildly misleading (positively)--Described the result of the intervention study as showing efficacy, benefit or statistical significance for the
dichotomous outcome of overweight status, without mentioning the non-significant result on the continuous outcome. (C) Moderately misleading
(positively)--Described the result of the intervention study as showing efficacy, benefit or statistical significance on some weight-related outcome
without explicitly stating that it was on the proportion overweight per se. (D) Explicitly misleading (positively)--Described, with a factually
incorrect statement, that the result of the intervention for a continuous weight-related outcome was significant or showed effectiveness. (E) Mildly
misleading (negatively)--Described the result of the intervention study as not showing efficacy, benefit or statistical significance on the continuous
measure of BMI, without mentioning the significant result on the dichotomous outcome. (F) Moderately misleading (negatively)--Described the result of
the intervention study as not showing efficacy, benefit or statistical significance on some weight-related outcome without explicitly stating that it
was on the continuous measure of BMI. (G) Explicitly misleading (negatively)--Described, with a factually incorrect statement, that the result for the
dichotomous outcome was not significant or that a lack of effectiveness was shown for the dichotomous outcome. (H) Unscorable--Did not make explicit
statements about the effects of the study, made statements that were too ambiguous to code or made statements that were self-contradictory.

Data Coding and Analysis
Each paper citing either James, et al.,\4\ or Ebbeling, et al.,\5\
was categorized (see Tables 1 and 2) on the basis of how authors cited
results related to body weight, BMI or overweight/obesity outcomes from
these two papers in their report. Papers citing James, et al., were
independently coded by the authors of this paper (DBA or MBC). Any
discrepancies were resolved by discussion. Papers citing Ebbeling, et
al., were scored by DBA and cross-checked by MBC. Proportions (with
confidence intervals) were calculated (Tables 1 and 2). Exact binomial
calculation tested the null hypothesis that the proportion citing
papers in a misleading manner that exaggerated the strength of evidence
was equal to the proportion citing papers in a misleading manner that
diminished the strength of evidence; as such an equal proportion would
suggest a lack of bias in the overall literature, even if not in any
one paper.
Citation Analysis Results
Results were quite consistent across papers citing either James, et
al.,\4\ or Ebbeling, et al.,\5\ The majority, 84.3% for James, et
al.,\4\ and 66.7% for Ebbeling, et al.,\5\ described results in a
misleadingly positive manner to varying degrees (that is, exaggerating
the strength of the evidence that NSB reduction showed beneficial
effects on obesity outcomes). Some were blatantly factually incorrect
in their misleading statements, describing the result as showing an
effect for a continuous obesity outcome, when no statistically
significant effect for continuous obesity outcomes was observed. In
contrast, only four papers (3.5%) were negatively misleading (that is,
underplayed the strength of evidence) for James, et al.,\4\ and none
were negatively misleading for Ebbeling, et al.\5\ Only 12.7 and 33% of
papers accurately described complete overall findings related to
obesity outcomes from James, et al.,\4\ and Ebbeling, et al.,\5\
respectively.
To test whether the proportion of misleading reporting in the
positive direction was equal to the proportion in the negative
direction, we calculated the confidence interval on the proportion of
misleading reportings in either direction that was positively
misleading. This yields a proportion of 0.96 (95% CI: 0.903-0.985) for
those citing James, et al.,\4\ and 1.00 (95% CI: .832-1.000) for those
citing Ebbeling, et al.,\5\ and is significantly different from 1/2 for
each (P
