- EXAMINING THE 2017 AGENDA FOR THE COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE 2017 AGENDA FOR THE COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 11, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-12

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-184 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas, Vice Ranking
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  Minority Member
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
JEFF DENHAM, California              RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
DOUG LaMALFA, California             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana         TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             JIMMY PANETTA, California
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                DARREN SOTO, Florida
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas            LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DON BACON, Nebraska
JOHN J. FASO, New York
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas

______

Matthew S. Schertz, Staff Director

Anne Simmons, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     3

Witness

Giancarlo, Hon. J. Christopher, Chairman, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, Washington, D.C............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Submitted questions..........................................    47

EXAMINING THE 2017 AGENDA FOR THE COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 11, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. K. Michael
Conaway [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Conaway, Thompson,
Goodlatte, Lucas, King, Austin Scott of Georgia, Crawford,
Hartzler, LaMalfa, Allen, Bost, Rouzer, Kelly, Comer, Marshall,
Bacon, Faso, Arrington, Peterson, David Scott of Georgia,
Costa, McGovern, Vela, Lujan Grisham, Kuster, Nolan, Bustos,
Maloney, Adams, Evans, Lawson, O'Halleran, Panetta, Soto, and
Blunt Rochester.
Staff present: Darryl Blakey, Paul Balzano, Rachel Millard,
Stephanie Addison, Liz Friedlander, Matthew MacKenzie, Troy
Phillips, Nicole Scott, and Carly Reedholm.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS

The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
entitled, Examining the 2017 Agenda for the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, will come to order.
I have asked Michael Bost to open us with a brief prayer.
Michael.
Mr. Bost. Please bow your head. Dear Heavenly Father, we
thank you so much for this opportunity to be here today. Lord,
we thank you for this nation. We thank you that we can live
freely, that we can debate issues to try to make this nation a
better place for our families, for the prosperity of this
nation. We ask your blessing be upon this nation. We ask you to
protect our brothers and sisters right now that are in Puerto
Rico, and the things they are suffering through. Lord, guide
the hands of the people that are down there working, that you
bless them and you bring their island back, Lord, that they
prosper. That the other areas that have been hit by such
devastation as the other two hurricanes and the fires, Lord
God, we just ask your protective hand be on all of our
citizens. Lord, we praise you, we worship you, guide us as we
work on these issues today. Give us the Wisdom of Solomon,
Lord, and help us to have the kind hearts that we need to have
as public servants. We ask all this in Jesus Christ's name.
Amen.
The Chairman. Thank you, Michael.
Good morning. I want to welcome Chairman Giancarlo for
being here today to highlight his plans for the CFTC. I want to
first congratulate him on his nomination and confirmation as
Chairman. I count Chris as a friend, and I have enjoyed his
counsel and the opportunity to work with him these past 3
years. He is going to make a fine Chairman of the CFTC, and I
have all the confidence in the world that he will run that
Commission in the way we would all like to see it run.
I also want to thank our colleagues in the Senate for their
quick action in confirming Brian Quintenz and Russ Benham as
new Commissioners. Having met with both of these gentlemen, I
know they will be able and thoughtful Commissioners. I am also
looking forward to the confirmation of Dawn Stump. The Senate
is waiting to pair her with the nominee for the fifth and final
seat, so hopefully that process moves along and we can finally
have a full Commission. The ag community is deeply supportive
of her nomination and is looking forward to having her
perspective inside your building.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your willingness to take a look
back at the regulatory responses made to the financial crisis
of 2008. Many of our Members have been advocates of a
comprehensive review of the CFTC's Title VII rulemakings. Too
many end-users and market participants remain adversely
impacted by the sprawling, complex rules. I share your
conviction that we can improve economic growth by reducing
unnecessary regulatory burdens.
I am also encouraged by your vision for improving the
management at the CFTC. You have said you want to make the CFTC
a 21st century regulator, and I look forward to more details
about LabCFTC and the other modernization plans that you are
proposing. You have also made structural changes and moved some
personnel reporting lines, and I am interested in hearing about
any early payoff that you have seen from those moves
You have outlined an ambitious agenda that is headlined by
two issues this Committee has spent substantial time examining:
the SEF trading rules and the swap data reporting requirements.
Progress on these two issues is critical to the success of the
Title VII reforms. The status quo will leave fractured markets
and nearsighted regulators. I am hopeful you can make
meaningful headway on both these fronts.
Finally, international issues remain front and center
before your Commission. As we have expected, trading venue
equivalence is an important issue and I am encouraged by what I
have heard in the news. But I am discouraged to read that CCP
equivalence is again on the table. It is imperative that the
U.S.-EU equivalence determination does not become collateral
damage in the Brexit fight.
You have talked about deference between international
regulators and I support that stance 100 percent. For three
Congresses in a row, this Committee, and this House, have
passed strong language that would have enshrined principles of
mutual deference to competent regulators into law. These
markets are too big and too important to strangle with
bureaucratic infighting.
Again, thank you for coming today and the time you and your
staff have spent preparing. We look forward to your testimony
and working with you over the course of your term.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conaway follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. K. Michael Conaway, a Representative in
Congress from Texas
Good morning. I would like to thank Chairman Giancarlo for being
here today to highlight his plans for the CFTC. I first want to
congratulate him on his nomination and confirmation. I count Chris as a
friend; I have enjoyed his counsel and the opportunity to work with him
the past 3 years. He is going to make a fine Chairman of the CFTC and I
have all the confidence in him.
I would also like to thank our colleagues in the Senate for their
quick action in confirming Brian Quintenz and Russ Benham as new
Commissioners. Having met with both of these gentlemen, I know they
will be able and thoughtful Commissioners. I'm also looking forward to
the confirmation of Dawn Stump. The Senate's waiting to pair her with
the nominee for the fifth and final seat, so hopefully that process
moves along and we can finally have a full Commission. The ag community
is deeply supportive of her nomination and is looking forward to having
her perspective inside the building.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your willingness to take a look back at
the regulatory responses made to the financial crisis of 2008. Many of
our Members have been advocates of a comprehensive review of the CFTC's
Title VII rulemakings. Too many end-users and market participants
remain adversely impacted by the sprawling, complex rules. I share your
conviction that we can improve economic growth by reducing unnecessary
regulatory burdens.
I am also encouraged by your vision for improving the management at
the CFTC. You've said you want to make the CFTC a ``21st Century
Regulator'' and I look forward to more details about LabCFTC and other
modernization plans. You've also made structural changes and moved some
personnel reporting lines, and I am interested in hearing about any
early payoff.
You've outlined an ambitious agenda that is headlined by two issues
this Committee has spent substantial time examining: the SEF trading
rules and the swap data reporting requirements. Progress on these two
issues is critical to the success of the Title VII reforms. The status
quo will leave fractured markets and nearsighted regulators. I am
hopeful you can make meaningful headway on both these fronts.
Finally, international issues remain front and center before the
Commission. As we expected, trading venue equivalence is an important
issue and I am encouraged by what I've heard in the news. But I am
discouraged to read that CCP equivalence is again on the table. It is
imperative that the U.S.-EU equivalence determination doesn't become
collateral damage in the Brexit fight.
You've talked about deference between international regulators and
I support that stance 100 percent. For three Congresses in a row, this
Committee and this House have passed strong language that would have
enshrined principles of mutual deference to competent regulators into
law. These markets are too big and too important to strangle with
bureaucratic infighting.
Again, thank you for coming in today and the time you and your
staff have spent preparing. We look forward to your testimony and
working with you over the course of your term.
I now turn to the Ranking Member, Mr. Peterson, for any comments he
would like to make.

The Chairman. I now turn to the Ranking Member for his
comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome,
Chairman Giancarlo, to the Agriculture Committee. You have
appeared before the Committee before, and you have actually
played in the band here in the Committee hearing room before,
we welcome you.
I am looking forward to your testimony today on where we
see the CFTC heading under your tenure. And I am particularly
interested in how you see the final implementation of Dodd-
Frank. I have generally been impressed with how the Commission
has gone about enacting the changes, and look forward to seeing
continued efforts to bring more transparency to the derivatives
marketplace.
I am concerned, however, that Europe's rules for their
version of our swap execution facilities don't provide anywhere
near the pre- and post-trade transparency that our rules do. I
understand that you have been negotiating an equivalence
agreement on those rules, and that you are close to reaching an
agreement. Hopefully, any final agreement will be more closely
aligned with our transparency rules than theirs.
The CFTC has a very important role to play, protecting the
integrity of our derivatives market, and this protects not just
those who use the market, but the economy as a whole.
So thank you again for being with us today, and I look
forward to your testimony.
I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the Ranking Member.
The chair would request other Members submit their openings
statements for the record so that our witness may begin his
testimony, and to ensure there is ample time for questions.
I want to welcome to the witness table the Honorable J.
Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman of the U.S. Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.
Chris, I trust that you will not use your role in the
Ranking Member's band to exert undue influence over him as you
play the banjo for the Second Amendment. So with that, Mr.
Giancarlo, you are recognized. The table is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. J. CHRISTOPHER GIANCARLO,
CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION, WASHINGTON,
D.C.

Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, and Members of the Committee. I am honored to testify
before you as Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission.
In the 3 years that I have served on the Commission I have
learned a lot from you about the issues facing America's
farmers, ranchers, producers, and other users of commodity
futures products. I have also traveled to many of your home
states to meet with Americans who use and rely on our markets
for these products. These visits have made me a much better
regulator. I have also spent the past 3 years getting to know
the agency, its staff, and its programs, and in that time my
respect has grown for the hardworking men and women who serve
the CFTC's important mission.
As you know, America's farmers and ranchers have used
listed derivative products and markets for more than 100 years
to hedge their costs of production and delivery. But derivative
markets are not just useful for agricultural producers; they
impact the price and availability of heating in American homes,
of energy used in factories, of interest rates charged on home
mortgages, and on the returns earned on Americans' life
savings. They serve the needs of society to help moderate
price, supply, and other commercial risks, and, thereby, free
up capital for economic growth, job creation, and much-needed
prosperity. That is why we must be diligent in protecting these
markets from fraud and abuse.
The day after the White House announced its intention to
nominate me as Chairman, I said, ``There will be no pause, no
letup, or no reduction in our duty to enforce the law and
punish wrongdoing in our derivative markets.'' And I have kept
that pledge, and intend to continue to do so, and I look
forward to detailing for this Committee the CFTC's vigorous
enforcement program.
In preparing the CFTC's current budget request earlier this
year, I reviewed the agency's various functions and
expenditures. I identified several ways it can run more
efficiently and save taxpayer money. But I also found areas
where we need to devote additional resources. These include
clearinghouse examinations, market economists, and
technologists. And I would like to discuss these needs with you
today.
I also look forward to discussing a new agency-wide review
of CFTC rules, regulations, and practices to make them simpler,
less burdensome, and less costly. This initiative is called
Project KISS. Now, it is not about identifying rules for
repeal; it is about taking our existing rules and applying them
in ways that are simpler, less costly, and less burdensome,
especially for smaller market participants and end-users. I
would also like to discuss another initiative which we call
LabCFTC. It serves as a focal point for our efforts to
facilitate market-enhancing financial technology innovation
along with fair competition for the benefit of the American
public. It serves as a platform to deepen our understanding of
emerging technologies and their impact on American markets.
LabCFTC is meant to help the CFTC avoid being a last century
analog regulator of today's 21st century digital markets.
Now, cybersecurity is certainly one of the greatest threats
to market integrity and systemic stability of our time, and I
look forward to reviewing for you the steps I have taken as
Chairman to address this ever-evolving challenge.
One of my key priorities is to better coordinate the work
of the CFTC and that of fellow regulators, including the SEC,
and also the Fed when it comes to clearinghouse supervision.
Equally important is to better harmonize our implementation of
swaps market reforms with that of overseas regulators. I am
committed to seeing that the CFTC's oversight of swaps and
other derivatives is robust and effective, and yet compatible
with overseas regulations to avoid fragmenting markets and
trading activity. And to this end, I am hopeful that the CFTC
and the EU will soon conclude satisfactory determinations on
margin on uncleared swaps and trade execution.
Finally, I look forward to resolving outstanding regulatory
issues before the Commission, such as the de minimis threshold.
Not just resolve it, but get it right, using the latest and
most complete data to make a determination based upon true risk
to the financial system. Yet, it is hard to get something as
complicated as this right when we are under a time crunch. On
one hand, we are less than 90 days away from the New Year, when
market participants will have to start counting the notional
amount of their swaps transactions for de minimis purposes. On
the other hand, we have two new Commissioners and a new
division director who are just seeing internal agency trading
data for the first time. I am reluctant to ask them to make
such an important decision in a rush. I have, therefore,
decided to request that the Commission delay this decision for
1 further year. We will follow the same procedural steps that
Chairman Massad used last year to implement this 1 year delay.
It will give the new Commissioners and division staff adequate
time to analyze extensive quantitative data, ask questions,
analyze the answers, and arrive at a final decision. The goal
is to get the right result, not a rushed result. Therefore, I
intend to put before the Commission in the first half of 2018 a
proposal for a final resolution of the swap dealer de minimis
issues. I do not intend to roll over the decision on this issue
again.
Thank you for inviting me to testify before you to review
issues of critical importance to the work of the CFTC and the
American people, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Giancarlo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. J. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.
Thank you Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of
the Committee.
I am honored to testify before you today as the 13th Chairman of
the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).
In the 3 years that I served as a Commissioner at the CFTC, I
learned a lot from you about the issues facing America's farmers,
ranchers, producers, and other users of commodity futures who depend on
the CFTC regulated markets for their risk management needs. I am
grateful now to give testimony as Chairman of the CFTC. Thank you for
the opportunity to hear your concerns and answer your questions.
In 2014, as a nominee to the CFTC, I presented my background in
commercial law and business to the Senate Agriculture Committee and
acknowledged my rather obvious character flaw of not having been raised
on a farm. I spoke about my experiences as a practicing lawyer and how
I always tried to spend time with new clients at their business offices
to learn what they did and how they did it. I believe you cannot truly
serve someone you represent unless you first dig in and understand how
they make a living. At that time, I committed to learning everything I
could about the agricultural sector.
Since that time, I have had the honor to meet with hundreds of
Americans who depend on CFTC-regulated derivatives markets. I have
travelled to many of your home states, 19 in fact, to meet with
farmers, ranchers, energy producers, and small and large manufacturers,
all of whom use our markets to hedge production and price risk. I have
milked dairy cows with family farmers in Melrose, Minnesota, and
visited with cotton farmers in Bardwell, Texas. I have been 900
underground in a Kentucky coal mine and 90 above ground on a North
Dakota natural gas rig. I have walked factory floors, oil refineries,
grain elevators, and power plants all over this country.
And I still have more walking to do. We regulators must learn to
walk in the shoes of our fellow Americans so that we can serve their
needs back in Washington. While these visits have been incredible in
their own right, they have most importantly made me a better informed
regulator of America's commodity futures markets.
I have also spent the past 3 years on the Commission getting to
know the agency, its staff, and its programs. My admiration and respect
have not diminished, but grown. In January, upon becoming Acting
Chairman, I began a process of looking at every function and
expenditure undertaken by the Commission, just as I learned to do in my
business career. In the private-sector, we would never simply take last
year's budget number and add a percentage increase. Rather, each dollar
requested had to serve a purpose. Likewise, when I first sat down with
the CFTC leadership team, my budget baseline was zero. We built our
budget from the ground up.
Drawing on my business experience, I have already identified
several ways the agencycan run more efficiently and save taxpayer
dollars. I also discovered areas within our current mission where we
need to devote additional resources. Moving forward, I have trust and
confidence that with the right allocation of resources we can meet the
challenges of an evolving 21st Century market.
Importance of the CFTC
As you well know, American farmers and ranchers have used listed
derivatives markets to hedge their costs of production and delivery for
more than 100 years. These markets allow the risks of variable
production costs, such as the price of raw materials, energy, foreign
currency, and interest rates, to be transferred from those who cannot
afford them to those who can. They are the reason why American
consumers enjoy stable prices in the grocery store, whatever the
conditions out on the farm.
Even Americans not actively participating in the futures markets
are impacted by the prices generated by them. Commodity futures markets
provide a critical source of information about future harvest prices.
For example, a grain elevator uses the futures market as the basis for
the price it offers local farmers at harvest. In return, farmers look
to exchange prices to determine for themselves whether they are getting
fair value for their crop. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
uses that same information to make price projections, determine
volatility measures, and make pay-outs on crop insurance.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ E.g., USDA, Informational Memorandum: PM-17-012, 2017 Crop Year
(CY) Common Crop Insurance Policy and Area Risk Protection Insurance
Projected Prices and Volatility Factors; Malting Barley Endorsement
Projected Price Component and Volatility Factor; and Hybrid Seed Price
Endorsement--Hybrid Seed Corn Prices (Mar. 1, 2017), available at
https://www.rma.usda.gov/bulletins/pm/2017/17-012.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But derivatives markets are not just useful for agricultural
producers. They impact the price and availability of heating in
American homes, energy used in factories, interest rates charged on
home mortgages and the returns earned on retirement savings. More than
ninety (90%) percent of Fortune 500 companies use derivatives to manage
commercial or market risk in their worldwide business operations.
In short, derivatives serve the needs of society to help moderate
price, supply and other commercial risks to free up capital for
economic growth, job creation and prosperity. While often derided in
the tabloid press as ``risky,'' derivatives--when used properly--are
tools for efficient risk transfer and mitigation. It has been estimated
that commercial derivatives usage added 1.1 percent to the size of the
U.S. economy between 2003 and 2012.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Milken Institute found the following economic benefits to
the U.S. economy from derivatives: ``[b]anks' use of derivatives, by
permitting greater extension of credit to the private-sector, increased
U.S. quarterly real GDP by about $2.7 billion each quarter from Q1 2003
to Q3 2012; [d]erivatives use by non-financial firms increased U.S.
quarterly real GDP by about $1 billion during the same period by
improving the firms' ability to undertake capital investments;
[c]ombined, derivatives expanded U.S. real GDP by about $3.7 billion
each quarter; the total increase in U.S. economic activity was 1.1
percent ($149.5 billion) between 2003 and 2012; [b]y the end of 2012,
use of derivatives boosted U.S. employment by 530,400 (0.6 percent) and
industrial production 2.1 percent.'' See Apanard Prabha, et al.,
Deriving the Economic Impact of Derivatives, Milken Institute, at 1
(Mar. 2014), available at http://assets1b.milkeninstitute.org/assets/
Publication/ResearchReport/PDF/Derivatives-Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Enforcement
I am committed to supporting and strengthening the CFTC's mission
to foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially sound markets
for the trading of commodity and financial futures, swaps, and other
derivatives. I am also committed to seeing that America's derivatives
markets operate free from fraud, manipulation, and other trading
abuses.
The day after the White House announced its intention to nominate
me as Chairman, I said ``there will be no pause, let up or reduction in
our duty to enforce the law and punish wrongdoing in our derivatives
markets; the American people are counting on us.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ J. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading
Comm'n, CFTC: A New Direction Forward, Remarks of Acting Chairman J.
Christopher Giancarlo before the 42nd Annual International Futures
Industry Conference in Boca Raton, FL (Mar. 15, 2017), available at
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagiancarlo-20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since then, I have appointed James McDonald as Director of
Enforcement, a former Federal prosecutor who served as an Assistant
United States Attorney from the Southern District of New York. I have
strengthened our rules and procedures to better protect whistleblowers,
brought new impactful enforcement cases, and successfully resolved
other important enforcement cases. Our enforcement resources have also
been enhanced. For example, I realigned our Market Surveillance Branch
to report directly to the Director of Enforcement.
Since January of this year, the CFTC's Division of Enforcement has
brought important enforcement actions across our markets, which have
strengthened market integrity and enhanced customer protections. For
example, following an investigation by the Division, the Commission
entered an Order earlier this year imposing sanctions for manipulation,
among other things, in the live cattle futures market. The Division has
continued to bring significant spoofing cases, and recently filed the
largest precious metals fraud case in the history of the Commission. It
has also prosecuted fraud in virtual currency markets. In fact, the
Commission has filed ten new enforcement actions in September alone.
Very recently, the CFTC filed civil fraud charges in the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of New York against a company over an
alleged Bitcoin investment scheme, involving fraud, misappropriation,
and issuing false account statements.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Press Release, U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading Comm'n, CFTC Charges
Nicholas Gelfman and Gelfman Blueprint, Inc. with Fraudulent
Solicitation, Misappropriation, and Issuing False Account Statements in
Bitcoin Ponzi Scheme (Sept. 21, 2017), available at http://
www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7614-17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to actions utilizing the Commission's fraud and
manipulation authority, the Division has also recommended actions
concerning failure to supervise, as well as violations of position
limits, record-keeping and reporting obligations, and registration
rules. We are also continuing to work proactively alongside our law
enforcement partners, including the Department of Justice, to ensure
that, in the appropriate cases, we are facilitating criminal
prosecutions of the most culpable actors.
The Division of Enforcement has also leveraged its resources
through implementation of a self-reporting program designed to help the
Division identify more culpable wrongdoers and hold them accountable.
As this program demonstrates, we will follow the facts and the law to
prosecute both corporations and responsible individuals. This self-
reporting program is designed to help us identify the individuals, and
where the evidence supports, prosecuting those individuals, most
culpable for any wrongdoing. As we did, for example, in charging
individuals at a major bank with spoofing violations earlier this year
based in part on the cooperation of other, less culpable individuals.
This program does not--in any way, shape or form--suggest a
lessening of the agency's efforts to enforce the law. Rather, it
signals the CFTC's determination to prosecute a broader range of
misbehavior than would otherwise be uncovered without self-reporting by
responsible parties.
Moreover, the CFTC's self-reporting program enjoys bipartisan
support. The foundation of the program is in the deferred prosecution
protocols established under the chairmanship of Timothy Massad and
adopted unanimously by the Commission. The current cooperation program
was fully supported by former Commissioner Sharon Bowen \5\ and mirrors
similar programs established by the Justice Department, and the SEC
during the Obama Administration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Neil Roland, CFTC plan to reward firms that self-report
misconduct is `no lessening or softening' of enforcement, Bowen says,
MLEX, September 27, 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
21st Century Regulator
As Chairman, I believe the CFTC's regulatory mission best serves
the public interest when it fosters broad-based economic growth and
American prosperity. It is my strong belief that for all segments of
our economy to flourish, we need well-crafted and practical rules,
regulations, and regulatory approaches that encourage participation and
responsible innovation in our markets.
So much of our world today, from information to music to
manufacturing to transportation to commerce--even farming, is
undergoing a digital transformation. It should be no surprise that our
capital, commodity, and futures markets are going through the same
transformation. The electronification of markets over the past 30 to 40
years and the advent of exponential growth in digital technologies have
altered trading, markets, and the entire financial landscape with far-
ranging implications for capital formation and risk transfer.
The world is changing. Our parents' financial markets are gone. The
21st century digital transformation is well underway. And, as our
markets continue to evolve, the CFTC cannot be an analog regulator in a
digital age--instead we must also evolve. We must learn from the
changes enveloping our world and adopt them in pursuit of our
regulatory mission and the betterment of our markets.
LabCFTC
With this in mind, CFTC recently launched an initiative called
LabCFTC.\6\ It serves as the focal point for Commission efforts to
facilitate market-enhancing financial technology (FinTech) innovation
and fair competition for the benefit of the American public. LabCFTC is
designed to make the CFTC more accessible to FinTech innovators. It
serves as a platform to inform the Commission's understanding of
emerging technologies. LabCFTC will enable the CFTC to be proactive and
forward-thinking as FinTech applications continue to develop, and to
help identify related regulatory opportunities, challenges, and, risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Press Release, U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading Comm'n, CFTC Launches
LabCFTC as Major Fintech Initiative (May 17, 2017), available at http:/
/www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7558-17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The LabCFTC initiative will accomplish its mission through three
primary work streams: The first is to provide greater regulatory
certainty and understanding that encourages market-enhancing financial
technology innovation to improve the quality, resiliency, and
competitiveness of our markets. The second is to identify, understand,
and utilize emerging technologies that will enable the CFTC to carry
out its mission more effectively and efficiently in the new digital
world. And, the third is to establish an internal resource to inform
our staff on emerging technologies, while collaborating with external
stakeholders, including domestic and international regulators, in order
to share best practices related to FinTech innovation.
Emerging financial technologies ranging from blockchain to machine
learning to predictive data analytics are transforming financial
markets and services. The rapid pace of innovation and adoption, the
potential disintermediation of traditional financial market functions,
and the increasing speed and power of computers are raising important
new opportunities and challenges for key market stakeholders, including
banks, end-users, and regulators. In order to remain proactive and
facilitate the emergence of market-enhancing technologies, regulators
around the world are working to share developments, trends, and
insights in order to understand and harness the potential of these
innovations.
Two weeks ago, under the leadership of the CFTC's first-ever Chief
Innovation Officer, LabCFTC held its second set of office hours in NYC.
LabCFTC will be holding its next set of office hours in Chicago on
Friday, October 20. LabCFTC is also targeting sessions in other
technology centers including Silicon Valley, Austin Texas and Route 28
outside of Boston.
Since its launch a few months ago, LabCFTC has held over 100
meetings with market participants and FinTech innovators, ranging from
established financial service firms to start-up companies. Among all
LabCFTC inquiries, more than \2/3\ were successfully resolved or
require no further follow-up by LabCFTC. Technologies discussed include
distributed ledger and blockchain, smart contracts, artificial
intelligence/machine learning, predictive data analytics, algorithmic
trading, cloud computing, digital identity, cyber-security, and
RegTech. Potential applications of these technologies in CFTC markets
could enhance efficiencies, reduce transaction costs, increase
transparency, and bolster compliance.
LabCFTC seeks to assist and foster market-enhancing FinTech
innovation in CFTC regulated markets here in America. We look to
harness these rapidly evolving digital markets to be engines for
economic freedom and opportunity--the ingredients that have always
been, and always will be, essential for American prosperity.
And, yet, there is another equally important purpose for LabCFTC,
one that is quite simple. That is to help the CFTC bridge the gap from
where we are today to where we need to be--a twenty-first century
regulator for twenty-first century digital markets.
Cybersecurity
And before I move on from speaking about technology, I want to
address cybersecurity--at the CFTC and the institutions in the markets
we oversee. I know Congress is rightly concerned about cyber risk in
light of recently announced breaches of Equifax and the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Such concern is appropriate. As I have repeatedly
said, cybersecurity is undoubtedly the most important single issue
facing our markets today in terms of market integrity and financial
stability.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ J. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading
Comm'n, Harvard Law School Fidelity Guest Lecture Series on
International Finance (Dec. 1, 2015), available at http://www.cftc.gov/
PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagiancarlo-11.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All Federal agencies and financial market participants must be
vigilant about cybersecurity. That includes the CFTC. It is why we are
constantly reviewing and updating our cybersecurity protections to
guard against the growing threat of a breach. Our agency has
successfully thwarted hundreds of attempted breaches. Yet, we can never
be complacent or assume that past success is an indicator of future
resilience.
In light of the relentlessness of the cyber threat, I have taken
several steps since becoming Chairman. I meet monthly with the CFTC's
Chief Cybersecurity Officer and review all recent cyber incidents and
agency responses. We also discuss anticipated threats and emerging best
practice defenses.
The CFTC recently worked with the Department of Homeland Security
to conduct a half day, agency wide disaster recovery exercise based on
a simulated cyber-attack on U.S. derivative markets. We have scheduled
further exercises in the months to come. We have taken other
significant steps to increase the CFTC's cyber defenses that cannot be
publicly disclosed.
Notwithstanding our commitment to cyber vigilance, the CFTC takes
nothing for granted. The cyber threat is persistent and ever-changing.
It has rightly been said that it is not a question of ``if'' a cyber
intrusion will occur, but ``when'' it will occur. That is why I have
consistently expressed concerns about the government's handling of
proprietary intellectual property for market participants.\8\ We must
carefully balance the agency's legitimate need to review market data
and other information against unnecessarily holding proprietary trading
information that could make us a larger target for a broader group of
cybercriminals, including those engaged in commercial espionage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ J. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading
Comm'n, Statement of Dissent Regarding Supplemental Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking on Regulation Automated Trading (Nov. 4, 2016), available at
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/
giancarlostatement110416#P5_827.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Turning to the cybersecurity of the markets we oversee, I note that
in September 2016 the CFTC unanimously adopted system safeguards and
cyber resilience standards for clearinghouses, contract markets, swap
execution facilities, and swap data repositories.\9\ It now falls to
the CFTC to examine registered entities for compliance with these
safeguards. Unfortunately, the CFTC currently has a 75% staff vacancy
rate in its CCP cyber-security program. The Commission needs funding to
fill these positions with examiners who have the skills needed to
measure compliance with CFTC regulations addressing cyber-security.
This need is critical if the agency is to fulfill its mission during
this time of increased cyber-attack and belligerence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ CFTC System Safeguard Testing Requirements, 81 Fed. Reg. 64272
and 64322 (Sept. 19, 2016) (codified at 17 CFR pts. 37-39, 49).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the request of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission's
Office of the Inspector General, from September 25, 2015 through July
25, 2016, Brown and Company CPAs and Management Consultants audited the
CFTC's performance in reviewing information technology system
safeguards in place at entities subject to CFTC regulatory oversight.
Brown and Company's report concluded that the CFTC and its oversight
divisions had developed policies and procedures to address
cybersecurity risks at CFTC registrants operating in derivatives
markets.\10\ The review also recommended several areas where the CFTC
could enhance its oversight of cybersecurity preparedness of agency
registrants.\11\ The CFTC was fully engaged with OIG, addressed all of
the report's findings, and adopted several of its recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ OIG Rep., U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading Comm'n, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission's Policies and Procedures for Reviewing Registrants'
Cybersecurity Policies 8 (Oct. 11, 2016).
\11\ Id. at 16-24.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project KISS
Too often CFTC rules and regulations are applied in a needlessly
complex and costly manner. They cause compliance to be too complex,
costly or time-consuming for market participants especially derivatives
end-users such as producers and farmers and ranchers. To address this
problem, shortly after assuming the role as acting Chairman, I
announced our Project KISS initiative.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ J. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading
Comm'n, CFTC: A New Direction Forward, Remarks of Acting Chairman J.
Christopher Giancarlo before the 42nd Annual International Futures
Industry Conference in Boca Raton, FL (Mar. 15, 2017), available at
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagiancarlo-20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project KISS stands for ``Keep It Simple Stupid.'' It is an agency-
wide review of CFTC rules, regulations, and practices to make them
simpler, less burdensome, and less costly. On February 24, 2017,
President Trump issued an Executive Order on ``Enforcing the Regulatory
Reform Agenda.'' \13\ Although the CFTC as an independent agency is not
strictly bound by President Trump's Executive Order, we believe that
Project KISS is in line with the President's objectives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of the Project KISS effort, the CFTC issued a call for
recommendations from the public on regulatory reform. We now have a
portal on our website for the public to provide suggestions that we can
look to implement. The comment period for Project KISS recommendations
closed on September 30.
We received 65 comments from the public, each of which is posted on
our website. An initial review of the public comments indicates that a
broad cross-section of the derivatives industry offered constructive
suggestions for reducing regulatory burdens. In addition to the public
comments, CFTC staff identified over forty examples of ways in which we
might achieve the objectives I have set forth under Project KISS.
Project KISS is not about identifying rules for repeal. It is about
taking our existing rules and applying them in ways that are simpler,
less costly and less burdensome. I believe the American taxpayer
expects us to do nothing less. For example, where we have the
discretion to take a broad, outcomes-based approach to finding the
regulatory regimes of foreign jurisdictions equivalent or comparable to
our own, I believe that we should do so. Or, where it makes sense to
codify existing, permanent staff no-action relief, again we should do
so. Several submissions reference specific No-Action letters, such as
void ab initio/error trade procedures (NAL 17-27) and SEFs' obligation
to provide confirmations for uncleared swaps (NAL 17-17). Even tweaks
as simple as streamlining registration or data submission forms, or
changing them to integrate current technology, will make these
necessary tasks more efficient and less burdensome for market
participants.
We must also work with other agencies to better harmonize and
simplify our rules, particularly where we have shared jurisdiction over
certain types of markets. In this vein, SEC Chairman Clayton and I have
been speaking since assuming our respective roles. At our very first
meeting we discussed ways in which we could harmonize our respective
rules and regulations. Since then, we have set up a Chairman to
Chairman working group that meets regularly. In fact, we most recently
met together for several hours last Monday. We hope to soon announce
some interagency understandings that will result in real regulatory
efficiencies.
Title VII
In 2014, I thought that my best qualification to serve on the CFTC
was my commercial expertise in the global over-the-counter swaps
markets. I was then--and remain today--a supporter of the swaps reforms
established in 2009 by the G20 leaders and embodied in Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act. I said that my support for these reforms was not based
on academic theory or political ideology. It was based on practical
experience.
I have not wavered in my support for these reforms in my 3 years on
the Commission. Yes, I have criticized the agency's implementation of
some of the reforms--almost always where I believed it was impractical,
overly burdensome or out of step with Congressional intent. In all
cases, however, I advocated alternative approaches I believe better
support healthy markets and are more faithful to the law. It is with
those basic principles in mind that I have developed several policy
priorities for the CFTC.
Swap Reforms
The CFTC was the first major regulator worldwide to implement most
of the G20 swaps reforms. You might call that framework ``CFTC Swaps
Reform Release 1.0.'' We now have more than 4 years of experience with
the varied strengths and shortcomings of the first release. I am
therefore advocating for new and enhanced edition, CFTC Swaps Reform
Release 2.0, which will be engineered to better support market
durability, increase trading liquidity and participant diversity, and
stimulate broad-based economic growth and revival. These changes will
stay true to the Pittsburgh G20 reforms and be in full accordance with
the letter of Dodd-Frank. Yet, they will incorporate lessons from our
initial reform efforts into a new and better version.
I have been critical of the CFTC's implementation of its swaps
trading rules. Over 2 years ago, I published a white paper that
analyzed this implementation.\14\ In it, I explained the mismatch
between the CFTC's swaps trading framework and the swap market's
fundamental structure. I asserted that the CFTC's current approach is
highly over-engineered, disproportionately modeled on the U.S. futures
market, and biased against both human discretion and technological
innovation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ J. Christopher Giancarlo, Pro-Reform Reconsideration of the
CFTC Swaps Trading Rules: Return to Dodd-Frank, White Paper, Jan. 29,
2015, http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@newsroom/documents/file/
sefwhitepaper012915.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As predicted, the CFTC's swaps trading implementation has caused a
number of harms. It has driven global market participants away from
transacting with U.S. entities. It has fragmented global markets into a
series of distinct liquidity pools that are more vulnerable to market
shocks.
Now, the CFTC must incorporate these lessons learned into a revised
swaps trading framework. The CFTC must create a framework that is
better aligned with swaps market dynamics and liquidity, and more
closely adheres to the express language and spirit of Dodd-Frank. The
revised swaps trading framework should be more flexible and allow
market participants to choose the manner of swap trade execution suited
to their business. It should help attract, rather than discourage,
global participants to U.S. trading markets. It should better align
regulatory oversight with inherent characteristics of the swap market.
Most importantly, the CFTC's revised swaps trading framework should
facilitate healthy risk hedging activities in the private-sector that
are essential for broad-based economic growth and revival.
In many ways, regulatory frameworks are like software applications.
Some work well and attract a broad base of users. Others are plagued
with bugs and flaws that, if not addressed, fail to attract those not
otherwise subject to required usage.
Like software users, market participants will always look to
participate in well-designed, regulatory frameworks. Trading
counterparties seek neither the least nor the most regulated
marketplaces, but market places that have the right balance of
sensible, objective and reliable regulation--in other words: good
software. Our goal is to oversee a U.S. swaps regulatory framework that
has the optimal mix of well-considered rules and regulations that best
foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially sound
derivatives markets to support American economic growth, job creation,
and prosperity.
Swaps Data Reporting
At the heart of the 2008 financial crisis was the inability of
regulators to assess and quantify the counterparty credit risk of large
banks and swap dealers.\15\ The legislative solution was to establish
swap data repositories (SDRs) under the Dodd-Frank Act.\16\ Although
much hard work and effort has gone into establishing SDRs and supplying
them with swaps data, 9 years after the financial crisis the SDRs still
cannot provide regulators with a complete and accurate picture of bank
counterparty credit risk in global markets.\17\ In part, that is
because international regulators have not yet harmonized global
reporting protocols and data fields across international
jurisdictions.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Fin. Crisis Inquiry Comm'n, Final Report of the National
Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the
United States 298-300, 329, 363, 386 (2011), available at http://
fcicstatic. law.stanford.edu/cdn_media/fcic-reports/
fcic_final_report_full.pdf.
\16\ 7 U.S.C.  24a (2012), Commodity Exchange Act  21.
\17\ Silla Brush, Dodd-Frank Swap Data Fails to Catch JPMorgan
Whale, O'Malia Says, Bloomberg, Mar. 19, 2013, available at http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-03-19/dodd-frank-swap-data-fails-
to-catch-jpmorgan-whale-o-malia-says.
\18\ Neil Roland, IOSCO's Wright Faults Authorities' Coordination
on Derivatives Trade Reporting, MLex FS Core, Nov. 18, 2015, available
at http://www.mlexfscore.com/
?r=EAAAABgJFMl6s4sxd6kwCIh1BeL7zWr2TdKX9gEasKt9evFi.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of all the many mandates to emerge from the financial crisis,
visibility into counterparty credit risk of major financial
institutions was perhaps the most pressing. The failure to accomplish
it is certainly the most disappointing.
The CFTC is committed to success in the global reform efforts
towards swaps data reporting. That is why we are actively engaged in
global swaps data harmonization efforts while simultaneously looking to
improve upon the current processes for swaps reporting that were put in
place back in 2012 and 2013.
On the international front, the CFTC is co-leading several global
initiatives to harmonize derivatives reporting along with fellow
overseas regulators via Committee on Payments and Infrastructures--
International Organization of Securities Commissioners (CPMI-IOSCO) and
the Financial Stability Board (FSB):

Unique transaction identifiers (or UTIs) to track the
lifecycle of a derivative transaction from creation until final
termination;

Unique product identifiers (or UPIs) to identify the
instrument type and elements of the product referenced in a
derivative; and

Critical data elements (or CDEs) to provide basic
information about the terms of the transaction, such as
notional amount, price, and collateral movements.

CPMI-IOSCO published final technical guidance on UTIs in early 2017
and final guidance on UPIs is expected soon. We expect that guidance on
CDE fields to be published by Q1 of 2018.
An FSB sponsored group, the Group on UPI and UTI Governance,
continues to work on governance issues for these identifiers, such as
implementation. This important international work is ongoing with the
CFTC's full support and involvement.
Meanwhile, here at home, the CFTC issued for comment in July a
swaps data reporting ``Roadmap.'' \19\ The CFTC has received 20 comment
letters on the Roadmap that were overwhelmingly well informed and
supportive. DMO staff is carefully considering them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ U.S. Comm. Fut. Trading Comm'n, Roadmap to Achieve High
Quality Swaps Data (July 10, 2017), available at http://www.cftc.gov/
PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7585-17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A major focus of implementing the Roadmap will be incorporating
harmonized UTI, UPI, and CDE guidance into our reporting regime.
Wherever possible, we want to harmonize CFTC reporting elements with
international CDE guidance. Still, it is possible that the CFTC will
require some additional fields for CFTC specific use cases that are not
addressed at the international level.
The Roadmap has carefully calibrated the release of CFTC rules to
follow the release of international technical guidance on CDE in order
to avoid conflict. Furthermore, the Roadmap attempts to incorporate a
realistic implementation timeline to allow for the appropriate building
and testing by all relevant parties. We are sensitive to the complexity
of changes to rules with multiple interconnected parts like swaps
reporting. We will work with market participants to set realistic
compliance dates.
To be clear, the international CPMI-IOSCO process is aimed at
harmonizing what must be reported on a derivative, not when and how to
report. We need to make sure that the when and how are also covered. In
the end, CFTC when and how rules for swaps reporting may be different
than those adopted by overseas regulators. In some areas, where we
believe we have the better approach, such as single-sided reporting, we
intend to pursue the CFTC's current approach. Yet, in other areas
where, in light of experience, it appears that overseas regulators have
adopted a better way, such as T+1 regulatory reporting, we will
consider making changes.
Swaps data reporting is new for all of us. No regulator has yet
found the optimal approach to success. Yet, we are all determined to
get there. None are more determined than the CFTC. That is why we
published the swaps data Roadmap.
There is an old saying, ``If you don't know where you're going,
you'll never get there.'' The Roadmap shows where the CFTC is going. We
are determined to get there.
CCP/Cross Border
In order for the CFTC to remain an effective regulator, it must
keep pace with the evolution of our markets, or our regulations will
become outdated and ineffective. This is especially so in its oversight
of derivatives clearinghouses. Mandatory clearing of standardized swaps
was a core component of the G20 reform agenda. The world's largest
Central Counterparties (CCPs), which collectively clear over 95 percent
of the global cleared swaps market, are directly registered with CFTC
as Designated Clearing Organizations (DCOs). These DCOs are located in
the United States, as well as in major financial centers in Europe and
Asia. I am committed to ensuring that the regulatory approach to
oversight over these global markets is effective and robust without
fragmenting markets and trading activity.
I recently returned from a 10 day trip in Europe where I met with
key regulatory counterparts and policymakers from the European Union,
France, Germany, and the United Kingdom to discuss how to ensure
effective regulatory cooperation and coordination between the CFTC and
Europe, especially with respect to the supervision of major cross-
border CCPs. During my trip I spoke publicly, as well as contributed a
guest op-ed in the leading French business paper Les Echos, expressing
the view that regulatory and supervisory deference should underpin how
U.S. and EU regulators supervise CCPs.
In the spring of 2016, under the leadership of Chairman Massad, the
CFTC reached a key accord with the European Commission on recognition
of swaps clearinghouses. This agreement was an important signal to the
markets and the international regulatory community that the United
States and Europe could work together successfully on critical cross-
border issues. That agreement has contributed to stronger and more
productive relations between the CFTC and its European and other
overseas regulatory counterparts. The CFTC remains committed to
honoring its obligations under this agreement.
I fully understand that Brexit raises new and challenging issues
for how Europe regulates its financial markets. Nevertheless, if Brexit
is indeed a trigger for a new approach in Europe regarding the
supervision of cross-border CCPs, then it must be an approach developed
with the cooperation and support of the CFTC. If the EU must reconsider
its approach to cross-border supervision of systemically important
CCPs, then we cannot have piecemeal and contradictory rule making.
Instead, we should together strive for a comprehensive and universal
solution that supports strong cross-border markets, recognizes and
builds upon the strengths of our respective supervisory programs, and
preserves as much as possible the basic tenets of the CFTC-EC
equivalence agreement.
Unfinished Business
And, last, but certainly not least, I look forward to working
closely with my fellow Commissioners on the priorities I have outlined
above, as well as resolution of outstanding regulatory issues before
the Commission, such as the de minimis exception and a position limits
rule.
The level of the de minimis threshold is a critically important
issue. Getting it right requires thoughtful analysis of the latest and
most complete data to inform the best path forward in terms of managing
risk to the financial system. Currently, work is actively being done by
the Division of Swap Dealer and Intermediary Oversight (DSIO) under a
new Division Director.
With respect to position limits, I committed in my confirmation
hearing to finalizing a rule and I intend to do so. This is an
enormously important undertaking that will impact America's farmers,
ranchers, and manufacturers and their ability to hedge legitimate
production costs. Any final rule must work in practice and not be
overly burdensome. It will be complicated. This is a rulemaking has
been underway for some time. There are thousands of comment letters on
the topic, and there are opinions on all sides of the issue.
That is why final position limits rulemaking should be done
properly by a full Commission. It will ensure that any final position
limits rule is indeed final and stands the test of time and changes in
future Administrations.
Conclusion
Again, I am grateful for the chance to testify before you today and
to outline issues that I believe are of critical importance to the work
of the CFTC. I commit to working with each one of you, with candor and
promptness, in our common purpose of serving the American people and
the producers upon which we all rely.
Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions.

The Chairman. Well, thank you, Chairman Giancarlo. We
appreciate you being here and your testimony.
I have something official to read real quick. The chair
would remind Members they will be recognized for questioning in
order of seniority for Members who were here at the start of
the hearing. After that, Members will be recognized in order of
arrival. I appreciate Members' understanding.
With that, I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Again, Chris, thanks for being here. Can you talk further
about the broader statement, the cross-border equivalence
deference, the things that are going on, and maybe help some of
us understand a little bit better, the Brexit issue, and what
EU may be trying to do to take advantage of those changes, to
try to impose a regime that was not necessarily contemplated
earlier when you did come to an equivalence kind of
conversation. Would you flush that out for us?
Mr. Giancarlo. I would be happy to. Maybe just a little bit
of background to just sort of set the stage.
Following the financial crisis in 2008, the world's G20
leaders met in Pittsburgh in 2009 and agreed on a number of
fundamental reforms for the global swaps market; moving swaps
off bank balance sheets to the extent possible into central
clearing, having swaps transact on licensed and regulated
platforms, reporting swaps transactions to central
repositories, and then minimum capital and margin requirements.
Personally, I agree with all of these steps and said so at
the time, and continue to believe they are the right steps. The
question is about the implementation. Those G20 accords said
that responsible regulatory authorities would implement these
core reforms through their national regulatory and statutory
processes.
The United States went first, in fact, the CFTC went first,
and by 2013 and 2014 it implemented most of those changes and
put them in place. We were a rule-maker in regard to the
implementation of these, and in many cases, did a very
effective job. Other cases I have been critical of some of the
implementation, but not the underlying law. And other cases
such as clearing, we have been wildly successful, and now we
are actually dealing with the second and third order impact of
those changes.
Well, other jurisdictions haven't been as quick to putting
their rules in place, and in many regards Europe is today
getting ready to put in their big implementation; something
called MiFID II, which comes into effect in January of 2018.
Since that time that our rules were in effect, we have
learned a lot about them, and Europe has come to a point where
they are now determining that our rulesets are either
equivalent to theirs or not equivalent to theirs. And we have a
number of important outstanding equivalence determinations that
we have been working here at the CFTC very diligently with our
European colleagues to get to a final resolution of, and as I
mentioned in my opening remarks, I am hoping we will soon be
there.
But on the subject of clearinghouse supervision, this is a
very important issue, and it may be an issue of some degree of
tension between us and Europe. As I said to you, the United
States is a rule-maker. We are not a rule-taker. And this is a
concern in the wake of the Brexit, that Britain will be taking
a lot of its swaps rules wholesale from Europe, and Europe is
now reformulating some of its rules in terms of clearinghouse
supervision to have a third-country approach where they propose
that they will have direct oversight of third-country
clearinghouses which, in some cases, could export European
substantive law into the way our clearinghouses operate.
Well, again, we are a rule-maker, not a rule-taker, in the
United States. This Congress decides what our law should be and
charges our agency to implement it. It doesn't tell us that we
have to abide by foreign country substantive law. This is an
area where we are working carefully with our European
colleagues. We are making them aware of our concerns. I have
just finished a 10 day visit to Europe where I had both private
visits and some public statements, and even did an op-ed in a
French newspaper to get our point across that we were the first
to adopt these rules, we will continue to be diligent in our
implementation of regulatory reform, but we are a sovereign
nation and we have a sovereign approach to these rule
implementations.
The Chairman. I didn't realize you were fluent in French.
Mr. Giancarlo. With a little help of a good translator.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate that. Again, I appreciate
your leadership at the CFTC. I look forward to working with you
on a variety of issues including reauthorization, funding
levels for your agency, all those important questions moving
forward, that we have a common interest in getting those done
and done as quickly as possible.
So with that, I yield back and turn to the Ranking Member
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Following up on that regard, I remember when I took the
Committee over to Europe, when we were doing all of this stuff
way back when, and we had the people there tell us that they
were shopping for the lowest level of regulation; well,
actually, some of our companies in the U.S. were using London
against New York in terms of saying, ``Well, if you don't give
us what we want, we are going to go over to London.'' Clearly,
they were doing that.
What I am concerned about is that apparently Clarus
Financial Technology has found that under the European rules
that they have set, 80 percent of the swaps would have no pre-
trade transparency, and that 75 percent of the risk traded will
remain dark for a month. What I am concerned about, are they
going to try to set up some kind of regime where they are so
upset with London that they are going to try to start
negotiating against each other to try to weaken these
regulations as part of their war with London. I am sure you are
well aware of all of this stuff, so do you think that your
negotiations are going to be able to overcome this, because my
concern is that we continue to have a system that works and is
transparent so we don't ever get into a situation like we were
in, in 2007, when people didn't know who could make good on the
risk, and the whole thing just about came apart.
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, thank you for that question, Ranking
Member.
As you rightly said, at the heart of the crisis back in
2008 was a lack of visibility, both for regulators and for the
marketplace, into the counterparty credit exposure of one large
bank to another large bank. And that led to an old-fashioned
run on the bank and a full meltdown financial crisis. And
fixing that risk profile of transparency is one of the most
important imperatives to come out of Dodd-Frank and Title VII.
And the shame of it is that here we are 9 years after the
crisis, 8 years after the Pittsburgh Accord, 7 years after
Dodd-Frank, and we still don't yet have the full mechanism in
place to give us that full visibility into counterparty
exposure.
Now, it is not for lack of trying. We have created the swap
data repositories, we are collecting the data, but we are
trying to bring order to a world in which every bank had a
different protocol for how these trades were recorded within
their own back office, let alone reported to regulators. We
have different nation and jurisdictional methodologies,
reporting methodologies.
Now, we at the CFTC are working very closely in
international bodies, at IOSCO and others, to try to get these
transaction identifiers right. And yet we have our own work to
do in putting our own systems in place to do this. This is an
imperative, and it is one that I am committed to following
through at the Commission.
Now, you mentioned the European approach to transparency. I
am concerned about it. There is a lot of discussion on
transparency, but as we understand the MiFID II requirements,
there are also a lot of exceptions to their own transparency
requirements. We are still understanding that.
At heart though, I will say one thing is, I do believe that
for the most part market participants don't search for the
lowest common denominator when it comes to regulation. I think
they search for the best. It is our job as regulators not to
focus on whether we have the least amount of regulation or the
most amount, it has to be to have the best regulation; the
regulation that achieves the core principles and the guidance
that Congress sets for it, but does it in a way that is
sensible and is in tune with the market itself. And that is
what we search for is, what is the optimal way to achieve the
policy goals that Congress sets for us.
Mr. Peterson. When do you think these discussions are going
to end?
Mr. Giancarlo. I think they are going to be going for a
long time. The Pittsburgh Accords, when they called for these
implementations they said what we must do is implement them in
a way that is compatible. And trying to get the compatibility
right is a long and complicated process. We will be at this for
some time.
I wish it were simpler than that, but these are complex
markets, and it is a complicated, regulatory landscape.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lucas, 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Giancarlo, let's pull back just a little closer to
home for a moment for what I hope will be a brief series of
questions.
The Treasury released last week recommendations that CFTC
and the SEC harmonize their treatment of inter-affiliate
margin. And I know that your agency has been willing to
acknowledge that these swaps are not presenting systematic
risks to the wider market, but the banking regulators have yet
to come around to that point of view. Would you agree that
these two approaches should be harmonized, and, briefly, if so,
how do you think the two agencies can go about it?
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you for that question.
As soon as Chairman Clayton at the SEC and I settled into
our chairs, we reached out to one another and agreed that there
are a whole range of issues that deserve a considerable amount
of high-level attention of our agencies to resolve between our
two agencies. And we have established now a Chairman-to-
Chairman ad hoc working group, led by his chief of staff and my
chief of staff, that meet several times a month, starting with
a list of unresolved issues that we have been going through one
at a time. And it led to recently a Chairman-to-Chairman
meeting with our full staffs to go through these issues. And we
will be now meeting every several weeks at the Chairman-to-
Chairman level, in addition to our chiefs of staff meeting,
more routinely, going through an issue. And I hope that by the
end of this year we will have some announcements to make about
having made progress on that.
But your point about compatibility, the one thing I would
say is we need to get to a balance between the banking
regulators' approach to swaps reforms and the market
regulators' approach to swaps reforms. They need to be balanced
out. I think that in some cases bank-driven concerns, concerns
over bank solvency have overridden concerns about market
trading liquidity, and in a healthy approach to swaps reform,
we balance the concerns on both sides.
Mr. Lucas. In the past, Chairman Giancarlo, you have
pointed out the risks that come with the government agencies
gathering highly sensitive trading information, and I agree
with you on that score, particularly pertaining to last year's
Regulation AT proposal from the Commission. These fears seem
particularly appropriate given the SEC's EDGAR (Electronic Data
Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system) hack in the last
month.
So, Mr. Chairman, I guess what I would ask is this, should
farmers and ranchers be concerned about a trove of sensitive
trading information being hacked at the CFTC, and then used to
upset the various commodity markets? Is that a fear we should
have?
Mr. Giancarlo. We all need to have a healthy, mature
concern about cybercrime, cybersecurity in this day and age. I
have told my staff that we should do everything we can to
prevent it, but sometimes we have to think about it as not a
question of if, but a question of when, and how do we minimize
the damage. And to that end, I recently instituted a new
instruction at the agency. We are in the process right now of
doing three things. One is cataloging every use we have of PII,
personally identifiable information, used by the agency.
Second, once we have identified all of it, we will then
determine where we can either eliminate or reduce our
collection of PII. And then third, for that PII that we
determine we do need to continue to collect, what will be our
best practices in how we protect it, how we limit its
utilization, how we encrypt the information, and what is the
duration by which we will keep it before we will destroy it.
So we are taking three steps to identify how we use
personal information, and hopefully, that will reduce the
likelihood that if and when we are hacked, that information
will get out into the wrong hands.
Mr. Lucas. In February of last year, the Commission
negotiated a common approach for recognizing transatlantic
derivative clearinghouses as equivalent with the EU. For a
moment, since I serve on a number of committees that look at a
number of things from a number of different perspectives, let's
say Congress repealed the Orderly Liquidation Authority for
systematically important clearinghouses, how would that affect
the equivalency determinations enjoyed by U.S. clearinghouses
now?
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you. A very important question. The
situation prior to Orderly Liquidation Authority, in the event
a CCP; a central counterparty clearinghouse, needed to be
resolved, is Title VII in bankruptcy, that is full wind-down
under the oversight of a trustee in bankruptcy. I mentioned
that some of the reforms of Dodd-Frank have been wildly
successful. One is the clearing mandate which has now caused
the supersizing of a number of swaps clearinghouses. Putting a
swaps clearinghouse of enormous proportion into Title VII
bankruptcy is not a good outcome. If Title II is repealed, we
are back to the situation prior, which is not optimal.
What we need to do is take a look at Title II, which was
designed for banks, and think about how it should be retailored
for use by these new supersized clearinghouses which, in the
event of a crisis, actually need to be run in a very orderly
fashion to maintain orderly markets, which could be a lengthy
duration of time, not wound down in an immediate fashion for
the benefit of either creditors or depositors, which they don't
have.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
David Scott, 5 minutes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Giancarlo, I strongly believe that we certainly,
on the issue of cross-border, that we have to continue to press
for U.S. interests, but ultimately make principles-based
agreements with foreign regulators so that we can continue to
promote cross-border businesses.
Now, our American market participants and other exchanges
like ICE, in my district in Atlanta, and clearinghouses, they
need to continue to have access to the European market in a
fair and reasonable way, not economic silos. Do you agree with
that?
Mr. Giancarlo. I couldn't agree more. I think you stated
the balance exactly right in your remarks. We need to work with
our overseas counterparts to pursue the core principles of the
swaps reforms, but do it in a way that advances American
interests. And finding that balance is the critically important
task for us at the agency.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes. Now, one thing that
disturbs me about this Brexit situation, in relationship to
that, are you aware that a fight has erupted between the United
Kingdom and EU, of course, since this Brexit regarding the
location of important derivatives clearinghouses such as LCH.
And the EU has even threatened to impose, or either enhance
supervision on these so-called relocation requirements? Are you
aware of that?
Mr. Giancarlo. I am very aware of it. I am following it
very closely, Congressman.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. And what is your concern with
that?
Mr. Giancarlo. If I can be a little colorful on this, I am
concerned sometimes, I feel as if the United States is being
treated as the children of a divorcing couple.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Absolutely. I couldn't have
said that any better than that. And so you can see my position,
and you are familiar with the Intercontinental Exchange and the
great work that they are doing.
Now, let me go to one other point on this de minimis
question. I am concerned that it could have devastating
consequences if we lower it to $3 billion. First of all, it
would limit our banks' ability to provide the risk management
solutions for our customers. And then second, it would raise
the cost of providing the hedges that are so important for risk
management.
And so my question to you is, considering how long this has
been going on and how soon action is needed, and you touched
upon it in your remarks, but will you pledge today to not lower
that level from $8 billion?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, let me say this. As in most of these
things, there is a careful balancing that needs to be done
here. The balancing is, one of the core reforms is that swap
dealers would be subject to registration.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes.
Mr. Giancarlo. And this issue then becomes what is the de
minimis of that; where is the cutoff. We want to get the cutoff
right, whether it is at $8 billion, $3 billion, or any other
billion, where we keep market participants making markets and
serving especially the smaller market participants, and at the
same time we honor our obligation to register them.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Mr. Giancarlo. What I will pledge to you to do is to get
the latest and the very best data, to put it in front of my
Commissioners and ask them what is the right level where we
keep the amount of market-making going on in the markets, so
our smallest market participants have access to it and yet we
honor our obligations to register those who are truly swap
dealers.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Mr. Giancarlo. And my goal is to get to the right outcome
of this.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Very good.
Finally, I serve as the Co-Chairman of the FinTech Caucus,
and I want to get your opinion on what you see the future as
far as regulation. Now, as you probably know, the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency has indicated that they want to now
put a special order charter on these FinTech companies, which
means once that happens, they have to register with the Federal
Government. Once they register then they are going to come
under all these regulations from a variety of different
sources. And in your case, you have a unit that you are dealing
with to look at this; so does the CFP, their unit is called
Galaxy.
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. And so is the Fed. All of these
regulators now are itching and looking to how to regulate, and
the biggest problem that the FinTech companies have is, what do
we do about this. And so I would like for you, my time is up,
so maybe we can look at that, going down the----
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you. If I could respond briefly. Just
at the risk of overgeneralizing, these new innovators come in
two buckets. They are either the quintessential small garage
startup new company, or they are big, incumbent operations like
some of the big Wall Street banks and other big players. My
fear is if we go to a charter basis, the big banks and all will
have no problem meeting all those requirements, and hiring the
lawyers and everything else that you need to do to do it, and
the small firms will simply say we will go somewhere else. We
are having a hard enough time doing accounting and payroll let
alone being able to hire the lawyers and everything necessary
to get one of these charters. And so we will have shifted the
balance of power in favor of the big firms. And as we know in
our own American experience of the last 30 years, sometimes it
is these small innovators that bring some of the most
fundamental change to markets.
We don't want to disadvantage the small players; we want a
balance between the big and the small, because where the best
innovation comes, we don't know, we want all sides of the
equation innovating and bringing those new evolutions to our
markets, hopefully to better our markets. And that is our job,
to make sure they better our markets.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for giving us a little extra time.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Austin Scott.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was
somewhat laughing at my colleague, David Scott from Georgia's
question how good it was, because the one that I had written
down dealt with financial technology, and you have answered
part of it, but now we have a little time, maybe you can
elaborate, Mr. Chairman.
The global contest in this area, are we ahead of other
countries or are we behind other countries with regard to
encouraging the development of this financial technology, and
are there certain countries that we need to catch up with?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. There was a study done by one of the
big accounting firms a year or so ago, and it ranked countries
on the FinTech and what we call RegTech innovation going on in
those jurisdictions, and it looked at the major jurisdictions,
divided the U.S. into California and New York, and looked at
London, Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia, and Japan. And on the
case of financing access to technology talent of the
university, the United States ranked number one. But when it
came to the regulatory environment, the United States ranked
dead last.
Our competing regulatory jurisdictions, especially in
London, but also in Hong Kong and Singapore, are way ahead of
us. They have developed what, in the UK, they call Project
Innovate where they work directly with FinTech companies. I
like to say what they have done is they have taken their old
limestone building and smashed a new doorway that says
innovators come in here. And innovators can go in and say,
``Look, here is what we are trying to do,'' and there will be
somebody there that says, ``Well, our rules don't let you do
that, but we will put you into a special innovation center
where we will allow you to innovate, you will work with some
young technologists on the staff of the Bank of England or the
Monetary Authority of Singapore, you will keep them apprised of
what you are doing, you will do your innovations, and then we
will see whether we need to amend our rules to allow you to do
that.''
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes.
Mr. Giancarlo. That is what we are trying to do at the
CFTC, but we are sort of unprecedented, this hasn't been the
U.S. Government's response to innovation. The answer to your
question is we are definitely behind our fellow international
regulators in this area, and need to catch up, I believe.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. So just a quick follow-up to
that. You are talking about trying to make changes by rule, and
my question as a follow-up would be, do you have the regulatory
authority now that you need, or do you need additional
authority through legislation to help you accomplish this?
Mr. Giancarlo. We are going to need at some point
additional authority through legislation.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Mr. Giancarlo. What we are trying to do in the interim
though is really understand and fine tune what that is.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Mr. Giancarlo. We have a rulebook and a set of regulations
at CFTC that was written for the 20th century analog markets;
those markets that we are all familiar with, we see in movies
of trading pits, and hooting and hollering and shouting. Those
trading pits are all closed, and yet our rulebook still
recognizes floor traders and floor brokers, categories that
don't exist anymore. Our rulebook was written for a trading
world that existed last century. The markets have moved on and
yet we have to catch our rulebook up to the way the markets are
today, and that is what we are trying to do with our LabCFTC.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. As you have recommendations
for the language in legislation, if you would let us know. I
imagine my colleague, Congressman Scott, and I can probably
find agreement on that. I look forward to working with you on
it.
One last question: The issue of self-reporting, there is a
lot of criticism of self-reporting in the media. Seems to be
criticism of virtually everything in the media these days. Can
you explain the rationale behind encouraging self-reporting?
Mr. Giancarlo. I would be delighted to. And I can explain
this on a number of levels. The criticism that has been the
media has run the gamut, and The New York Post reported that we
are using south Bronx tactics to go after white-collar
defendants. On the other side of the spectrum we have been
accused of waving the white flag to Wall Street. The criticism
has been all over the place.
Thank you for the question, because I really want to
address this head-on. And let me start with how the CFTC
prosecutes wrongdoing. We have three traditional ways of
finding out about wrongdoing, all three of which we have
enhanced in the last 6 months, not shutdown, not diminished;
not waved the white flag. Our three traditional ways; one is
our own internal surveillance. We have enhanced that by
actually moving it into our Division of Enforcement so it is
more efficient in terms of uncovering wrongdoing. Second, we
rely on tips and referrals from other law enforcement agencies.
We have enhanced those relationships to make those tips
received by us more efficiently.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes.
Mr. Giancarlo. And finally, we have a whistleblower
program. We have enhanced that by adding new protections for
whistleblowers to protect them to bring items to our attention.
All three of those methodologies remain in place.
Our new cooperation agreement is an additional fourth
channel that we have added to that. And what this is, is a way
of us having companies themselves, if they become aware of
wrongdoing, report that wrongdoing to us so that we can then
act on it.
Now, my light is flashing so I am running out of time. I
would like to talk about this more, if there is a further
follow-up question, I want to talk more about this specific
program.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Chairman, thank you for
your service and your family's service to the country, and
thank you for visiting Georgia.
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time had expired.
Mr. Maloney, 5 minutes.
Mr. Maloney. Would you like to finish your previous answer,
Mr. Chairman? I would be curious to let you do that.
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you very much.
I want to give you just an example of where this
cooperation program can be really useful. Just picture a CEO
walks into his office at 9 o'clock on a Wednesday morning, and
standing outside is his Chief Compliance Officer, and he says,
``Sir, we have a problem. We just discovered that Joe Blogs on
one of our trading desks has been engaged in completely illegal
conduct. It has just come to our attention. I am bringing it to
your attention.'' The CEO rightfully says take him off the
desk, send him home, let's investigate and find out what is
going on. A month later he gets the report. The report is this
guy was a lone actor, as soon as they discovered it they took
him off the desk. It seems like he was acting alone, but they
know it was wrong. The CEO at that point is faced with a
choice. One choice is to fire that employee, say nothing
further, and be done with it. The other choice is to report it
to the regulator.
Up until now, if they report it to the regulator, they are
subject to the full panoply of punishment for doing that.
Unfortunately, the choice that may be more likely to be made is
that employee is fired and nothing more said about it. And the
problem with that is that means that employee then goes across
the street, gets a new job with another firm, and starts the
same nonsense all over again, and we as the regulator don't get
to take that person out of the marketplace.
Mr. Maloney. Okay, if I may.
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes.
Mr. Maloney. I am reclaiming my time, as my colleague
Maxine Waters would say.
Mr. Giancarlo. Of course. I am sorry.
Mr. Maloney. I am interested in that, but I am also
interested in systemic risk. What are the sources of systemic
risk right now that we are not paying enough attention to?
Mr. Giancarlo. That is a great question, and it is a
complicated one for----
Mr. Maloney. Do you want to start with clearinghouses?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, in some ways it is the victim of our
own success. The swaps clearing mandate has been wildly
successful, but I am not sure we fully thought of the
dimension. Today, the London clearinghouse has eclipsed the
Chicago Mercantile Exchanges, the world's largest clearinghouse
measured by initial margin.
Mr. Maloney. Right. What happens if it fails?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, failure in the swaps world is
complicated because clearinghouses traditionally don't fail.
Mr. Maloney. I know.
Mr. Giancarlo. What they do is though----
Mr. Maloney. But they are different now, right?
Mr. Giancarlo. They can suffer short-term liquidity
crunches where they have to pay initial margin, or a variation
margin, in cash, and they have to convert collateral, often
very good collateral, like T-bills and cash-like debt, but they
have to convert it quickly into cash.
For our domestic clearinghouses, they have a facility under
Title VIII of Dodd-Frank with the Federal Reserve that can give
them short-term liquidity lending.
For overseas clearinghouses, they have the Bank of England
but they don't have direct access to our Federal Reserve. And
yet something like 50 percent or so of what is in the London
Clearinghouse is U.S. bank, and something like 44 percent is
U.S.-dollar denominated. That is a concern.
Another concern I have is a consolidation that is taking
place in the----
Mr. Maloney. Yes, I am sorry, just quickly, what is the
concern?
Mr. Giancarlo. I don't want to use your time. Thank you.
Mr. Maloney. The concern is that the Bank of London doesn't
care the way it should about bailing out U.S. companies.
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, the Bank of England is a very good
regulator, and I have confidence in their ability to act
quickly, but they would be having to act quickly with dollar
facilities for those dollar deposits, and they may then need to
turn around and use what is called a swap facility with our
Federal Reserve to back that up. Now, I have spent time with
the Bank of England, I believe the processes are in place for
this, but in fast-moving crisis this could be a point of a fair
amount of concern and tension.
Mr. Maloney. I have less than a minute. Besides the
clearinghouses, what are the other systemic risk concerns?
Mr. Giancarlo. There is always a concern with swaps when
you combine the complexity and the leverage that is involved in
them, and that is one of the reasons why a lot of the reforms
are the right reforms, when we register swap dealers, we
inspect them, we want to make sure they understand how these
products are used. We need to understand what the actors are in
this, and why I have put forward a proposal to actually license
intermediaries in this market, brokers in this market. It is
not something that is in Dodd-Frank, and I feel it should be,
and it is something we feel at the agency we can do, so that we
make sure that the market participants themselves are
knowledgeable in these products.
Mr. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I knew you when you
were a successful entrepreneur in New York City, in a space
that was similar to the one I was in, and you had a better
business model. I am very happy to see you in this chair today.
Mr. Giancarlo. It is nice to see you again. Thank you,
Congressman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Crawford, 5 minutes.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for being here today. Back in June,
this Committee heard testimony supporting granting
clearinghouses access to account services and limited discount
window access at the Fed. Do you think extending such services
to all derivative clearinghouses would help avoid a taxpayer
bailout and reduce systemic risk, and if so, why?
Mr. Giancarlo. I want to distinguish too big to fail, TARP-
like bailouts of clearinghouses, which would be extraordinarily
unforeseeable, with the two facilities that are available in
Title VIII, which is depository facilities. Actually, to Mr.
Maloney's question about systemic risk, one area of systemic
risk is these clearinghouses are collecting all this margin and
they are putting it with the same three or four custodial
banks. Being able to put that money on deposit into the Federal
Reserve system is a very valuable element of Title VIII, and
that is a value. And that is not a too big to fail, that is
simply putting up cash assets into a Fed reserve account. And
the one is short-term liquidity provision in the event of a
short-term liquidity crunch, where these clearinghouses will be
able to put up good assets again in terms of short-term cash
liquidity on either a day or intraday, or several-day basis.
Those are healthy facilities that could actually forestall a
crisis.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you.
I want to switch gears a little bit, Mr. Chairman. This is
the Agriculture Committee, and I want to talk ag commodity
trading as it applies to an everyday farmer who is making
decisions about risk management, and how they deal with that
day-to-day. I am a former Series 3 license holder. I don't
pretend to know much about the commodity markets other than, as
you described, a broad range of commodities under your purview.
But I want to focus on the ag side just a little bit.
I have a theory, and you can either debunk this or validate
it, whatever, but I have a theory that if we have more actuals
in the market, and I am talking about commodities
agriculturally, if we have more actuals in the market we reduce
volatility. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Giancarlo. There are a lot of new and emerging
econometric views of markets. There is something called the
adaptive markets theory that has come out of a professor named
Andrew Lo at MIT that talks about markets like ecosystems.
Mr. Crawford. Yes.
Mr. Giancarlo. And, in the natural world the healthiest
markets are the markets that have the greatest amount of
biodiversity.
Mr. Crawford. Yes.
Mr. Giancarlo. And the market environments that are the
least durable and the more prone to market shocks are the ones
that have limited biodiversity. We see a similar thing in our
markets; those markets that have the greatest multiplicity of
market participants of all stripes; naturals, long-term
hedgers, short-term hedgers, speculators, are the ones that are
the most durable. And the ones where you have a small amount of
market participants or of a similar trading style are the ones
that are least durable. Our goal, as market overseers, ought to
encourage the greatest diversity of market style, market
strategy into marketplaces. And that is what we seek to do is
to increase the biodiversity, if you will, of our markets.
Mr. Crawford. Sure. Let me throw this out. My fear is that,
as we have discussed this, and it has been an interesting
conversation we have had thus far, but I am thinking the folks
that are watching this on C-SPAN, the literally tens of people
that are watching this right now----
Mr. Giancarlo. With their eyes glazing over, at least when
I am speaking.
Mr. Crawford.--have kind of zoned out, and that is sort of
the sense that I get from farmers is that they have been
relegated to purely price takers, and that spec traders on
either side are now responsible for price discovery. And there
used to be a true price discovery in there for them, and that
is when we saw probably more of a willingness for agricultural
producers to become hedgers, because they are already in the
market, they are already long actuals, so they need to hedge,
they need to be short. But trying to sell that to a farmer with
all that we are talking about right now in the broad sense, it
is putting a lot of fear out there. And so my point is this, we
are relying almost exclusively on spec trading for price
discovery. Your thoughts on that?
Mr. Giancarlo. I worry about that too. And one of the
things that we aim to do in our budget is really double the
size of our econometrics unit. The CFTC used to be an agency
driven by economics, and that has really winnowed down over the
last decade, and because we need to understand the impact of
these new market participants in the market. There is no magic
wand, but it has to start with better intelligence about how
our markets are changing as we go into this digital
environment.
And I am very concerned, but I don't want to take action
based upon fear and worry, I want to take it based upon sound,
economic understanding as to what are the impacts of some of
these new, nontraditional players in our ag markets.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Evans, 5 minutes.
Mr. Evans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to follow up on something that
my colleague was raising in terms of can you think of laws and
regulations that have changed with Dodd-Frank that still needs
more refinement. You look like you had started to talk about
that. You mentioned specifically some things that were not in
Dodd-Frank. Can you go back to that aspect of it?
Mr. Giancarlo. Sure. If we take the core reforms in Title
VII that the CFTC was charged to implement, starting with
probably the one that was most fundamental, and that was the
clearing mandate the CFTC's implementation, as I said, was
wildly successful. And now we have the second and third order
ramifications of that, and that is the supersizing of some of
our clearinghouses, including one in particular that is not
even on American shores. And we have to face up to that
challenge in an environment where even the European regulatory
response is changing because of Brexit. That is a very
complicated one, and will play out over the next year or so.
The second mandate that we implemented was swaps data
reporting, and as I mentioned earlier, a vitally important
reform, one that I fully support for different reasons. We
haven't achieved its ultimate objective. It was an enormous
undertaking.
Mr. Evans. Did you say we have or have not?
Mr. Giancarlo. Have not.
Mr. Evans. Okay.
Mr. Giancarlo. I am sorry if I didn't articulate. We have
not fully achieved that. I am committed to doing it, but it is
a big project, and that is because the marketplace itself had
no agreement on what were the right ways of identifying
transactions. They called the same instruments by different
names throughout the marketplace, and different nation states
have different approaches to this as well. It is an enormous
task. We must get it done.
The third implementation was the one that I personally am
most critical of, I believe in the need to regulate and
register swaps intermediaries; what are called swap execution
facilities. But I believe that the CFTC in its first crack at
this got it wrong for two reasons. One is it didn't follow the
instructions of Congress. Congress said that swap execution
facilities should be able to use any means of interstate
commerce to transact, and the CFTC said, ``Well, you can have
any means as you want as long as it is either the two types we
are prescribing.'' And the two types were types that come out
of the futures world, not out of the swaps world, so they used
the wrong model on this. And so I wrote a lengthy white paper 2
years ago laying out an approach that is more consistent with
Congress' instruction there.
Those are the three major rule implementations that we have
done, and moving forward, what I believe in the three
principles that we want to do is optimize their implementation
in a way that is healthy and is appropriate for our markets.
Mr. Evans. You also said something else a few minutes
earlier, you talked about the rulebook, the rulebook being
established at one period of time, and then you talk about the
modernization, where we are in the 21st century. How do you
reconcile that aspect, and what recommendations do you make to
us to try to somewhat reconcile that challenge?
Mr. Giancarlo. I believe it is the case that we have a
ruleset that was pretty much originated--our agency was founded
in 1975, most of our accords were written in the 20th century,
and yet our markets are changing dramatically in front of our
eyes.
A quick experience I had visiting a farmer in Texas a year
ago, he showed me how he was able to cut a field in the middle
of the night in pitch darkness, using GPS satellite guidance
for his combine, vehicle telemetry for his tractor, and a drone
to be able to film the entire scene. He and his son cut the
entire field in the middle of the night. Farming; an activity
that is as old as mankind, has always been a daylight activity,
thanks to digitization, is now a 24 hour a day activity. And
that type of digitization of farming is mirrored in our markets
as well. Our markets are being dramatically changed by these
new exponential digital technologies, and we need to keep up.
Now, there is an old doctor adage; ``First, do no harm.''
We need to be careful how we make changes in our rulebook. They
need to be appropriate, and we need to start with understanding
the impact of these new technologies on our markets, understand
it thoroughly so we can update our rulebook in line with hard
data as to how our markets are being affected by these new
digital technologies.
Mr. Evans. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Thank you.
Mr. Comer, 5 minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is going to revolve around digital
currency jurisdiction.
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes.
Mr. Comer. Bitcoin and distributed ledger technology are
the subject of many interesting regulatory questions today. For
example, the CFTC asserted jurisdiction over digital currency
such as Bitcoin, calling them commodities, while the SEC
asserted jurisdiction over DAO (decentralized autonomous
organization) tokens, calling them securities.
Similar questions arise in connection with the treatment of
distributed ledger technology by other regulators. What can you
do to help clarify the regulatory treatment of these new
technologies?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. Here is a perfect example of how our
rules and SEC rules were written for a time before there were
digital currencies. And what we now need to do is reinterpret
these rules in light of this very fast-paced technological
innovation, which are these cryptocurrencies. And it is a
volatile environment; it is one that is evolving very, very
quickly.
And so what we are doing at the Commission is just calling
it straight down the line. We are approaching this like a good
umpire; we are calling balls and strikes. We read our statute
and the definition of commodities to involve these new
instruments. And you mentioned that we registered a
cryptocurrency exchange, we did that because they met our
requirements. And I had our lawyers go through it carefully and
say, ``Yes, they meet the requirements,'' so we registered it.
We also, however, have just taken on a Bitcoin Ponzi
scheme, because we also believe they are meeting our
requirements but in the wrong way, and they are violating
those.
We are playing this straight down the line. We are
interpreting our rules in light of this new technological
innovation, and we are looking at this very carefully and very
thoughtfully, but we have to reinterpret a rulebook that was
written before those came in existence for the world that we
have today.
Mr. Comer. Okay. Switching gears, the Volcker Rule is
currently administered by five agencies jointly, including the
CFTC. The Treasury Department recently criticized the rule for
its extraordinarily complex and burdensome compliance regime,
which hinders both market-making, functions necessary to ensure
a healthy level of market liquidity, and hedging necessary to
mitigate risk. What role do you think the CFTC should take in
the future implementation of the Volcker Rule, and how do you
scale that to your available resources?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes, the Treasury Secretary has taken the
lead on this and it is in the Treasury report, and the
Administration's view is not to call for the repeal of the
Volcker Rule but to make it suitable for our markets, and
ultimately suitable for broader economic growth and market
health. And I believe that is the right course.
We will be in the boat rowing on fixing the Volcker Rule,
but we won't be the lead oar; that will come out of Treasury,
and we look forward to what recommendation is made.
As far as from a markets point of view, my concern with
Volcker is that it be conducive to healthy market activity.
There are some presumptions built into the current definition
of the Volcker Rule that presumes that activity is
impermissible proprietary trading as opposed to permissible
market-making. And I have some questions with some of the
presumptions. They don't seem to be based upon market reality,
they seem to be based upon maybe a bias against markets. And as
a market regulator, we are very concerned where we believe
there is bias against healthy market activity.
Mr. Comer. Yes. With respect to position limits, the SEFs
are required to set position limits, but have no view into the
overall positions held by people who transact on their
platform. Does it make sense to eliminate this requirement?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, it is a very complicated area. The
nature of the swaps market is to have multiple execution
points, unlike our futures market that has one execution point
for most of the listed products. It is complicated. How do you
have uniform position limits when it is actually implemented at
multiple points, who don't necessarily have a means of
communication, which is why, before I went to the government, I
actually proposed to the CFTC a public-private partnership to
form a council that would agree on position limits and apply it
across the board. And that is something we are still looking
at, at the Commission, and will continue to look at as to
whether that might be a solution to this.
Mr. Comer. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. O'Halleran, 5 minutes.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess my problem
right now is I have so many notes, I can't organize them fast
enough, but I have as many concerns also. Your testimony
basically has said to me that after 9 years, we are not where
we need to be, and that I don't think I have, in my experience
with the CFTC I have never seen a time when you were funded
appropriately to be able to meet your mission statement at all.
And so I don't think you are funded appropriately now either.
You had stated there are more knowns than unknowns. I don't
know about that. There are more unknowns than knowns. That is a
concern, given your current position. [Audio malfunction in
hearing room.] and my math is bad too, as it appears. After all
that diatribe, please catch up with me.
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you, Congressman. Now my notes are all
over the place, and I will try to respond, if I could.
Thank you for the shout-out on our budget. As you know, we
did use bypass authority to seek a 12 percent funding increase
over the budget put forward by the White House. You asked about
what is the strategic vision. I think the strategic vision is
twofold. One is, I am committed to the core reforms of Title
VII, personally. I was committed then, I am committed today. My
goal is----
Mr. O'Halleran. You don't have the resources to get there.
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, we have asked for a 12 percent budget
increase, but within that we can achieve a lot.
Second, even with those reforms, Title VII doesn't address
some of the biggest challenges we have today. Cyber is not
addressed in Dodd-Frank. The digitization of our markets, not
addressed in Dodd-Frank. The fragmentation of our markets, not
addressed. The consolidation of market participants, including
the consolidations of the futures commission merchants
industry, not addressed. We are committed to completing that,
but we also have to look forward to these other challenges that
are not addressed, and that requires market intelligence. We
really need to understand these changes.
I do want to address the issue on----
Mr. O'Halleran. I hear a tapping behind me.
Mr. Giancarlo. If I could just on The Wall Street Journal
piece, that compared the first 6 months of this year. As we
explained to The Wall Street Journal, all of those cases were
started under my predecessor, so if they are disappointed in
what has been done in the first 6 months, they are really
addressing not my agenda, but the previous agenda.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Bost, 5 minutes.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Giancarlo, the ongoing conflict between the UK and
EU over Brexit has introduced significant risk to swap
clearing. The EU may require euro-denominated swaps to be
cleared in the EU. Alternatively, the EU may impose strict
supervision requirements on clearinghouses outside of the
borders.
Now, because of the luxury of this place, I am bouncing
from one committee to another, so you may have answered some of
these questions already, but I have four specific questions and
I would like to have them addressed today, if we can. How might
this affect the U.S. clearinghouses, how might it affect U.S.
swap markets, why would we allow the EU to disrupt the
equivalency agreements, and what can we do to make sure
investments are adequately protected? Those are the four
questions I have.
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you very much. The last one is
investments are adequately protected?
Mr. Bost. Yes.
Mr. Giancarlo. It will affect our U.S. clearinghouses. As I
read the European proposal, they would export European
substantive law, a mirror on the operation of our U.S.
clearinghouses. They also would have a role for the European
Central Bank in overseeing our clearinghouses. This is
something that is unprecedented. Our Federal Reserve has no
role in clearinghouses offshore. Yes, it would affect our U.S.
clearinghouses.
It would also affect U.S. markets. We think it would lead
to a greater fragmentation of markets. And as I used that
analogy of markets like ecosystems, when you fragment
ecosystems you weaken and create potential harm to ecosystems.
And we think fragmenting markets is an existing problem which
will be exacerbated by this proposal.
On the third point about the existing equivalence
agreement, where I come from a deal is a deal. We reached a
deal. And I give credit to my predecessor, Chairman Massad, he
spent 3 years working on that deal. Concessions were made to
reach that deal with the Europeans. A deal is a deal.
And then on investments in the market, whether the
investment is shareholders in our clearinghouses, whether it is
investment shareholders in other elements of our financial
institution, a wholesale change like this will have impact on
investment and the investment returns for market participants.
All four of your concerns are concerns that we share and we
will be addressing in the months to come.
Mr. Bost. What is the answer that we can do from this
Committee from a legislative standpoint to give an opportunity
to protect our investors?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, the signals to the Europeans that the
United States is a rule-maker, not a rule-taker are a start. We
were the first rule-maker when it came to the implementation of
the Pittsburgh Accord swaps reforms, and in many ways we did a
mighty fine job of it. And while we respect the Europeans'
process of coming to their rulesets and rule-making, again, we
are a sovereign nation, this Congress makes the laws, this
agency implements the laws, and we have been doing this for a
long time, and for the most part we are doing it quite
successfully. Not in every case. We can always improve and we
can always do better, but we certainly are recognized as the
world's leader in derivatives regulation, and this Committee
has a very important role to play. We are a rule-maker, not a
rule-taker.
Mr. Bost. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Panetta, 5 minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Giancarlo, welcome, and thank you for this opportunity
for me to ask you questions. I appreciate this chance.
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you.
Mr. Panetta. And thank you for your preparation as well as
your testimony.
I have one question, but I have a little bit of a windup
before I pitch it to you, if that is all right. It deals with
the CFTC's enforcement of the impartial access provision. Now,
prior to 2008 the swaps market was based on sort of a two-tier
system; it went from the client, to the dealer, to the broker,
and then back up that chain. The issue back then was that the
dealer and the broker had sort of a, I guess, a relationship
where they worked out more of a favorable rate. And the dealer
would benefit, but then would charge the client at a much
higher rate. And, therefore, I guess, Title VII of the Dodd-
Frank, which was, I guess, crafted by this Committee, changed
it from a two-tier system to a one-tier system, and put in a
middleman for these standardized swaps, what they called them,
and they are known as the swap execution facilities; SEFs. Now,
they are supposed to be impartial and anonymous, reduce
discriminatory pricing on these swaps, and require no
customization whatsoever. And, in fact, the CFTC's SEF rule
mandates that an SEF must ensure impartial access to its
markets and market services for eligible participants, and that
eligibility itself must be set at an impartial, transparent,
fair, and nondiscriminatory manner.
Now, one of these eligible participants from my State of
California would be CalPERS, the state agency responsible for
managing retirement accounts for public employees. And by
ensuring impartial access to CalPERS into this market, they and
the 1.6 million Californians who depend on CalPERS, including
myself on a past employment that I had, for their retirement
and health benefits, they stand to gain.
In your written testimony, you state that the goal of the
CFTC is to oversee a U.S. swaps regulatory framework that has
the optimal mix of well-considered rules and regulations that
best foster open, transparent, competitive, and financially
sound derivative markets to support American economic growth,
job creation, and prosperity. However, the SEF marketplace as
it stands would not be fairly described as one where impartial
access is the rule. Rather, it is the exception.
My question, why is the CFTC not ensuring impartial access
to SEFs for standardized swap trading?
Mr. Giancarlo. We will pursue failures of SEFs to impose
impartial access as appropriate. That is a rule that we take
seriously. We will.
More broadly, we believe that Congress took a very organic
approach to market development in Title VII and did not dictate
the form of market structure. The science of platform economics
teaches that there are many different market structures and
marketplaces. There are many markets that have wholesale and
retail market structures, from the automobile market to many
other marketplaces. I don't view Title VII as requiring an all-
to-all marketplace. In fact, the swaps market is not a retail
market; it is restricted to what is called eligible contract
participants. It is a professional marketplace. And many
professional marketplaces have wholesale elements and retail
elements.
However, I entirely agree that whatever the market
structure that evolves organically in the marketplace, the
impartial access requirement is a fundamental requirement in
that marketplace, and we will enforce that requirement as
appropriate as and when we see it.
Mr. Panetta. And do you see that happening any time soon,
or when do you think that is going to happen?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, if we see a violation of it, we will
respond to it.
Mr. Panetta. Okay, great. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Thompson [presiding.] The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the past Chairman of the Agriculture
Committee, Mr. Goodlatte, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Giancarlo, thank you very much for appearing today. I
appreciate it very much.
I would like to follow up on a line of questioning by Mr.
Lucas earlier with regard to the recent Treasury report
released just last week, where they observed that the
regulatory distinction between swaps and security-based swaps
did not reflect previous market practice, and the resulting
split jurisdiction between the SEC and the CFTC has posed
challenges for market participants. Large market participants
have expressed their concern over being subjected to
unnecessary costs and duplicative oversight by both the CFTC
and the SEC, and have observed that it would be much more cost-
effective for market participants and the derivatives market as
a whole to adhere to one set of rule-makings.
As we sit here today, more than 7 years after the Dodd-
Frank Act became law, the CFTC has largely implemented its
swaps rules, whereas the SEC has yet to do so. Why would not
right now be the right time to reconsider how we have divided
swaps jurisdiction between the two agencies? Since you have
done your homework on your agency.
Mr. Giancarlo. Any time is right to reconsider whether a
particular part of the statute may have been ill-advised or
cause over-complexity. An example is in the credit default
swaps marketplace where a trading desk that may engage in
credit default swaps will have both on the desk those trading
single-name credit default swaps and those trading credit
indices, and yet if they are trading one product, they are
subject to SEC regulation, that is single-name credit default
swaps, if they are trading credit indices they will be subject
to CFTC regulation. And since sometimes these indices have
different components in them, if it is ten or less it is SEC
regulation, if it is ten or more it is CFTC regulation, and the
components can change. You can have a trading desk that the
division between who their regulator is can shift, and yet in
real time they are trading the marketplace.
Yes, some of these definitions are overly complex,
especially more complex by the fact that we have our rules set
in place and the SEC is still doing it.
I do believe there are other products, however, in the
securities-based category that probably are suitable for the
SEC, such as equity-based derivatives. If Congress were to take
up the challenge of reconsidering this, both I and Chairman
Clayton would be pleased to participate in this in an informed
fashion to get the optimal mix of what should be SEC
jurisdiction, what should be CFTC jurisdiction, and perhaps we
don't have that optimal mix today.
Mr. Goodlatte. Let me ask another question related to Mr.
Lucas' line of questioning. You talked about the financial
stability of some of the commodity exchanges, and what is the
best way to deal with a collapse of one of those exchanges,
which we certainly hope doesn't happen but it can happen. Have
you had the opportunity to look at the legislation passed by
the House, which originated in the Judiciary Committee, which I
chair, dealing with a new way to handle large financial
institutions in bankruptcy? It primarily focused on banks that
were considered to be too big to fail. But I would like to know
whether you have looked at that, whether you know anything
about whether that could work for these types of institutions,
or whether something else could be done, or whether that
legislation could be tweaked to make it work better, to be
prepared in the event that there is a need to liquidate an
exchange.
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you for that.
I am aware of the existence of that legislation. I
apologize that I am not conversant with the details. What I did
note in it is that, from my perspective, you appear to be
saying, ``Okay, Title II of Title VII was passed in the wake of
a crisis, it was rushed and it was rather wooden, perhaps, and
crude in its approach. How do we fine-tune this in a more
thoughtful fashion based upon what we have learned, and get to
an outcome that is a better and more refined outcome.'' And
that is where we need to go with some of our systemically
important clearinghouses in the swaps area. Title II is a
rather wooden and really bank-centric approach, and yet we need
something much more tailored to clearinghouses which, in the
event of a resolution, which is highly unlikely, need a more
long-term solution than simply taking them out of the market.
That could cause tremendous market harm. They need to be
operated for the health of the markets perhaps for a long
duration, and that is not really possible under Title II of
Dodd-Frank as I read it today.
A more refined approach would be very welcome.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, I would be interested if you would
take a closer look at that and give us your thoughts, and I
would be happy to make available the attorneys on our
Regulatory Reform Subcommittee that deal with bankruptcy law to
hear your thoughts on anything we might be able to do in that
area to make it work better for other types of financial
institution failures.
Mr. Giancarlo. We will do that, Congressman, and we will be
in touch with your office on that. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman [presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Blunt Rochester, 5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
so much, Mr. Giancarlo, for being here.
My question is a little different than some of the other
ones that you have heard this morning. Congress will once again
face a vote to lift the debt ceiling, and at our full Committee
hearing on clearinghouse resiliency this year we heard a great
deal of testimony regarding the paramount importance of U.S.
treasuries to the clearinghouses and, thus, cleared markets you
oversee. Some of my colleagues in Congress, including
colleagues on our Committee, have publicly stated that their
belief that failing to raise the debt ceiling would actually,
``not be that big a deal.'' Would you please describe the
impact of such a failure on the markets the CFTC oversees?
Mr. Giancarlo. All parties probably would agree, and I
certainly would agree, that widespread concerns that the U.S.
would not make payments on its securities would be harmful to
markets, and certainly would affect their usefulness as
collateral in our clearinghouses to support swaps transactions.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Yes. Given the nature of this, and I
watch CNBC, I love this kind of stuff, but the thought of what
this could mean to our country as you describe it, and also as
I hear about it, and kind of the pain that it would inflict
upon us for what seems to be maybe political, in the end, can
you tell us do you think it is time to end this practice? Do
you agree with the President that it is time to abolish it?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. As the head of a regulatory agency, I
am loath to tell Congress how it should conduct its affairs.
These are important instruments in the marketplace, but how
Congress organizes its funding and how the debate goes I will
leave to those who have stood for public election and represent
their constituents, and will make those decisions as they see
fit.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Well, I appreciate your having
confidence in us, and we have confidence in you as well. I mean
so that is one of the reasons we ask your opinion on something
like this, and particularly since it is something that the
President himself has said it is time to abolish. I was just
curious if you agree with that.
Mr. Giancarlo. I truly do believe that the creditworthiness
of the United States Government is vitally important to both
our domestic and global financial markets, unquestionably.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Okay. And I am going to shift a little
bit because I have the same kind of questions that the two Mr.
Scotts and Mr. O'Halleran had about FinTech, and I was really
interested in what you said about the study and how we compared
to other countries, and where you said that we are number one
is on the financing and access to talent, basically. And where
you said we are falling behind, or are the last, is on the
regulatory environment. And I was just curious if you could
just share with us things that you think we need to do, your
agency needs to do, so that we move ahead and move from the
bottom to the top.
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. One of the things that was cited in the
study that I mentioned as a very optimal outcome is what the
Brits do. There is a coordinated program between the Treasury,
the Bank of England, and the market regulator; the FCA, on this
Project Innovate. They work together so innovators can do
pretty much one-stop shopping when they talk to the regulators
and the government about their innovations.
Now, I also think they are very prudent about the way they
go, but they don't just simply say, ``Oh, new innovation,
great, knock yourselves out, go for it,'' they are very
diligent in how they approach these innovators, they work with
them carefully, they are not going to willy-nilly make rule
changes simply because some new innovation is coming around.
But the innovators know from day one where they stand when they
speak to the British regulators. And the same is true in
Singapore and Hong Kong, in my experience.
That is not the approach here. What we have here is an
alphabet soup of regulators. We have our LabCFTC, others have
no place for innovators to go. And I have heard some stories
about one innovator that went to one regulator and said,
``Well, we want to try something new,'' and the regulator said,
``Well, you can't, our rules don't allow for it.'' And they
said, ``But this is, potentially, really beneficial to the
market,'' and the regulatory officer they met with said simply,
``Maybe our rule will change, but for now that is the way it
is, end of story.'' That is not the reception they would have
in the UK, and that is not the reception we want to give in
this country. We are the home of innovation. I mean we created
the Internet. We should be a place where innovators receive a
warm and intelligent reception, thoughtful reception, a
cautious one; we always need to be cautious, but a thoughtful
one. And that is where we need to get to.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Faso, 5 minutes.
Mr. Faso. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that. And, Chairman
Giancarlo, thank you for being here today, and I have enjoyed
your testimony.
Mr. Bost, unfortunately, asked the question I was thinking
of, but picking up on what Ms. Blunt Rochester just said, I am
wondering if you could blue sky with us for a moment. If we do
not modernize our regulatory pattern and approach where do you
think these markets will be in 10 years, and what risk do we
have domestically if we do not keep up with innovations and
regulatory reforms which may be taking place in other markets
around the world; Singapore and other places?
Mr. Giancarlo. Actually, when I spoke to an official from
the Monetary Authority of Singapore, they told me that they
modeled their approach to innovation on the U.S. And I said,
``On us?'' And they said, ``Yes, but 20 years ago. We modeled
it on the U.S. in the 1980s when a thoughtful Congress and the
White House got together and said the Internet is happening
here, why don't we take a first, do no harm approach to the
Internet and encourage its innovation in the United States.''
And so foreign jurisdictions are taking a page out of our book
and we are not following our own good example in this way. And
so we are seeing big innovation environments develop offshore
in England.
China has devoted a whole province and funded it to develop
this new distributed ledger technology, and its leading
university in that area is receiving government money. China is
so committed to the market innovations, we need to have just
some portion of that same fortitude and determination and we
would do equally well, if not better, because so much of the
science is here, so much of the funding is here. But we need
the same regulatory approach. We need an open regulatory
approach.
Mr. Faso. Let's try to bring this to a practical level. To
the average person who might be watching this out in America,
to our consumers, to our farmers, to our businesses, what are
the practical implications if we don't modernize and reform?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, we fall behind, and so the big context
here is that other countries view markets as vital national
interests. The Chinese are the largest consumers of cotton in
the world, the largest consumers of precious metals in the
world, the largest consumers of rare earth metals, and yet all
of those commodities are priced in western markets. And they
say to themselves, but we consume those products, why are they
not priced in Yuan, why are they priced in dollars. They would
love to own those markets. They would love to have those
markets. We need to have the same approach to our markets as
vital national interests, that other countries see as vital
national interests.
Mr. Faso. But persuade the consumer out there, tell the
American consumer what does this actually mean to them.
Mr. Giancarlo. I will give you a perfect example. I was in
a grain elevator in Montana a few months ago and the grain
elevator operator showed me his chart of his prices, and all of
his prices were coming off of prices traded on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange. When a farmer in Montana goes to the grain
elevator, the price signals, even if he is not hedging in his
markets, the prices are coming from American markets. Well,
let's say those markets, however, move offshore, and the prices
are not coming from Chicago but are coming from Shanghai. That
is why these markets are vitally important, because our
consumers can rely on American markets to set the price for
their production.
Mr. Faso. In other words, there is less volatility in terms
of what the predictability of prices could be, because they are
priced in dollar-denominated, not foreign-denominated.
What does that mean to a consumer in the grocery store
looking at the cost of various staples that they buy each week?
Mr. Giancarlo. When any of us go in the grocery store we
enjoy the luxury of not having to stop for a minute and say,
``Wow, I wonder if it was a good condition on the American
farm, I wonder if it was a good growing season, because I want
to know if there are going to be fresh vegetables when I get to
the vegetable section, or if there will be bread on the
shelves.'' We enjoy that luxury of stable prices, and it is not
just in our groceries but in our 30 year mortgages. We are the
only country in the world that, as a standard homeownership
tool, uses a 30 year fixed rate mortgage, because our interest
rate swaps market enable our banks to hedge the risk of
variable interest rates. Same thing with our heating oil, all
our energy products are priced in dollars. If it were priced in
foreign markets without our strong regulation, and priced in
different currencies, the consistency we enjoy in our western
way of life would be dramatically changed.
Mr. Faso. This is the critical ingredient that we need to
drive home to the American consumer as to the importance of
modernization of these rules, because it provides more
predictability and stability to prices here for our consumers,
our businesses in the United States.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Adams, 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
Ranking Member. And thank you very much for your testimony.
The new self-reporting and compliance approach that you
outlined in your testimony does not provide a formula or
benchmark for the benefit a company may derive from self-
reporting. An earlier draft of the new advisory specified a
reduction of up to 75 percent of the total penalty, but the
final version simply said that the company will see substantial
reduction in their penalty if they self-report.
How do you expect companies to calculate the benefits of
self-reporting without specific numbers, and will CFTC be
issuing further guidance?
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you very much for that, Congresswoman.
Some of this is an iterative process; we will learn as we
go. The program we have in place is not a Republican or a
Democratic program, in fact, in many ways it is based upon
programs originated under the Obama Administration at the
Department of Justice and the SEC. In fact, what we have at our
Commission was built upon some deferred prosecution procedures
that were put in place by my predecessor, Chairman Massad, and
the program we have was put forward jointly by me and
Commissioner Bowen, my Democratic colleague, over the last few
months. What we are doing has a great deal of precedent in the
prior Administration and support by my former fellow Democratic
Commissioner on the Commission.
But what we are trying to do is build into this gradually.
We are going to learn as we go. It is new for our Commission,
even if it isn't new in other parts of the Federal Government
and other law enforcement agencies. We are going to learn as we
go what is the right level. And some of that level of redress
in our penalties will be built upon the degree of cooperation
we get from firms; how fully do they disclose to us the
wrongdoing, how cooperative are they. If they are not fully
cooperative and don't fully disclose, then all bets are off.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Under the new self-reporting and
compliance approach to enforcement that you outlined in your
testimony, will every self-report to the CFTC result in an
enforcement investigation?
Mr. Giancarlo. They have to report to the Enforcement
Division.
Ms. Adams. Okay. The Security and Exchange Commission's
information technology budget last year was significantly
higher than yours, and yet the SEC suffered a significant
cybersecurity breach of its active system. Cybersecurity
breaches like this have become common. Just last week we
learned about more breaches at Equifax and Yahoo. Do you feel
that your agency has sufficient resources to prevent a future
cyber attack, or to respond to one if and when it occurs?
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you. I want to be very careful to say
that there will never be a successful attack. I will tell you
that we currently encounter about 10,000 attacks on our
agency's systems per month. That is a lot of attacks, and I
can't say that someday some one of them won't be successful,
but I can tell you that we will do everything we can. Since I
have been Chairman, I have initiated a number of new cyber
procedures. The first thing is I now meet with our Chief
Cybersecurity Officer monthly, and I review with them the
nature of those attacks, whether we are seeing any changes in
the attacks, whether there are any significant attacks that he
wants to bring to my attention. We also review latest
developments in our own cybersecurity defenses.
Second, a few months ago we initiated the first ever
agency-wide cybersecurity drill where we created a hypothetical
cybersecurity attack on our marketplace, and then we drilled
our senior executives to see how they responded to it.
There is an old adage in the U.S. Army that says, ``You
fight as you drill,'' and so we are going to be drilling a
great deal at the CFTC from here on out.
And then third, as I mentioned to you, we now are doing a
full inventory of our collection of personally identifiable
information to see where we can either eliminate or reduce the
collection of it, and where we do feel we do need to collect
it, what would be the best way of protecting that information.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Thompson, 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And, Chairman
Giancarlo, welcome. I am glad to have you here.
Many of the CFTC regulations are rooted in outmoded
expectations of how business is conducted, such as trading
futures in pits that no longer exist, or through floor traders
that no have no floor. What are you doing to help CFTC's
regulations catch up to modern business practices?
Mr. Giancarlo. This is why we have designed LabCFTC. The
first thing we need to do is really understand the impact of
this digitized financial marketplace, and how is it changing
the dynamics, who are the new players, how are they interacting
in the market, how are they using technology.
LabCFTC is our outreach; it is our way of interacting with
them to understand what they are doing. But then second, how
can we maybe use some of those technologies in what we are
doing to keep us and to allow us to keep pace with the
innovation. Second, we are really looking to get back to solid,
econometric work at the agency. I must say that one of my
biggest disappointments of the agency is the way in which the
Office of Chief Economist was allowed to wither on the vine
over the last few years, and we really want to build that back
up. If we are ever going to understand these changing markets,
we need world-class economists helping us understand it.
I am not someone who wants to make policy changes based
upon the latest anecdote or the latest newspaper article. I
really want to make it on sound science, sound understanding of
how the markets are changing and, therefore, that should drive
what the policy response is.
Before I can just spout and say, ``Well, we are going to do
this about algos, or we are going to do this about automated
trading,'' I really want to understand what the impact is, and
that should then drive what do we need to do as a policy
response.
Mr. Thompson. As a follow-up to that, at least at this
point, what legislative changes do you need to implement your
priorities and to help better manage the agency?
Mr. Giancarlo. There are a number of things that we have
been looking at. There are a couple of things the SEC does that
we would like to emulate, but we have some statutory
prohibitions. The SEC is able to second employees with other
regulators here and abroad. I mentioned that about 75 percent
of the global swaps market is cleared in London, and yet we
have no one in London. If there is a crisis overnight in
London, we are 5 hours behind, by the time we wake up and get
our arms around it, it is already happening. I would like to be
able to second an employee to the Bank of England or to the
Financial Conduct Authority, and I have been invited to do so,
and yet we don't have statutory authority to do that. It is
something we would like to look at.
We also would like to be able to, in our LabCFTC we have
been invited by some of these new innovations to participate as
a participant in something what they call proof of concepts, or
these beta tests of some of these new developments. And yet if
we were to accept that, it would be accepting a contribution to
the government, and would have to go through a procurement
process. We would like to see whether we can have the same
ability to participate in the way that our fellow regulators
abroad do. The Brits participate in these programs all the
time, and we would like to see if we can do the same thing that
the British regulators do.
We mentioned OLA, the orderly liquidation authority, we
would like to work with Congress on, if there will be changes
in that, how do we tailor that for our clearinghouses. There
are some areas in the Treasury part where they are concerned
about financial end-users. We would like to look at that.
Insured depository institutions, some of the language there
could be improved.
There are some areas around the edges that we would like to
work with this Committee and with Congress as we go forward
that we could find some ways of improving things.
Mr. Thompson. Given that we know that qualifying for end-
user exceptions can be burdensome and complicated, and even
Treasury recently released a report recommending legislative
amendments, how would you suggest we simplify the clearing and
margin exemptions for end-users?
Mr. Giancarlo. Broadly, one of the most important elements
of Title VII was to exempt end-users from it. End-users were
not the cause of the financial crisis, and yet so much of the
rule is falling on them. This is an area where we really need
to focus. The Treasury report called on us to focus, and there
are a number of areas where we can make some improvements. I
mentioned the insured depository institution relief, and
certainly financial end-users as well are perhaps areas where
the rules have been overly broad and overly restrictive, goes
against the fundamental decision that was made in Dodd-Frank to
exempt end-users from its reach. It is an area where we really
need to bring our best thinking, and think about what we can do
to get that right.
Mr. Thompson. Okay, thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Soto, 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Chairman Giancarlo,
congratulations on your recent confirmation.
I wanted to get a sense of sort of your philosophy on the
scope of what our future trading universe should be. Can you
give me your philosophy on the scope as opposed to what crop
insurance does or what Wall Street and the stock market in New
York does? Where are the boundaries of what we should be doing
with the futures trading?
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you very much. And nice to see you
again, and my heart goes out to the people of Puerto Rico. I
know it is a concern of yours.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. These markets are very important to not
just end-users and farmers and producers that use the markets
directly to hedge, but also indirectly the price of their
produce is being priced off these markets. Even if they are not
hedging themselves, when they go to the grain elevator, when
they go to the distributor, the price they are being offered is
set as a spread to the price that that product is trading in
the futures market.
It is vitally important for us as a regulator to make sure
those prices are set fairly, that there is no fraud and
manipulation in the markets, to make sure that those prices are
the accurate market price, even for those market participants
who are not directly using them to hedge, but are affected by
the price signals that come out of it. There is a very
important retail-level impact of these markets way far away
from Wall Street, that is our job as regulators to make sure we
police and get right.
Mr. Soto. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Allen, 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for being with us today and trying to help us
understand exactly how this thing works.
Just a quick question on the effect on our community banks
which my district is, particularly with agriculture, dependent
on our community banks. And regarding the de minimis, Congress
intended to help community banks by excluding from the de
minimis calculation swaps between an insured depository
institution and a customer in connection with originating a
loan. The CFTC interpreted that exclusion very narrowly. And as
you examine the de minimis level, will you consider a proper
scope of that exclusion?
Mr. Giancarlo. Absolutely. Thank you for bringing that up
because that is an area that in some ways often gets
overlooked. It was one or two errant words or ambiguous words
in the statute led to three or four pages of extensive
restrictions in our ruleset. And that is an area that is
absolutely ripe for us to take another look at and simplify.
At heart, it is about whether an insured depository
institution can make a loan and then hedge the loan. And as you
know, if they can't adequately hedge the loan, they may be less
reluctant to make the loan or might charge more for it. We want
lending and we want hedging. We want these smaller institutions
to make loans to their local constituents and then actually
properly hedge it, so on their balance sheet it is not an
exposure to them.
Our over-regulation, our overwriting of this rule is
restricting the very activity that we want to promote in a
growing economy. This is something that is very ripe for us to
take another look at, and we will take another look at this.
Mr. Allen. Good. Again, I am glad to hear that.
Well, as you know, with commodity prices, farm income is
down a bit over 55 percent over the last 3 years. Of course, 5
years ago they were at their highest level. And, of course, now
they are down. We have some trade issues that may account for
some of that. But how does this commodity, obviously, we are
hedging in a global marketplace.
Mr. Giancarlo. Right.
Mr. Allen. Okay? But then you have countries, like China,
that will pay their farmers over $1 a pound for cotton, yet our
world market price right now, I don't know, it is probably a
little less than 70 , which is too low. From a trade
standpoint, how do you work with our trade ambassador to deal
with how we actually hedge these things?
Mr. Giancarlo. You are absolutely right. I mean it is a
complicated environment, when we operate a free market for the
setting of prices in our commodities, and our commodities no
longer face a domestic market, but truly a global market, and
they compete against low-cost producers in developing parts of
the globe. And yet some of the very markets that are importing
our products themselves have price protection on their own
commodities. It is a very complicated balance, and it is one
that is a big challenge for our trade representatives as well
as our Agriculture Secretary, who I believe is really up to the
job, but it is a big job and a complicated job.
I had the opportunity to meet with Secretary Perdue in
Montana a few months ago and talk about some of these very
issues. I know he is focused on it, and I pledged to him my
support of anything we can do, and he knows he has it and we
will be there for him.
Mr. Allen. Well, that is good because it is a big concern
out there. Really the fluctuation, I mean even though it has
been over 5 years it is nearly impossible. I mean right now, we
are obviously planting more peanuts than we are cotton because
of the current farm program. But somehow we have to restore
stability in this marketplace for these folks to be able to
plant ahead. Right?
Mr. Giancarlo. Exactly right.
Mr. Allen. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lawson, 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawson. Thank you very much, and welcome to the
Committee. And the more I hear you speak, the more complicated
the issue gets, which I don't come close to understanding. But
what I will say, when financial institutions are doing a
downturn over the financial crisis, holding more contracts than
they have cash on-hand, and then when the mortgage rates go
down and they are not able to meet those obligations, could you
explain what really happens when they hit that point?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, as you know, one of the tremendously
important reforms in Dodd-Frank was to standardize the margin
that must be provided, or must be utilized, in transactions for
swaps that don't go through a clearinghouse in order to avoid
that very problem. If there is a payout required under the
terms of that derivative instrument, that the necessary margin
is there to support that position. That was a concern during
the crisis that was addressed in the law, and now it is up to
us as the regulators to make sure that that the way the margin
is calculated, the way it is applied, the way it is charged is
done in a way that is effective to meet that very concern that
you raise.
Mr. Lawson. Okay. Well, let me ask you this, because I want
you to comment. A couple of months ago the large financial
institutions were here and were saying we need a repeal of
Dodd-Frank. And from what information that you have given,
Dodd-Frank was supposed to provide some relief and regulations.
Why, in your opinion, did the larger banks say that it is time
now to move away from Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, those that may have that opinion, it
is not an opinion I share when it comes to Title VII, and Title
VII is the provision that my agency is directly charged to
implement, and I am personally supportive of it, and
institutionally as an agency we support it. I don't know what
or who expressed that view, but it doesn't reflect the view of
either me or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. We
believe that Title VII, I have said this many a time, I will
say it again, I think Congress got Title VII right, and now it
is up to us as an agency to make sure we get the implementation
right.
Mr. Lawson. Okay. I saw something that I wanted to ask you
about, about the trade, where there are hedges, about the cost,
were they going to stay at a certain level and the price might
go down, but there are fees that are implemented, and there is
a winner and a loser in this process, according to what I just
read. Is this a normal practice all the time in trading
commodities?
Mr. Giancarlo. And are you----
Mr. Lawson. If it makes any sense what I am saying.
Mr. Giancarlo. Are you referring to what is called the
variation margin that parties to a trade must post?
Mr. Lawson. Right.
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, in the futures market this is a
longstanding practice that has survived one financial crisis
after another. It is a very sound practice, it works very well,
and it is where we look when we think about how we should then
have a variation margin program, and if so, in swaps, and how
do we get the balance right. But where we utilize variation
margin in the futures world, it is a very sound practice, and
our clearinghouses do a very good job of calculating it and
applying it.
Mr. Lawson. Okay. Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Kuster, 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much. And thank you for being
with us today, Chairman Giancarlo. Congratulations on your
unanimous confirmation, and I wish you well in your new
position.
I appreciated the opportunity to meet with you back in
April, and I wanted to thank you for our discussion. We talked
about your appropriation, which I support increasing, and your
approach to implementing Dodd-Frank and the enforcement of bad
actors in our derivatives market.
And I want to expand on that enforcement discussion, if I
could. In your testimony you outlined several steps you have
taken to strengthen the CFTC's mission to deterring fraud and
abuse within our derivative markets. And one aspect that I want
to hone in on, can you describe in detail which types of
penalties, and I want to get out the criminal or civil, will be
addressed in the self-reporting mechanism? On the surface it
may appear that the ``significant reduction'' in penalties that
the CFTC's Enforcement Division would award to companies may
let bad actors off the hook. And so that is my concern. And
then as a follow-up, can you describe how this mechanism will
hold bad actors accountable, and prevent them from trading on
the derivatives market in the future if they have been engaged
in wrongdoing? And under the new self-reporting and compliance
approach, will every self-report to the CFTC result in an
enforcement investigation?
Mr. Giancarlo. Thank you for those questions.
We do not have criminal authority at the CFTC. We work with
a criminal law enforcement authority, such as the Department of
Justice, if we are aware of what we believe to be crimes and we
report that. We have civil authority, and we pursue that where
it leads.
In the case of self-reporting, we expect a number of things
for self-reporters, and that is complete, candid, and accurate
reporting, we expect them to take their own actions to
immediately discontinue any bad conduct, and then we expect
full cooperation through the process. We will assess after all
that whether there is appropriate credit for self-reporting,
and we expect full, as I said, full and complete and candid
cooperation with us throughout the process.
Ms. Kuster. At what point would you make the determination
to refer to the Department of Justice if it was criminal in
nature?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes.
Ms. Kuster. How do you make that decision if you are
relying on self-reporting?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. The same basis we do today in all other
matters. If we see criminal activity, we bring in the
Department of Justice early on in the process.
Ms. Kuster. And then the other question, I know that you
have a strategy for a successful whistleblower program that
began under your predecessor, I am wondering if you will
continue that program to ensure that we can weed out bad
actors, and whether you would substantially increase your
standard civil monetary penalty for individuals above the
current rate. It is only about $150,000, that doesn't seem like
much of a deterrent for people that could be committing fraud
and making millions of dollars.
Mr. Giancarlo. Well, thank you for that. I believe in the
whistleblower program. In fact, in my first few weeks as acting
Chairman I, in fact, put forward an enhancement of the
whistleblower protections; protections for whistleblowers, and
that stands as a statement of my commitment to that program. We
do not intend to winnow down that program in any way.
I would be happy to look at those penalties. That isn't
something that enforcement brought to my attention, but I would
be happy to look at those to see if they are suitable for their
purpose or whether they can be increased in any way.
Ms. Kuster. And I guess I would just ask you on an ongoing
basis, because I still do have concerns about this self-
reporting, if we had relied on self-reporting on Wall Street we
would have probably seen some serious bad actors cause serious
harm to consumers across this country. Could we ask you for a
reporting-back mechanism to this Committee on the success of
the self-reporting, and any outcome from the whistleblower
protection program, and just an accounting of your referrals to
the DOJ, in other words, a full picture of how this works,
going forward, so you can reassure us if it is working, or you
can make adjustments.
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. And I want to make something perfectly
clear. We are not relying on the self-reporting program. We are
continuing every form of wrongful behavior detecting activity
that we do today, from tips and referrals to our own
surveillance process, which I have also enhanced since I have
been acting Chairman, through our whistleblower program. All of
those remain in place and will continue to be important
sources. This self-reporting is an enhancement to that.
And the answer is I would be happy to have my staff brief
you on a regular basis of what we are doing on this. Our new
enforcement that will be giving some figures on self-reporting
once we have a period of time under our belt, and our
whistleblower awards are publicly available.
Ms. Kuster. I think it would be helpful for all the Members
of the Committee.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Chris, thank you for being here. The term deference is
currently being used in the vernacular. I have used it, you
have. Can you give us a couple of sentences on what you mean by
the phrase deference?
Mr. Giancarlo. Yes. It is really a fairly simple concept,
and that is that the nation state regulator is the primary
regulator of their domestic clearinghouses, and overseas
regulators should defer to the supervision done by the local
regulator. What we mean by that is we believe that we are the
competent local regulator of our domestic clearinghouses. We
have been doing this for 4 decades now, and we work very well
with our colleagues in Europe and abroad. But if they have
issues and concerns as to how we regulate our clearinghouse, we
are their first port of call. We will work with them, we will
cooperate with them, provide them with the information they
need to understand how we go about our regulatory duties. And
we believe that is the best approach in an increasingly
complicated world for clearinghouse supervision.
The Chairman. Well, thank you very much. Mr. Peterson, any
final comments?
Well, Chris, thanks for being here this morning. You did
make a tactical error. I found it much more helpful when I am
doing a presentation that I introduce my wife right at the
start, because I typically get better treatment that way. I
appreciate Regina being here with us this morning. Should have
said that right in early on, buddy.
Mr. Giancarlo. Absolutely. Complete tactical error, and she
will make me know it when I get home. My wife, Regina
Giancarlo.
The Chairman. I got you. Well, thank you both for being
here this morning, and your testimony. I appreciate the
evolutionary agenda that you are putting forward with the
agency, rather than reactionary. It is a good place to be in
and in line with where the Committee has been with Title VII
since its enactment. We are supportive of the goals of Title
VII and the efforts to reduce systemic risk, but wary of the
way it has been implemented and the impacts that that
implementation has on market cohesion and liquidity.
We can have the best rulesets in the world, but without
cooperation between global regulators we are going to break
global risk markets. And I believe that the best markets serve
people and businesses who need them, and not necessarily the
regulators who oversee them.
In December 2012, we had testimony from Patrick Pearson,
the head of the Financial Market Infrastructure Unit at the
European Commission. Mr. Pearson observed, ``If we don't reach
agreement on a sensible cross-border approach then conflicts,
inconsistencies, and gaps will persist. Trades won't take
place, trades won't be cleared, and they will be reported in a
fragmented way. Companies in our economies will not be able to
hedge risks they will not be able to hedge risks they have to
hedge to do business, commercial or financial.'' I believe that
Mr. Pearson was right then and he is right today.
I said this in my opening statement, and I would like to
say it again because I believe it is important, that Chris has
proposed a thoughtful plan based on deference between competent
regulators. It is the right plan not just for the regulation of
global clearinghouses, but also for all other new requirements
that we are imposing on these swaps markets. If we fail to make
progress on international cooperation in the regulation of
global markets, we just simply won't have global markets.
And with that, I again appreciate Mr. Giancarlo being here
with us this morning. Under the Rules of the Committee, the
record of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days
to receive additional material and supplementary written
responses from the witness to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Questions
Response from Hon. J. Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman, Commodity
Futures Trading Commission
Question Submitted by Hon. Vicky Hartzler, a Representative in Congress
from Missouri
Question. Chairman Giancarlo, I want to thank you for working with
me and my constituents to address issues many coops, rural electric co-
ops, and everyday end-users were having with the Ownership Control and
Reporting rule also known as the OCR rule. I appreciate the September
25th no action relief and expansion of flexibility on the final rule. I
had an amendment to that passed the House earlier this year as part of
the CFTC reauthorization, which altered the level of contracts traded
each day that triggered compliance with the OCR rule. I was very
pleased to see the CFTC make that much needed change.
In the September 25th announcement, the CFTC called for further
review of the underlying regulations to match the regulatory relief. I
believe regulating through no action relief letters is poor governance
although necessary at times for expedient flexibility while an agency
conducts the formal rule making process. Can you please tell me your
plans for making long term changes to the OCR rule and when you expect
this to be finalized?
Answer. Following up on the September 25th No-Action Relief
announcement, CFTC staff began cataloguing and analyzing all of the
open issues with the OCR rule, with a view toward making a
recommendation for a permanent fix to the rule. Staff has been looking
at the three issues that are the subject of your amendment to H.R. 238,
namely: the 50 contract threshold triggering certain OCR reporting;
natural person controller data; and foreign privacy law reporting
restrictions.
CFTC staff has also reached out to representatives of interested
parties to ensure that no issues are missed and that their
understanding of the issues is up to date. CFTC staff will focus on
issues of concern to your co-op, rural electric coop, and everyday end-
user constituents as we consider changes to the OCR rule. I also invite
you and your constituents to provide comments and input during the
rulemaking process.
I agree with your concerns about regulating through No-Action
letters, as well as your acknowledgment that they are sometimes
expedient and provide flexibility in advance of a rulemaking.
I would like to present proposed changes to the OCR rule to my
fellow Commissioners before the end of next year. I can assure you and
your constituents that a permanent fix to the OCR rule is on my list of
priorities during my tenure as Chairman.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Stacey E. Plaskett, a Delegate in Congress
from Virgin Islands
Question 1. Energy costs are of great concern to my constituents.
As you know, in 2010, the Dodd-Frank Act provided the Commission with
specific tools, including position limits, to prevent manipulation in
energy markets. The Commission was given power to impose limits on the
size of positions in physical commodity derivatives, such as those
based on oil futures, and new authority over margin levels--the amount
put down to buy or sell swaps.
Again, this was in 2010, and while the Commission has finalized its
rulemaking on margin requirements for uncleared swaps, it has not yet
done so for position limits.
When do you expect the Commission to finalize its position limits
rule? Will it be strong enough to lessen the kind of trading that gave
rise to concerns about price manipulation in energy markets, and lead
to lower and more stable prices for consumers?
Answer. I am committed to presenting the Commission a workable
position limits rulemaking that balances the public interest in
restricting excessive speculation while allowing America's farmers,
ranchers, energy producers and manufacturers to hedge bona fide risks
of production costs and volatile commodity prices. Such rule should
strike an appropriate balance among key levels and standards, such as
deliverable supply levels and position limits, set by the Commission
and those set by exchanges and self-regulatory bodies that are in the
best interest of America's agricultural producers upon which we all
rely.

Question 2. As you know, the Commission's leasing decisions
continue to be scrutinized. Reports have been issued on underutilized
office space, which of course comes at cost to taxpayers.
Last year, the GAO came out with findings of the Commission
improperly recording lease obligations, and that it did not make cost-
effective decisions regarding lease procurement and internal controls.
I know the Commission deals with very complex situations in its
oversight duties.
Given that there is already an agency--the General Services
Administration (GSA)--with duties to provide real estate services and
lease negotiations so that other agencies can focus on core matters,
are you open to working through GSA to have them negotiate future
leasing?
The CFTC reauthorization bill that passed our chamber earlier this
year included a provision to designate other agencies to manage leasing
for the Commission, and I'd like to know your thoughts on that as well.
Answer. The Commission recognizes the value that the General
Services Administration (GSA) provides as the Federal expert in the
area of Federal leasing. We therefore signed a Memorandum of
Understanding, in November of 2016 that established a relationship with
GSA for collaborating on the development of a comprehensive real estate
portfolio strategy, as well as the execution of CFTC future leasing
needs. As the Agency's current leases expire, the CFTC will utilize the
services of GSA to execute those leases.
Statutory changes are not required for the Commission to allow GSA
to negotiate future leases on behalf of the Agency.

[all]
