- MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------                              --
--------

Thursday, February 16, 2012.

QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE MILITARY

WITNESSES

CMSAF JAMES A. ROY, CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT OF THE AIR FORCE
SERGEANT MAJOR RAYMOND F. CHANDLER III, SERGEANT MAJOR OF THE ARMY
SERGEANT MAJOR MICHEAL P. BARRETT, SERGEANT MAJOR OF THE MARINE CORPS
MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER RICK WEST, MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER OF THE
NAVY

Chairman Opening Statement

Mr. Culberson. Today, we are gathered to address the
quality of life issues faced by our men and women in uniform,
to make sure that they don't have to worry for one moment about
the quality of the care that their families are receiving, that
the quality of the housing, all the things that we take for
granted in our day to day lives we want to make sure that our
men and women in uniform take for granted as well, and don't
have to worry about them, as they are out there on the front
lines of freedom, protecting this great nation.
We are immensely proud of your service. Gentlemen, we are
thrilled to have you here today.
You will find, if you don't already know, that this
subcommittee works arm in arm, irrespective of party or
geography or no matter where we are from, no matter what
political philosophy we may have that got us here. We are all
equally committed to make sure that we support you, that we
help you.
We are praying for you. We are proud to be here to do
whatever we can to support you. And we are looking forward to
your testimony today.
And it is my privilege to welcome and introduce my good
friend from Georgia, Mr. Bishop, for any comments he may have.

Ranking Member Opening Statement

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much for yielding, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, as I said last year, I always look forward to
this hearing. These individuals that are sitting before us
represent that our military has to offer. And they always give
us the best picture of what those on the front lines are
dealing with.
We talk a lot about facilities and equipment and strategy.
But basically, it is the men and the women, like the ones
sitting before us, that really make our military what it is
today.
I will say again that our service members make our military
great. And it is our responsibility to make sure that you are
taken care of. That is why we started the Military Family
Caucus, so that we can better address the issues that you will
be raising today.
In all of your testimonies, you raise many issues that
confront your respective services. And I would like for you to
use this opportunity to tell us what we have gotten right, what
we need to improve in order to ease the burden that is placed
on our service members and their families.
Just a few weeks ago, my staff and I were at Ft. Myer in a
staff training session. And I heard directly from soldiers
regarding some of the issues that they are facing.
And I said, I would like to--I want to make sure that we do
enough to help the service members and families, because the
last thing that service members need to worry about is what is
going on back home.
Finally, I want you to know that as issues arise, we don't
want you to hesitate to let the committee know what help you
may need. And you can do it through the official channels or
you can do it back channel.
But the bottom line is we want to know what it is you need,
so that we can do our dead level best to make sure that you and
your service members have it.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.

QUALITY OF EDUCATION

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Mr. Bishop.
During your testimony today, I would like to ask each one
of you in particular to talk to us about--I am especially
interested in the quality of education that is available for
our men and women in uniform when they are based in different
parts of the country.
Do they have, in your opinion, good opportunities and
choices for education? You know, the public schools are not
always sometimes, unfortunately, the best where the bases are.
And I am particularly interested in making sure that charter
schools are available, that choices are available for their
families, in terms of education for their kids.
And we are just delighted to have each one of you here
today. And I am going to introduce--I guess I could really
introduce each one of you in turn.
We will start with the sergeant major of the Army, Raymond
Chandler. We are delighted to have you here with us today,
sergeant major. You are a returning witness, of course.
And you are already as my extraordinary staff points out,
quite correctly, already sworn in on March 1st of last year.
You have 31 years of service in the Army, sir. And we thank you
so much for that service.
You joined in June of 1981 and have served in all tank
crewman positions and had multiple tours a troop squadron and
regimental master gunner. And we are delighted to have you here
today, sir, and look forward to your testimony.
I guess I will--if you want to go? I guess I will introduce
everybody and then we will just recognize you in turn.
Also with us today is Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
Micheal Barrett.
He is a first time witness. Delighted to have you with us
today, sir. And assumed your current post as the 17th sergeant
major of the Marine Corps on June 9th of 2011, after 31 years
of service, enlisting about the same--it looks you all are
pretty close, but he has got you by about 2 months--in March of
1981 as an infantry instructor, assigned to numerous support
duties that include an armor, nuclear, biological, chemical,
non-commissioned officer and a training chief, and served in
the Gulf War.
Sergeant Major Barrett served with Task Force Papa Bear,
completed two combat deployments in support of Operation Iraqi
Freedom in the al Anbar Province, Iraq, and deployed to
Operation Enduring Freedom in March of 2010, and becoming the
NATO regional command, southwest command sergeant major for
Nimruz and Helmand Province in Afghanistan.
Thank you very much, sir, for your service and for being
here today.
Also, I want to be sure to introduce Master Chief Petty
Officer of the Navy Rick West, who is here again as a returning
witness, and also, of course, came in as the Master Chief Campa
on December 12th of 2008, after 31 years of service, entered
the Navy straight from high school in 1981.
Master Chief West is a submariner, particularly near and
dear to my heart, whose assignments include service on the
staff of the commander, Submarine Force, U.S. Pacific Fleet,
extraordinarily important these days with the Communist Chinese
coming after us aggressively, breaking in and stealing every
piece of intellectual property they can, both public and
private, and chief of the boat aboard the USS Portsmouth.
Most recently served as fleet master chief for the U.S.
Fleet Forces Command. And we are delighted to have you here
today with us, sir. Thank you for your service.
Chief West. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Culberson. And also, I want to introduce the chief
master sergeant of the Air Force, James Roy, who is also a
returning witness, and was appointed on June 30th of 2009. And
your background, master chief, includes leadership roles at the
squadron group, Air Force and combatant command levels and--
squadron group, Air Force and combatant command levels, and
served as senior enlisted leader and adviser to the U.S.
Pacific Command combatant commander and staff.
And we are just delighted to have you here today, sir.
Thank you also for your service to the nation.
Folks who have really particularly served their nation and
they are not recognized enough and thanked enough, I want to be
sure to recognize your spouses. I understand that Mrs. Chandler
and Mrs. Roy are in the room.
Deeply grateful for your patience, your prayers, and the
sacrifices that you and your families made.
And if I could also ask that your wives, perhaps, also
visit with me and some of the other members about education.
What can we do to help make sure that the kids of the families
that your husbands command are given every education
opportunity that they need?
We are delighted to have you here today. We thank you for
taking the time to be here, and above all for your service to
the nation.
And without objection, your written statements will be
entered into the record. And please feel free to summarize your
remarks in about 5 minutes each, or as much time as you feel
like you need, of course.
We will flexible on this committee. I want to make sure
that you are given ample time to tell us what you feel like you
need to do from the heart, in addition to the official
statement about what we need to do to make sure the men and
women under your command are taken care of.
We thank you all for your statements.
And I would like--if I could, Chief Chandler, allow you to
proceed, sir.

Opening Statement of Sergeant Major Chandler

Sergeant Major Chandler. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, distinguished members of this committee,
thank you for your invitation to represent the two million
soldiers and families who make up our Army.
This subcommittee has a tremendous responsibility in
ensuring that we have what we need to accomplish our mission
and take care of our soldiers today and into the foreseeable
future. And I thank you for what you do for our Army on a daily
basis.
I want to stress the amazing work being done every day by
our Army team. I have traveled almost 200,000 miles as the
sergeant major of the Army this past year. In every place I go,
you cannot help but be in awe of the professionalism,
dedication and sacrifice of our soldiers every day.
They are, quite frankly, the best trained, best manned,
best equipped and best led force in our Army's history. Our
families are the strongest and most resilient in the nation.
And our civilian workforce is second to none.
I am proud to be a part of this Army team. I would like to
introduce three people here that have accompanied me today.
First, the command sergeant major of the Army National
Guard, Command Sergeant Major Richard Burch, who serves as the
senior enlisted advisor for Lieutenant General William E.
Ingram Junior.
Also with me is the command sergeant major of the United
States Army Reserve, Command Sergeant Major Michael D. Schultz,
who serves as the senior enlisted adviser to Lieutenant General
Jack Stultz.
With these two distinguished warriors, I am proud to
represent the all volunteer force, your United States Army.
Also with me is my bride, who is the most ardent supporter
of our Army families. And she has traveled with me on many
occasions and is an inspiration to our Army families and to me
on a daily basis.
Over the past 10 years, our Army has been fully committed
to combat operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Secretary McHugh,
General Odierno and I are proud of all of our soldiers and
civilians and what they have accomplished over this last
decade.
We have proven ourselves in every engagement and continue
to display a physical and mental toughness long associated with
the word ``soldier.'' Even though we are in an Army in
transition, our mission has not decisively changed.
We must prevent war by our capacity, readiness and
modernization, shape the environment that which we are in, and
when called to combat, fight and win our nation's wars
decisively.
To ensure we are the decisive land force in the world,
General Odierno has articulated five priorities: provide
trained and ready forces for the current fight; develop the
Army of the future; sustain the all volunteer force; adapt a
leader development to meet our future security challenges; and
to foster a continued commitment to our Army profession.
With the successful completion of our mission in Iraq and
continued transition to Afghan security forces, and the
reduction of the United States presence in Afghanistan, the
time is right to begin reducing our force structure to support
these priorities.
Over the next 6 years, the Army will reduce its active
force and strength from 570,000 to 490,000 soldiers, which
includes a reduction of at least eight brigade combat teams. We
will accomplish these cuts in a controlled and responsible
manner.
Your support in managing this draw down is critical to our
success. And though we are proud of the contributions of our
soldiers and families over the last decade, and look forward to
the challenges ahead, we recognize that there is still much
work to be done.
We must endeavor to meet issues associated with post
traumatic stress, traumatic brain injury, wounded warrior care,
suicide, sexual assault and harassment, and hazing head on, to
ensure our soldiers are not only receiving the care they need,
but also maintaining the good order and discipline we expect of
a United States Army soldier.
I, along with other senior Army leadership, am committed to
this, and will not rest until we make significant and lasting
improvements in these areas.
In closing, I want to thank you for your support you have
shown of the Army over the last decade. The post-9/11 GI Bill,
one of the most generous benefits any soldier has ever
received, increased survivor benefits for the families of our
fallen, and your direct influence on our wounded warriors have
made all the difference for our soldiers and families.
We would not be the Army we are today without your
continued support. I truly appreciate this opportunity to speak
before you and tell you our story.
I welcome your questions. Thank you. And Army strong.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.009

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, sergeant major.
Sergeant Major Barrett, we look forward to your testimony,
sir. Thank you.

Opening Statement of Sergeant Major Barrett

Sergeant Major Barrett. Good morning. Chairman Culberson,
Ranking Member Bishop, members of the subcommittee, right now,
30,000 Marines are forward deployed around the world, defending
our nation's liberty, saving strategic environments, training
and engaging with our partners and our allies, ensuring freedom
of the seas and deterring aggression.
Over the past year, the forward presence and crisis
response of America's Marines, working in concert with our most
important joint partner, the United States Navy, has created
opportunities and provided decision space for our nation's
leaders.
Your Marines were first on the scene to provide
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief in Japan, Cambodia
and Thailand. We conducted the first precision air strikes over
Libya, and successfully executed a tactical recovery of a
downed American aviator.
We conducted non-combatant evacuation operations in
Tunisia, and the reinforcement of our embassies in Egypt, Yemen
and Bahrain.
While accomplishing all of that, your Corps continued to
conduct sustained combat and counter-insurgency missions in
Afghanistan.
General Amos and I have just returned from visiting many of
our nearly 20,000 Marines and sailors currently deployed there.
And I can tell you first hand that their martial spirit and
their moral remain notably high.
Through the fidelity and support of Congress, our Marines
and sailors in the fight and at home have received what is
necessary to ensure success over this past year. To best meet
the demands of the future and the many types of missions
Marines will be expected to perform now and beyond the post-OEF
security environment, the commandant of the Marine Corps
established four priorities.
And to that end, we will provide the best trained and best
equipped units, who will forward deploy into harms way. We will
rebalance our Corps and posture it for the future.
We will better educate and train our Marines to succeed in
distributive operations and increasingly complex environments.
And we will keep faith with our Marines, our sailors and their
families.
I am sincerely thankful for this opportunity to appear
before you today to provide you with a report on the progress
we are making regarding our enduring commitment. We will keep
faith with our Marines and families who have sacrificed so much
for more than a decade of war.
And as we take on the challenges of the future, faced with
shrinking budgets and forces, the Marine Corps continues its
efforts to ensure Marines and their families maintain the
quality of life they so richly deserve.
I have much to report regarding our progress in family
readiness and care, support to those who have lost a loved one,
cared for our wounded, ill and injured, our revised Transition
Assistance Management Program, behavioral health, support to
our deployed Marines, and improvements to our infrastructure
and our facilities.
We embrace these critical areas as one Marine community and
as one team. Mission first; Marines and their families always.
Your Corps is ever mindful that meeting our nation's need
for an expeditionary force and readiness that operates capably
in every time and place is paramount. Our Marines and families
are, indeed, national treasures. They continue to march forward
in their dedicated service to the nation.
We will keep faith with them. We owe them no less.
Thank you for your unwavering support. And I welcome your
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.027

Mr. Culberson. Thank you, sergeant major.
And I welcome the testimony of Master Chief West. Thank
you, sir.

Opening Statement of Master Chief West

Master Chief West. Yes, sir.
Chairman Culberson, Ranking Member Bishop and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, I am privileged to appear before
you today along with my service counterparts and Force Master
Chief Wheeler, who represents our Navy Reserve, to testify on
the quality of life of our enlisted force.
I would like to thank you for your attention to the
important issues affecting our Sailors and their families, and
for your steadfast commitment to keep our Navy strong. Your
efforts to sustain and advance quality of life initiatives for
service members are vital in the development and deployment of
a focused, potent and prepared force.
America's Navy is defined, first, by its agile war fighting
capability. Operating forward and always ready, our fleet is
deterring aggression, protecting sea lines, projecting power
and delivering humanitarian assistance where needed.
Despite physical constraints facing our nation, the world's
oceans and waterways are not getting smaller. We still remain
engaged in every theater of operation.
Sailors are the singular keystone in our Navy's total
force. Their families share our burdens and our sacrifices.
They do this with admirable strength, conviction and
resiliency.
It is imperative that we provide quality of life
commensurate with the immeasurable contributions of our Sailors
and their families. We must also ensure our Sailors are safe,
healthy and well compensated, well trained, well educated, and
that Sailor and family support programs and initiatives must
continue to evolve as the needs of our families change.
Mr. Chairman, committee members, the brave men and women of
the United States Navy continue to perform exceptionally well
under demanding conditions. Congressional support remains
fundamental to their success and the readiness of our force.
As I complete my 32 year career, I would like to take one
last opportunity on behalf of the men and women of the United
States Navy and the families who faithfully stand by them to
thank you, thank you for your unwavering support.
And I look forward to answering your questions.
I would be remiss, today is my 25th anniversary. I sure as
heck would not be in front of you today if it wasn't for my
spouse being there for me. So, sir.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.060

Mr. Culberson. Thank you, sir.
God bless all the spouses. That is so true. None of you
could do what you do without your spouses.
Sergeant Roy. No way, sir.
Mr. Culberson. And I am sure you are married yourselves.
Master Chief West. Well above. Only thing against her, sir,
is she is from Iowa. But----
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, sir. Thank you so much.
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Roy, we are
delighted to have you, sir. Thank you.

Opening Statement of Chief Master Sergeant Roy

CMSAF Roy. Chairman Culberson, Ranking Member Bishop,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
tell you about America's Air Force, our Airmen and their
families.
It is an honor and a distinct privilege to join my fellow
senior enlisted advisors here today to represent the young men
and women who make up our great United States Air Force. Nearly
510,000 uniformed Airmen and more than 181,000 Air Force
civilians make up the total force team.
Three members of the total force team join me today, Chief
Master Sergeant Denise Jelinski-Hall, the senior enlisted
leader for the National Guard Bureau; Chief Master Sergeant
Chris Muncy, the command Chief Master Sergeant of the Air
National Guard; and Chief Master Sergeant Kathleen Buckner, the
Command Chief Master Sergeant for the United States Air Force
Reserve.
We appreciate the unwavering support of the members of this
House of Representatives; has been vital to our success. We
greatly appreciate the efforts, actions and legislation that
have led to the expansion of service members' and veterans' pay
and benefits.
We also appreciate the visits House members have made to
our Airmen in the field and to our wounded warriors at the
health care facilities. To represent all Air Force wounded
warriors, I am joined here today by one of our explosive
ordnance disposal technicians, Technical Sergeant Joseph
Deslauriers, better known as Des.
Des was seriously injured while conducting a post blast
assessment of a vehicle in Afghanistan's Helmand Province with
the Second Marine Expeditionary Force in September of 2011. I
visited Des a few weeks after this incident and found him
already engaged in physical therapy.
He is a warrior and a hero. Des earned the Bronze Star
during a previous combat tour in Iraq. He also earned through
combat action another Bronze Star, as well as a Purple Heart,
for his heroism in Afghanistan.
Airmen like Des are on the front lines of a variety of
areas of operations. They are also providing Airmanship skills
to combatant commanders around the world. And they are
constantly deploying, leaving behind families and friends.

AIRMEN RESILIENCY

We must ensure our Airmen and their families are safe,
healthy and resilient. Building resiliency among our Airmen and
their families is one of our key focus areas.
Our continued high operational tempo in deployed locations
demands attention to reintegration with families. We are also
focused on resilience of our Airmen, such as remotely piloted
aircraft operators, who effect the battle space every single
day from their home stations.
Resilient Airmen are better equipped to withstand, to
recover and/or to grow in the face of stressors and changing
demands.
It is my distinct honor to be with you here today to talk
about America's Air Force and what we do on a daily basis.
I would like to pay attention to the question that you
asked me, Mr. Chairman. You asked me the quality of education
around our bases.

QUALITY OF EDUCATION AT AIR FORCE BASES

As we talked yesterday, it is a concern. A couple items I
will add to the record is the interstate compact and about 40
different states have signed up thus far. We have about 10 more
states that need to do so.
And this is important due to the transitory nature of our
United States military family members and the transferability
of those credits for school aged children.
I would also draw your attention to a couple other things
that we as the United States Air Force have been able to do to
try to offset this a little bit. One involves school liaison
officers at our installation. That person is there to help get
the member, the family, the child into the school, and help
ease that transition.
And then one last thing is this idea of chartered schools.
Currently today there are four public charter schools located
on or near Air Force installations, one out here at Joint Base
Andrews, which is the newest one and also at Little Rock,
Davis-Monthan and Vandenberg Air Force Bases.
These charter schools exist based on the need at these
particular locations. As we talked yesterday, some of this is
facilitated by a privatized housing contractor who wants a good
school system, as that can draw folks into privatized housing
as well.
So I hope I addressed your question, sir.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.080

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Chief Master Sergeant
of the Air Force.
I want to thank you, Des, for your sacrifice and your
service. Your presence here today is just an indication of what
a role model you are to everybody. You haven't slowed down, I
reckon, one bit.
We are very proud of you, sir. And thank you for your
service. It means a great deal to have you here today, sir.
And looking forward to your continued service in whatever
form or capacity that you can do so.
We are particularly interested in--and again, each and
every one of you, if you could address, as Master Sergeant Roy
did, the quality of education that is offered to your families
and your kids back home.
I am really glad Betty McCollum is here. She has got
special experience in that area, as a former teacher, and has a
real passion for education. And I am looking forward to her
questions as well.
So pay particular attention to her. And I know she has got
a good perspective on this as well.
I would like, if I could, to ask each one of you really to
just kind of toss up a slow softball for you to let us--because
we are really looking for testimony from your heart, and what
you hear and see and feel from the men and women that you
represent.
What is on their minds? What are the three most--if we
could, pick out three of the most important quality of life
issues that this subcommittee and the Congress needs to be
aware of, that we should attempt to focus on, in addition,
perhaps, to obviously the official testimony you have given us,
I am confident, includes those.
But stressing from your own hearts and your own experience
and feelings, what are you hearing? What should we on this
committee focus on, top three issues?

QUALITY OF LIFE ISSUES

Sergeant Major Barrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If you don't mind, Ray, I will jump on this one real quick.
Major Chandler. Absolutely.
Sergeant Major Barrett. You know, I sat down with a lot of
people. And they gave me a whole bunch of things that they have
heard around the force. But I have been around the force a lot,
back and forth, up and down the east and west coast, talked
with Marines.
And again, there is a whole bunch of smart that gave me a
list of seven things that said, hey, this is what is on the
Marines' minds. I said, well, thank you for your perspective,
but I have heard from almost every single Marine across the
Corps in the last 10 months.
And do you know what was on their mind is they want to know
who we are going to fight next. They want to know about
advancements in full spectrum battle equipment. We tell them.
They want to know--they wonder when we are going to get that
new 7.62 helmet that stops projectiles.
Hey, tell us more about lighter body armor. Hey, tell us
more----
Mr. Culberson. They sound like Texans.
Sergeant Major Barrett. Marines, like to fight, sir.
They want to know about advancements in full spectrum
battle equipment. And they want to know what they need to do
stay in the Corps. And of course, I obviously give them the
right answer. And I tell them, well, you bring your A game
every single day, and then just how to go about doing that.
And you know, you asked the question specifically what is
on their minds, what are their concerns. The portion of the
question I didn't hear, sir, is what do they love right now.
I can tell you, because of the fidelity of Congress and
what you have provided us, they love their new Bachelor
Enlisted Quarters (BEQs). As a matter of fact, I have stayed in
17 of them, spent the night in there with Marines. And walking
back from the chow hall one night, I said ``what do you think
about your new BEQs.''
And the young Marine said, ``We don't even call them
BEQs.'' I said, ``Really? What do you call them.'' They said,
``Our community. This is our community.''
And I says, ``How is that? How is this your community?''
And they said, ``Well, because, sergeant major, you will see if
you walk outside tonight at any time, you will see Marines out
there in our new courtyard, our new functional fitness areas,
our new rubberized track, our new fall pits where we can do our
martial arts, the mountain bike track that you put around our
barracks.''
But that is our community. You have brought us together. We
don't need to go out in town anymore because we have everything
we want right here.
So it is what they love. They love their new BEQs. They
love their new chow halls. They love the new fitness centers.
And they love the new things that they have brought up to
improve their quality of life.
But Marines want to know where the next fight is. They want
to know about equipment. And they want to know how to stay in
the Corps.
And thank you for the new barracks, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Yes, sir. You are welcome.
And I would really open it up to any of you all who want to
dive in next.

RETIREMENT AND COMPENSATION UNCERTAINTY

CNSAF Roy. Let me just add to that. One of the things that
is on peoples' minds--and we need to take this as what it is,
and that is simply a distracter. And it is this budget.
It is a distracter. In my case, we have young Airmen that
are focused on their retirement. I don't need young Airmen
focused on retirement. I need young Airmen focused on upgrade
training. I need Airmen focused on the mission.
I don't need them to be worried about the retirement system
and their compensation. So that is probably the number one
thing. It is the number one thing that I hear from our Airmen,
and quite frankly, a lot of families out there.
There is uncertainty out there right now. And I think it is
beginning to affect us a little bit. We are trying to keep
focus on the mission, as I mentioned. But it is a distracter to
them.
I mentioned earlier in my testimony the idea of resiliency.
We have been at war for an awful long time. Your Air Force has
been in the Middle East for well over 20 years. Some will
remember Operations Northern Watch and Southern Watch.
Your United States Air Force Airmen have been flying
missions, have been supporting missions in and out of theater
for 22 years now. They are a little bit tired. But they are
ready.
As the Sergeant Major said, what is next. They are always
ready for what is next. But you have got to understand that,
you know, we do need to reset, if you will. There is a little
bit of reset. And I call that resiliency.
Give our Airmen some time at home. And realizing that it is
not only time at home. I mentioned the Remote Piloted Aircraft
(RPA) operators, those that kind of help shape that battle
space every single day and they are at their home station,
somewhere here in the United States.
And that night, they are going to go home to their family
members knowing what they have seen. That is certainly unique
to the United States Air Force. And it is something that we
take very seriously.
Mr. Culberson. CMSAF Roy, you mentioned retirement. Did
your airmen start to talk about that. Was it triggered by when
the President, during his speech, mentioned there might be some
change in retirement? And what possible effect is that having,
in your opinion, on retention?
CMSAF Roy. The initial trigger was a Defense Business Board
study that went on a few months ago. There was a little bit of
discussion after the State of the Union Address. But I think at
that point it was made clear that folks that are serving would
be grandfathered.
And I know Secretary Panetta and Chairman Dempsey have come
on board to say that folks that are serving would be
grandfathered. And that has really helped.
Mr. Culberson. DBB?

DEFENSE BUSINESS BOARD STUDY IMPACTS

CMSAF Roy. Defense Business Board. And it was a study that
was asked for by Secretary Gates. And unfortunately, it went
out. It went viral. And quite frankly, it disturbed some folks.
Mr. Culberson. Internet is a good thing, but----
CMSAF Roy. Sometimes.
Mr. Culberson. We look forward to learning more about that.
Thank you.
And perhaps each one of you guys could mention that a
little bit, talk to us a little bit about that, if you are
hearing as well your young men and women talking about
retirement, which we don't necessarily want them to focus on.
We want them to stay focused on what they are doing.
Master Chief West. Yes, sir. And I would like to echo both
of the gentlemen to my port and starboard here. Both of these
folks really the same issues.
Now with that said, about 40 percent of your Navy is
underway today, out doing the J-O-B. We have kind of been doing
that for the past years as well. So we are used to those
deployments.
We had a ship recently, though, as you know, due to some
events around the world, complete a 10.5 month deployment. That
caused a little angst in the force; hey, is that normal for us?
Which we are in the process of saying, no, that is not our
norm.
That is what we are going to have to do if we need to do
it. We are going to stay focused obviously on CENTCOM. We have
about 25,000 folks that are either on the ground or in that
AOR, that are, as you know, going to push out into the Pacific.
And we are ready to do that. And we are doing that on a daily
basis.
Mr. Culberson. Texas is out there right now making the
Chinese sweat bullets.
Master Chief West. Yes, sir. They are doing the job.
Now just to put things in perspective, back when I came in
1981, first term retention in my force was about 41 percent.
Today, as I look at you, it is about almost 70 percent.
Yes, sir.
That is a good problem. But it also can be a little bit
difficult. Our folks are concerned about--when you go out and
talk to them, they are talking about the retirements. They are
talking about, you know, the future of the force, with all the
budget cuts that are out there, i.e., personnel.
And we have had to make some tough choices, but choices
that we had to make to balance our force. I am sure you have
heard of some of those. Perform to Serve is one and the
Enlisted Retirement Board or Retention Board is the other.
But we are through that process. And we will continue to
use those to shape our force. And I think we have a good handle
on it.
But our folks, it is no different. They are talking about
the same time things. The DBB, or the Defense Business Board,
did make a lot of folks nervous. Not only did it go viral, it
was on the front cover of all of our military magazines.
And you know when that happens, it is a lot of angst, even
though those military magazines aren't affiliated with the
service.
Mr. Culberson. That really triggered it for each one of you
all?
Master Chief West. You bet. You bet it sure did. And the
budget cuts as of late, you know, those folks are sitting back.
And you know, some folks would tell you that personnel didn't
join the Navy for retirement of the military for retirement.
Maybe they didn't initially. But once they get in and see
the contributions they make to the nation, they start thinking
about some of that. And so anything you can do to help out in
that arena would help us out, surely.
Mr. Culberson. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
Sergeant Major?

TOP ARMY QUALITY OF LIFE ISSUES

Sergeant Major Chandler. Chairman, two answers. First was
really about the quality of education and opportunities for
charter schools. I am not aware of a Army base that has a
charter school on it.
[The information follows:]

Educating our children is a state function, and all schools, no
matter what type, must comply with the state laws and regulations
regarding the public education system. Army Families have several
options to educate their children, depending on their duty station.
Although parents at one Army installation have explored charter school
options, there are no charter schools on Army installations at this
time. The Army is open to the idea of charter schools with the
understanding that public education is a state and local
responsibility, each state has different rules regarding charter
schools and alternative schools, the Army has not established official
guidance on charter schools, and the Army has no authority to start
charter schools.

Mr. Culberson. Thank you. And why? Why we don't have any; I
would love to know and----
Sergeant Major Chandler. And I will give you an answer for
that. I am just not aware of them at this time.
Mr. Culberson. Choices primarily, not necessarily charter.
I mean, charter is obviously important, but really choices.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Well, obviously home schooling is
allowed. We do that on post. And we do have private schools
that are available in most communities and obviously the public
school system.
Mr. Culberson. And the defense schools.
Sergeant Major Chandler. And the Defense School System,
although those are not as prevalent as some people may think.
Many of our bases have a school that is on the base, but it is
part of the school district for whatever county that they are a
part of.
Second part, though, is quality of life issues and stress.
I will tell you that as we have spoke about just the other day,
the impact of retirement obviously was a huge concern between
April and September really for the Army. And it is not as
prevalent.
I think the number one issue right now for soldiers in the
field, deployed around the world and at home, has to be whether
or not there will be another continuing resolution this year.
That may sound odd.

CONTINUING RESOLUTION IMPACTS

But the impacts of last year's Continuing Resolution (CR)
really I think rose even our young troopers' awareness of what
and how the government functions and what the impact is. I was
asked questions beginning in April, all the way until
September, what do you mean the Army can't pay me?
Well, that is not something that we actually control. We
are a conduit for the moneys that we receive through the
process of our Congress and the executive branch. It was a very
eye opening experience. And I think the concerns that are
raised in media about the impact of the election year and
whether or not there will be appropriations and authorization
bills signed are on people's minds.
The last thing that I think any of us want to have is for
some Soldier, Sailor, Airman or Marine deployed in harm's way
being concerned about whether or not they are going to get
paid. And that is just something that we don't need to have
these young men and women to be stressed out about.
Mr. Culberson. For 1 nanosecond.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Yes, sir, absolutely. And we would
appreciate your continued support in that.
The second one for the Army is the draw down. You know, we
have a very significant amount of people that we are going to
separate out of the service over the next 6 years. And there
are tremendous concerns about the impact of leaving the service
in these times, with the state of our economy, and how we are
going to transition soldiers out.
And that is a major focus for me personally and the rest of
the Army this year, is to really refine our Transition
Assistance Program with the help of the Department of Veterans
Affairs and the Department of Labor, and to put our kids in the
best places that we can to make sure that they have a dignified
transition out of the service and back into the rest of the
American society.
And then finally, military compensation overall is
something that is still out there. But it is not the number one
priority anymore, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, sergeant major.
Master Chief West. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Culberson. Yes, sir.

DOD AND CHARTER SCHOOLS

Master Chief West. If I could, I didn't address the school.
I would just like to go back. We do have charter schools in the
Navy. We have two, one in Key West. The other one is in New
Orleans.
And I am happy. I know that we have work to do, but we--
happy with the choices that our students have. I think the
addition of the SLOs, the school liaison officers that we have,
has been a huge impact. And I think working through not only
leadership but through the family groups that we have, you
know, we are making progress in that arena.
Mr. Culberson. All right, sir. Thank you. And if I really
would be grateful if each and every one of you would ping your
networks and ask for some feedback while we are developing our
bill during the springtime, into the winter and springtime, to
find out what else can we do, what else should be done to help
make sure that all your men and women that have kids on base
have got all the choices they need for school and for their
kids.
Are they happy with it? And what else could this committee
do to help?
And I look forward to Betty's help on that as well,
Congresswoman McCollum's.
Let me recognize my good friend Mr. Bishop from Georgia.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And again, let me welcome you gentlemen.
And certainly I want to extend a warm welcome to the
spouses that are here. Mrs. Roy and Mrs. Chandler, we really
appreciate what you do in support of the troops under your
husbands' command.

SUICIDE PREVENTION

I want to touch on two issues that are not necessarily
pleasant subjects. The first is suicide prevention. And I want
to deal with that. And the second one is sexual assault.
First off, it has been pretty clear that active duty Army
suicide rates have been higher than civilian rates since 2008.
There were 20 suicides per 100,000 in the Army, compared with
18 suicides per 100,000 in the civilian population at that
time.
And the Army is projecting that the final 2011 numbers will
be more than 24 suicides per 100,000 active duty soldiers,
which is another record high. It has been attributed to the
stress of repeated deployments during the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan. But officials are saying that there are other
factors at work.
What steps has the Army taken to identify potential at risk
soldiers, to improve the prevention and outreach efforts? Does
the fiscal year 2013 budget request include adequate funding
for suicide prevention training and the other outreach
programs, especially for the Guard and the Reserve troops, who
appear to be most at risk?
And while serving on active duty, returning from
deployments, are there more structured support networks that
are in place, particularly again for the Guard and Reservists,
who are frequently isolated geographically, because they come
from rural areas and areas that may not be close to military
bases?
Describe what the Army particularly is doing. And I don't
know, maybe the Marine Corps might have something. I am not
sure whether the problem is as bad for the Air Force and the
Navy.

SEXUAL ASSAULT

And of course, the second has to do with sexual assaults,
which Secretary Panetta said that there were 3,191 sexual
assaults last year. But he thinks that--those are reported, but
he thinks that it was actually closer to 19,000.
And of course, as a military and a society, we have got to
do more to change the stigma of sexual assault reporting, so
that the victims aren't afraid to come forward. And so I would
like for each of you to describe what policies and programs are
currently in place to combat sexual assault and to provide the
care and assistance to the victims of sexual assault.
And particularly with the Army, is there a concern that the
expanded role of the female service members will expose them to
greater risk of sexual assaults? And what, if anything, is the
Army doing about that, and whether or not the fiscal year 2013
budget sufficiently covers your needs in that regard?
Thank you.

ARMY SUICIDE

Sergeant Major Chandler. Thank you, congressman. I
appreciate that. And I agree with you. Although it may not be
comfortable, it is something that we have to talk about and
have a frank discussion.
You know, any suicide in our Army is just something that we
can not tolerate. And so we are doing a lot of things. We have
to continue to be committed to helping our soldiers.
I think the one thing that we probably will never be able
to answer is why someone chooses to take their life. I am not
sure we will ever be able to answer that question.
We have done a lot of things, however, over the past year
to try and improve awareness, and improve the ability for our
leaders to intervene when necessary with a soldier who may be
in crisis.
Over the last year, we have incorporated additional
commander and command sergeant major training as part of our
pre-command course, so that they understand the policies,
procedures and programs that are available to them as they go
into their command position.
We have also improved communications between local law
enforcement and military police, which has been a challenge in
the past. We have launched a program called myPRIME, which is
an online substance and alcohol abuse awareness program, that a
person can go in and use this tool, and look at whether or not
they may have some issues surrounding alcohol and drug abuse,
which we know does tend to be causal towards suicides.
There are a lot of alcohol related issues and drug issues
associated with some of our suicides this past year.
Mr. Bishop. The underlying cause may be some of the
alcoholism and the substance abuse----
Sergeant Major Chandler. Well, congressman, I mean, there
are many different issues. Some of them are relationship
issues. Some of the are, in fact, related to their deployment.
Some of them, especially in our Guard and Reserve, can be an
issue surrounding employment with their civilian employer.
So I would tell you that for the 280 suicides that we have
had in our Army in calendar year 2011, there are probably 280
different reasons why there has been that suicide.
You know, for the Army, that number is lower than it was
2010. Not much lower, and really it doesn't matter. In the
active component, we did see a small increase. In the Guard and
Reserve, we saw a slight decrease.
I would tell you, however, that the training that we have
incorporated over the past 2 years, and have really paid a lot
of attention to this past year, with former Vice Chief of Staff
of the Army Correlli's focus has started to make a difference,
we think.
It is way too early to say we have turned the corner on
suicide. But we believe that the programs we have in place are
starting to gain traction.
You asked about whether or not we have enough funds in the
fiscal year--for fiscal year 2013, I believe so.

SEXUAL ASSAULT IN THE ARMY

The other question that you asked was specifically about
sexual assault. This is completely contrary to who we say we
are as Army professionals.
The fact that we have service members, soldiers in my case,
that are preying on other soldiers, that are committing acts of
violence, goes completely against what we say we are as an
Army. We have a warrior ethos that says, in part, ``I will
never leave a fallen comrade. I will never quit.''
And those things and the idea of what that means are
inculcated in us from the time that we start basic training and
throughout our military career. When this happens, it is
unacceptable.
And we are not where we want to be. I will be honest with
you. We have a 5-year program. We are in our 3rd year and we
have done a tremendous amount of work.
As I understand it, sexual assault is probably the least
reported crime in our country. I would assume that within the
Army that is probably true also.
So we have to create a climate where people feel that they
trust the chain of command to report. And then we have to have
swift justice, so that if the act is actually valid and true,
that a punishment arise from it.
And that is how we will start to change the culture. The
NDAA from fiscal year 2012 made a requirement that we have a
sexual assault coordinator and a victim advocate in every
brigade in our Army, two people per brigade. Right now we are
struggling to find the resources to fulfill that commitment.
The secretary and the chief are committed to it. We just
had a series of meetings over the last 2 weeks about how we are
going to make this happen. And we are working towards that
objective.
The NDAA, as you know, was passed relatively lately, with a
requirement of December of 2011 to have those programs
initiated.
In order to turn this around, you have got really two
different ways you can do it. You can contract it and you can
work towards the military and the Department of the Army
civilian solution. By October of 2013, it is supposed to be a
military or D.A. civilian, in my case, solution.
So we are struggling to find the money. We have got to get
the forces in there. We have got to get them trained and
credentialed, and get them into the system.
We are looking for some help with definitions on what a
brigade actually entails. You have some brigades that are 200
people. You have some brigades that are 5,000.
Do we really need to have two people for that 200 person
brigade? Do we need to have maybe a little more in the larger
brigade? I know the secretary and the chief have taken this on
and are really working, both the D.A. secretary and the Army
staff, to get this thing moving.
And from a soldier perspective and as the sergeant major of
the Army, my focus on this is about who we say we are as
professionals. And if we as an Army, as soldiers accept this
behavior, it is counter to what we say we are.
And if you are going to contribute or have that type of
behavior, you are not worthy to wear the uniform. And that is
the bottom line.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir.
Sergeant Major Barrett. Thank you.

BEHAVIORAL PROGRAMS--SEXUAL ASSAULT AND SUICIDE PREVENTION

Sir, first thing I want to say is--I want to go right in
order. All of our behavioral health programs are closely
integrated at the headquarters level. And the purpose for that
is to better synchronize all of our research, all our policy,
all our training, all our prevention and all of our treatment.
And so to answer the second part of your question, for our
fiscal year 2013, yes, we do have the money that will cover all
of our behavioral needs, in regards to sexual assault, suicide,
combat operational stress control, family advocacy and domestic
violence issues as well.
All those are grouped into the behavioral health domain.
In regards to suicide, fiscal year 2009, we had 52; fiscal
year 2010, we had 37; and fiscal year 2011, we had 33. So we
have shown a marked improvement.
But just like the sergeant major of the Army said, one is
too many. So we are not dancing in the end zone yet that we are
making all this great progress. But have seen a great
improvement, in large due to our training programs, Never Leave
a Marine Behind training continuum, which is peer led.
The non commission officers (NCOs) said they wanted it. And
by God, they have been fixing it. So it is peer led.
We also have, for lack of a better term, a hotline called
Dstress. And it is a phone line that is manned by Marines and
it is for Marines. Because Marines feel comfortable talking to
other Marines and they will bring their problems to other
Marines.
And one measurement of effectiveness in our Dstress
Program, something that we have learned, is we know to date
that our Dstress hotline has saved the lives of Marines. We
know that through--through our data.
Also, we are very proud of something we started 3 years
ago, our Combat Operational Stress Control Continuum, known as
the OSCAR training, which is Operational Stress Control and
Readiness. It takes on the core functionality of you train the
leadership at the battalion level, and all the way down to the
squad level, where we have the commanders; we have the sergeant
major; we have the staff NCOs, who live and sleep with these
Marines day in and day out.
And it is not designed to treat somebody with issues. It is
designed to identify somebody who has characteristic changes.
And it is there. And as the continuum goes, you strengthen
Marine in training, therefore strengthening him. He gets
resiliency.
And then you start to put in those prevention and
mitigation factors. And OSCAR, where it really kicks in, the
identification, and then it goes to the intervention. Who, how
and when do you intervene?
And the intervention goes into the treatment of the Marine.
The Marine gets treated. And then we reintegrate him back into
the fabric of his unit. And then once he is reintegrated back
into the fabric of the unit, then he is maintained.
So we are very proud of the steps that we have taken in
creating strength and resiliency in our Marines through our
program Never Leave a Marine Behind, our Dstress hotlines and
our OSCAR training.
And to make a point--make a point by a story, Lance
Corporal Barson saved the life of a Marine, someone who had
received the OSCAR training, who identified a Marine in
distress, just happened to be walking by him in a chow hall,
overseas in Afghanistan, decides to just sit down and he
befriended the young man.
Well, if we push forward a few hours, later that evening,
the Marine that was in distress found Lance Corporal Barson and
actually brought him the implements that he was going to use to
kill himself that night.
He then said, ``I do need help.'' And that young lance
corporal took him and he got him the help he needed. And that
Marine is alive and well today, and reintegrated back into his
unit.
So to emphasize the point of our OSCAR training, our Never
Leave a Marine Behind training, there is the one shining
example. So all the moneys that we have put into this has paid
for itself ten fold already just because of that.

BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROGRAMS

And to echo the sergeant major of the Army also, when it
comes to sexual assault, our programs--and we are very proud of
Take a Stand, Step Up, but right in lines with sexual assault,
we don't condone it. That is all I have to say about that, sir.
Master Chief West. Yes, sir. If I may, as you know, Marine
Corps and Navy kind of go at a lot of these issues together.
And without going over all of that, I would like to just
highlight a couple of things.
One, we are focusing not only on leadership but the
individuals themselves. We are focusing the training there. We
are being more proactive with that, sending teams out to train
them also at a accession commands and leadership commands,
pushing the training to them.
We do also a thing called bystander intervention training,
similar to the Marine Corps, where they have their junior folks
are overseeing some of this. But that is done well for us. And
it is been well received on the deck plate.
We approach this with four pillars, one being the education
and awareness piece. The other one being the operational stress
control, intervention and post-vention support, focusing on
resilience, peer to peer support, leadership, enhancing family
support and fostering a proper command climate.
Many times the proper commander climate and the leadership
team really makes a difference with all of these programs. If
you make it so that an individual has no issue approaching a
leader in that unit, you know, you will see that that unit
typically thrives and has far less issues than a lot of our
folks.
One hundred sixty suicide related behaviors a month is
typically what we have seen. With that said, that could be also
seen as a good news story, because those are related behaviors
and they seek help, which shows that some of our programs that
we have put in place is working.
We feel we are properly funded in the suicide arena. And we
will continue to work that. Any sailor that we lose is a loss,
in our eyes, of readiness.

SEXUAL ASSAULT PREVENTION AND RESPONSE (SAPR)

Sexual assault--sir, really it goes back, again, to what
the sergeant major said. I would like to highlight two things
that we are doing that I really think is a good move for us. We
have something called SAPR, sexual assault prevention, SAPR-L
and SAPR-F, L being leadership, and F being for the fleet.
Leadership, we are going to go at this similar to what we
went at with Don't Ask, Don't Tell training: we have got them
training now. Put teams in place. And they are going to go out
and look every Sailor face to face and talk to them about
sexual assault.
We are not only doing that, but we are putting them at our
accession commands. And you know, that is our seed corn for the
Navy. That is what grows up and becomes Sailors. We have had a
lot of focus up there, and our A and C schools. That is the
next step from our accession commands.
So I think we are going after this this year. We go at it
as a Department of the Navy. Secretary of the Navy has put
things in place and aligned things to allow us to do this.
And I think you will continue to see us attack this problem
and, you know, make a difference there.
SAPR L, again, that is for leadership, Don't Ask, Don't
Tell construct. Then we will move over to the right and then we
will hit the fleet with it later this year. This training will
be complete this year.

SUICIDES AND SUPERVISOR TRAINING

CMSAF Roy. If I could add just a couple of things from what
my peers said, and tell you what the Air Force has done. Yes,
to answer your question, suicide is a problem in the United
States Air Force.
We did take a knee. We took a stand down after the first of
the year because of a spike in suicides.
The United States Air Force Chief of Staff and I signed out
a letter to all commands, basically telling them to send out a
package of lesson plans, if you will, of here is what you will
talk about. They had to do it within a certain time period.
But it was up to the major commands to tell them that you
need to take a break and talk with your people. So leadership
involvement has got to happen. And it is happening in the
United States Air Force today.
To that point, we have some high risk career fields, high
risk ranks that we have identified, that a lot of these
suicides happen within. So we have focused our attention on
some of those. And we have provided what we call frontline
supervisor, first line supervisor training to those Airmen that
are supervising.
Mr. Bishop. What are those areas?
CMSAF Roy. There are primarily three risk areas. There is
security forces. For us, it is security forces, our young E-6s
within security forces. Our maintenance, within the maintenance
community, and then within our intelligence community. Those
are the three primary high risk areas.
And that is not to say that that is all, because they are
not. This is far reaching and it affects everybody. But for
this front line training, we have focused our attention to
those supervisors of those particular Air Force Specialty Codes
(AFSCs) in those ranks.
Like somebody else mentioned, we have taken on the
bystander approach. We have done training within the force on
what it is to be a bystander, and taking action on what you
see.
So that has been helpful to us. And of course, we consider
this a wingman culture, if you will, of taking care of each
other. I keep talking about resiliency.
We have borrowed from the United States Army, on the
comprehensive Soldier fitness. We call it comprehensive Airman
fitness. And we focus on four different pillars of an
individual's wellness, health, if you will.
We focus on social, physical, emotional and spiritual. We
focus on those areas because we figure that those are the areas
that the members would need the most help on. And it covers
down on basically everything.
Just like OSD has total force fitness and they have seven
different elements to theirs, it can all be rolled up into each
of these. They are overlapping.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I apologize for the length of the questions. And I
apologize to my colleagues for the time that it took for you to
respond. But I do think it is important.
Mr. Culberson. No, it is really important. We deeply
appreciate it.
And I am happy to recognize my friend, Mr. Carter, for his
questions.
Mr. Carter. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And first, welcome to all of you. This is actually, I would
argue, the hearing that we receive the most information
pertinent to this committee's mission, because this committee
is about our warriors.
It is not some political committee. It is about people.
And thank you, because you all are the backbone of each of
your respective services.
Also, I would like to thank all of our National Guard and
Reservists that are here. They also have certainly carried
their lion's share in these 10 years of war.
And so all of you can be sure, your nation is grateful for
you.
I am thankful that our founding fathers stood up and said
``We pledge our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor,'' but
the only example we have of this today is our military service.
They actually make that pledge and honor it.
And if we all honored it, we would be a better country. So
thank you for what you do.
I want to go back to the beginning of what you described,
because it is something that is concerning me as we face this
potential sequestration, this draw down of the funds available,
and therefore this draw down of surface personnel across the
various forces.
From having talked with General Odierno, the Army and
Marine Corps' number one investment is people. You guys have
the equipment that they can take to cut things, but now they
have to cut people.
And when you start talking about the kinds of cuts that we
envision might occur in our forces, you have to be worried
about a couple of things. First, the young man or woman who has
made a career choice that, through no fault or lack of duty and
service, they are, all of a sudden, told they are no longer
needed, because there is no money to pay them. There is no
money to keep them there.
That has to be, from a recruiting standpoint, a very big
negative as you look down the aisle for the future of the
various services.
And then secondly, and I think more importantly, everything
I have learned since I have been in Congress about our military
is that the NCO corps is a dire necessity, and quite honestly,
a major strength as you compare our warriors to our enemies. We
have non-commissioned officers who step up and lead.
And in other people that we fight, that doesn't exist with
the kind of stalwarts that we have in our military. And
therefore, it has become a contributor to what makes us
effective.
Now, how do we continue to maintain the NCO corps, which
has to rise through the ranks, if we are going to make 100,000
soldier cuts in the Army, or 50,000 in the Marine Corps, 50,000
in the other? This is taking a big chunk out of your future of
the NCO corps.
I would like to get each of you to comment on that.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Yes, sir.

DRAWDOWN OF NCO CORPS

I will start from the Army perspective. Obviously the draw
down for us is going to be done in four ways. You know, we will
do less recruiting. We are going to retain less people. And the
privilege to serve will become more difficult.
And we also have instituted some force shaping measures,
like the other services have. And we will institute some more
in the coming months. The number one, obviously, recruiting; we
have done tremendously well in recruiting so far.
We actually have more than 35,000 perspective soldiers who
are in our delayed entry program. And we see no issues with
continuing to recruit the best qualified people to come into
our Army.
The next step, though, is retention. We have had soldiers
who may not have, in previous times, been allowed to continue
to serve, may have had some challenges specifically in the
discipline arena, that we are going to take another hard look
at.
It doesn't mean that someone can't overcome a mistake that
they may have made. But if they are a person that continues to
make the same mistake, you have really got to question whether
or not it is a motivational issue--I am not willing to do what
I need to do to be a soldier--or if it is a training issue.
So we will be a little bit more restrictive on who gets the
privilege to serve. And some of our soldiers we may ask to
serve in a different job that what we are doing right now. And
that is going to become how we work through the issues with the
force structure and how we reshape our Army.
Force shaping measures have been primarily focused on our
mid-grade NCOs. We allowed a very large gap between the time we
made sergeant, E-5, and staff sergeant, E-6, and then sergeant
first class, E-7.
That has created a bubble. And we have got to smooth that
bubble out. And really, it comes down to is that individual
doing everything that they can do in our promotion system to
get promoted?
In every MOS in the Army, someone gets promoted every year.
So if you are not getting promoted, you have first got to look
at whether or not you are doing what you need to do.
Then the last step is for our retirement eligible folks, we
are going to probably ask some of our retirement eligible folks
to leave the service now, instead of at their mandatory
retirement date. And those are folks that within their MOS,
there may be no future upward potential, or that they
themselves have really maximized their service to the nation.
Our commitment is for each of those circumstances, in
retention and force shaping and retirement, is that we have a
orderly transition plan, starting a year before they leave the
service, to help them with the things that they and their
family to do to be successful.
That is what I talked about earlier, about the partnership
with the Department of Labor and VA. We have a tremendous
partnership with them now. I am excited about this program. My
number one concern in the arena is to make sure that we treat
every one of those troopers who we have asked so much for in
the 10 years with dignity and respect as they leave the
service.
Sequestration will be a huge challenge for us. And really
all bets are off the table at that point, because the drastic
measures that had to be implemented almost immediately are
going to have a huge impact on not only the soldiers but our
family members and our civilian workforce.
And that is of huge concern.
Mr. Culberson. Such as?

SEQUESTRATION AND IMPACTS ON QUALITY OF LIFE

Sergeant Major Chandler. Just, sir, the impact of the fact
that sequestration is going to cause us to make just such
drastic cuts so quickly. We have a very deliberate process
right now to reduce the size of our Army within the strategy
the Secretary of Defense has laid out for the department.
But if we have to automatically or immediately shift gears,
we will have tremendous impact on family programs. We will have
to make huge cuts. We will have to make huge cuts and immediate
cuts in people.
That is going to be a problem for us.
Mr. Culberson. If I could ask each one of you, as you
answer Mr. Carter's question, is to address that. What would
sequestration mean for your men and your women under your
command and their quality of life?
Sergeant Major Chandler. To put it in a nutshell, it would
be a huge and immediate impact on an already stressed force.
And for the Army, that is of huge concern.
Sergeant Major Barrett. Thank you for that question, sir.
I will go kind of in a chronological order. I want to talk
about accessions, then retention, then NCOs, and then talk
about the draw down, in that regard.
First of all, it is the same as the Army. We are bringing
in less. But the standards are higher. As of right now, current
to date, 100 percent of every single person that has been
brought into the Marine Corps is a high school graduate. That
is just amazing.
Our Armed Force Qualifications Test (AFQT) testing score is
76th percentile. DoD base line is 60. So we are knocking it out
of the park by way of the quality of the young men and women
that we are bringing into the Marine Corps today.
Another goodness with accessions today, recruiting, is that
these young men and women in the Marine Corps are staying in
the delayed entry program anywhere up to 9 months before they
are actually shipping to their recruit training.
What that is doing is the recruiter has more time to prep
that young man or woman so that they are ready to meet the
rigors of recruit training. By doing that, our MCRD, Marine
Corps Recruit Depot Attrition has gone down. It has been
reduced.
Less attrition costs less money. So our accessions is going
very well. We are bringing in less Marines this year to handle
what will inevitably be our draw down.
Going to retention, our retention has never been better. It
is a little bit into the 4th month of the fiscal year. And we
are about to tip 90 percent retention mission made for our
First Term Alignment Program.
And all the prerequisites are being exceeded in that realm
as well, meaning the best get to stay. We get to be choosy,
very choosy. We have this tier rating--tier one, tier two, tier
three, tier four--to meet the quota based on each Military
Occupational Specialty.
Well, we are only keeping tier one and tier two. Meaning
these are young men and women who are knocking it out of the
park. They are first class Physical Fitness Testers PFTers.
They are exceeding in their Marine Corps martial arts program.
They are doing all the education they are supposed to be doing.
They are shooting well on the rifle range. They are doing
everything right. Those are the ones that we are keeping. So we
are on a fast track to make our retention mission.
So accessions is great. Retention is great.
We are talking about the NCOs and their education. We have
learned a lot in the last 10 years. We have the most
experienced NCO corps that our nation, I believe, has ever seen
in 10 years of fighting.
In the Marine Corps, we like to refer to our NCOs as
strategic corporals, strategic sergeants, meaning that their
tactical decisions on the battle field have strategic
implications, and that everything they do has to be done right.
So the commandant has injected $125 million into our Marine
Corps University, so that we can ensure that our young NCOs,
our staff non-commissioned officers and our young officers are
getting all the right education to carry us forward in future
distributive operations and in ever increasing complex
environment.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACTS

So we are pushing down. And we are putting all the right
things into our education as well.
We believe in the statement, also, keeping faith works both
ways. 75 percent of our first time alignment program gets out
every year. The United States Marine Corps is a very young
force. So everyone is trying to actually stay in right now.
But keeping faith works both ways means if you are not a
tier one or a tier two Marine and you are doing everything
right, I am sorry, thank you for your service, but keeping
faith meant when you came in and you raised your right hand in
a federal building, before an American flag, in front of a
commissioned officer, you said that you would do the following
things. You didn't do all those things you said. So you kind of
broke faith with us.
So keeping faith is we are going to keep the very best. We
are going to let them fulfill their entire contract. We are not
going to reduce in force, by forcing people out. We are using
every single voluntary force shaping tool that we can to
maximize--and maximize to that extent.
But some involuntary separation tools are likely to be used
for those who are denied reenlistment, if you will.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACTS ON PERSONNEL--NAVY

Master Chief West. Yes, sir. Thank you very much. Great
question.
The Navy, we have been at this for quite some time, ie the
draw down. We have I guess drew down about 55,000 sailors over
the past 10 years, a lot of folks may not know that, while
meeting our missions and doing what we need to do.
Recently, due to the high retention and low attrition that
we have, and the funnel of folks coming in, it is like the
Marine Corps. Our recruiters have met their goals for--I don't
even know how many months straight now. And people do want to
stay.
But we use Perform To Serve as our lever for controlling
the amount of folks that we have. Perform To Serve started
several years back, but it really takes the performance of an
individual at first.
Now we have done that in a very controlled manner. We got
to a point where with retention so high and attrition low, that
got pressurized as well.
So now we are back up to about eight or nine out of 10
sailors who want to stay can say. However, we were down at one
point to four or five that we had to really put through.
But again, we were focusing on performance with that. With
that saying, that allows to not only balance our force, but it
balances the ratings as well.
Like other folks, we advanced through vacancies in our
force. If you don't have a vacancy there, it is hard for a
person to advance. And in fact, in many ratings, they were
advancing. They were being stagnant.
So we had to implement something this past year called the
Enlisted Retention Board, ERB. You might have heard of that. It
wasn't something that we wanted to do. It is something we had
to do.
That focused on 31 ratings that were severely over-manned.
When a rating is over-manned, again, people don't move. They
stay stagnant.
And it doesn't allow us to assess people we need to,
because we have people in ratings, frankly, that are kind of
jammed up, if you may.
But we focused on that. We just completed that, through
your help in getting TERA, the Temporary Early Retirement
piece, in for us. We have about 300 of those 2,947 folks that
were asked to move along from TERA. We have about 300 of those
folks that are eligible for TERA, which was a big help for us.
So we had to make some tough choices out there with our ERB
process. But it was a focused--again, we looked at two things
with that. We looked at performance first. And then we had to
look into quotas.
So we had to go in and balance, again, those ratings to
allow us to assess the people that we need. Again, something
that we didn't want to do; something we had to do.
But I will tell you, now that we have moved passed it, we
have this year about 11 of those ratings are only going to be
slightly over-manned. So the effect we were looking for
happened.
Well, we didn't just say hey, move along, folks. We put in
some other things, for example, some services, you know, things
such as exchange and commissary type services, as well medical
benefits, to help those folks along.
Plus, we have hired a world class placement organization,
Challenger, Gray and Christmas, that will take these folks and
provide them with the personal I guess mentorship and coaching
to translate or move over to the civilian side.
We have already reduced recruiting as far as we could. We
are about down to 33,000 this year that we are bringing into
the Navy. And most folks will say, well, why don't you just cut
farther down?
Well, you can't. You have to have that healthy balance of
folks coming in to go through the system of the military or you
will have leadership gaps as you move forward. So I think we
have had a very challenging year with those things.
But with PTS, again by doing that ERB, we are up to eight
or nine out of 10 people that want to stay at the end of their
contract, they are able to stay. So we are moving forward.
I think, though, with our draw down, we are about as
balanced as we have. We can't go down much further, based on
the amount of deployments that we are going to see in our
future out into the WESTPAC and into CENTCOM, and as we engage
worldwide as a Navy.
You mentioned sequestration. I agree with my Army
counterpart. It is going to be a huge and immediate impact. And
I have to tell you, I think that is going to really hurt your
military overall--now I will speak for the Navy here--if that
was enacted.
CMSAF Roy. They hit a lot of points. Let me talk just a
short note about the United States Air Force.
In the last 9 years, we have come down well over 75,000
Airmen. That is directly out of the force. So we are at the
point of not necessarily drawing down. We are at the point of
management.

AIRMEN EDUCATION AND TRAINING

And I believe that is what the MCPON is getting to, is that
we are in the art of management now.
It is a very competitive force. We are the most
technologically advanced force that has ever existed. It
requires a deliberately developed Airman, one that has
experience, one that has education and one that has training.
So you have got to focus on those things. And we just
changed what we call our high year tenure, where we have moved
the ranks down, if you will, to how long they can serve. That
has freed up some spaces, if you will, to allow others to
continue to move, to have continual progression.
We also have lock downs on some AFSCs, especially because--
we call CJRs, career job reservations. So they can't reenlist
in those AFSCs. They may get asked to serve in another
position.
All said and done--and you asked about sequestration. I
think probably a word that resonates with folks. I think you
could probably focus on a hollow force. If you want a hollow
force, go sequestration.
If you are not going to have the training, number one, you
are not going to have the people. But if you don't have the
training and you don't provide the education, you have got a
hollow force. It is not about just the hardware. It is about
the people, as you mentioned.
Mr. Carter. Well, and a follow up which--I have taken too
much time with the answers. But thank you for them. Because I
think we as an American people need to see the picture of what
eventually is going to happen.
But as we said, this committee is about people. If there
are programs, resources as we face this change in the platform
of our military that we need to be addressing, would you put
those in some kind of a report and send them to the chairman?
[The information follows:]

We would of course do our best to maintain a vital, mission-
effective force if sequestration were to happen. But we all know the
impact of sequestration on the Air Force would be significant. For
example, across-the-board reductions would certainly result in reduced
special and incentive pays. Critical skills currently receiving
recruitment and retention bonuses would be severely and adversely
impacted, degrading our ability to shape our force to the right skill
and experience mix. Critical skills include contracting, intelligence
analysts and loadmasters, as well as bootson-the-ground special
operations and explosive ordnance disposal personnel. The inevitable
loss of these Airmen would directly degrade our warfighting
capabilities and interrupt the development of future NCO leaders with
battlefield tested experience in these critical career fields. A fully
qualified Airman in these skills requires substantial training costs
and a long time to develop; their loss would have a long-term negative
impact. The Air Force initial enlistment bonus specifically targets
accessions in our Battlefield Airmen and Combat Support specialties
which require a combination of physical abilities and aptitudes for
training in highly technical skill areas. Loss of these bonuses would
reduce our ability to compete for the best and brightest, especially
when unemployment improves and retention returns to normal levels.
Sequestration is not in the best interest of our national security.
The Army's share of the cut could be almost $134 billion through 2017.
The impact to the Army could cause up to 100,000 additional cuts to our
end-strength on top of the 86,000 we are planning to reduce. This would
result in severe reductions in the National Guard, our Army Reserves,
and additional continued reductions in the active component. It will
significantly decrease what the Army can do for the joint force.
Sequestration would require us to fundamentally relook how we provide
national security for our nation.
We appreciate your support and request that Congress support the
President's FY13 budget request. The President's Budget reflects the
appropriate balance of resources to requirements and the finding levels
required to sustain Navy manpower, personnel, training, education and
Sailor and family support programs, to include all necessary transition
costs for sailors affected by force shaping.
The Marine Corps is revolutionizing our transition assistance
program to better meet the needs of our Marines. We plan to map and
integrate our transition assistance program into the lifecycle of a
Marine from recruitment, through separation or retirement, and beyond
as veteran Marines. Examples of this planned integration will include
the mandatory enrollment of first-term Marines into a Personal and
Professional Development course, which will be linked to the promotion
to E-4 (Corporal), and will cover topics such as personal financial
management, reenlistment and veteran benefits. Additionally, Marines
will meet with career planners at designated times during their careers
to monitor the progress of and establish a plan to achieve personal and
professional goals.
The first step in this process is the implementation of our revised
Transition Readiness Seminar (TRS) in March 2012. The week-long TRS
includes a mandatory standardized core curriculum along with four well-
defined military-civilian pathways: (1) College/University Education,
(2) Career/Technical training, (3) Employment, or (4) Entrepreneurship.
A Marine will choose the pathway that best meets his or her future
goals and will have access to individual counseling services within
each pathway. This tailored approach to the TRS will greatly reduce
information overload and will target the individual circumstances and
needs of the Marine. It will facilitate a practical learning experience
with specific transition readiness standards that are effective and
beneficial to Marines.
Our enhanced Marine for Life Program, along with its nationwide
network of Hometown Links, will support improved reach-back and
outreach support for veteran Marines in need of localized support in
their hometowns with information, opportunities or other specific
needs. These assets help veterans develop and maintain local networks
of Marine-friendly individuals, employers, and organizations.

And one of the things I want to commend you for, is looking
at the future of that warrior who is going out into the
workforce at a time when we have got pretty high unemployment
in this country. And that is part of our responsibility to do
the best we can to help that person transition into civilian
life.
We owe that to them. They gave us 10 years of their lives
at war. We owe that to them. And so give us suggestions. Send
them to us, so we can spend this money the way we need to spend
this money, to make for better lives for our soldiers, our
sailors, our airmen and our Marines.
Okay. Thank you for your service. I am honored to be in
your presence.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, judge. I know we all feel the
same. We are, indeed, honored to be in your presence.
I recognize my good friend from California, Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here. This is always a look forward
to hearing. We really get the quality of life discussion.
I wanted to bring one of my constituents here today to
address our meeting. But unfortunately he is across the hall.
His name is Secretary Leon Panetta.
And he is trying to explain to the committee that ordered
sequestration, which we all voted for, what it means. And I
think we have to realize that it doesn't just apply to
Department of Defense (DoD). It applies to every federal
agency. And I don't see how it is not going to happen.
So we are going to be living with it.
Another one of my constituents--and I wanted to thank
Sergeant Major Chandler for coming out to my district. I don't
know if you were aware when you were out there that Al Brown,
who lives in Seaside, the former--won the Army Spouse of the
Year.
Her husband, Ricky Brown, is in the U.S. Army. Al is in the
final five for the military spouse of the year. And her son
Ricky II is an inspiration to her. He is a 1-year-old and has
autism.
His mother developed a program called Kinderjam, an early
development child program for preschoolers and toddler aged
children. And as long as you are here, I want to extend to them
and on behalf of this committee, congratulations to her and to
her husband, who is an Army enlisted.
This committee is the only committee in either the Senate
or the House that has the spectrum of both quality of life of
uniform military and Veterans Department, where you will all be
when you leave and you separate. So we are the only committee
that kind of looks at the separation.
And you know, they are just totally two different silos.
And to break down those silos is I think our responsibility. So
I am very interested in this because I think you come up with
some very interesting approaches to suicide prevention,
particularly this peer approach that the Marine Corps has.
But I am curious as to when do you count a suicide? Is it
only a person in uniform? The minute that person separates, if
it is a week after separation, is it considered a veteran then
suicide? Or how do we count it?
And what are we doing to prepare the veteran side of it?
Here is a soldier that we think is having some mental health
issues and may need PTSD, may need these other things; is there
ability to pass that on to the Veterans Administration?
Because we pick up an awful lot of the other side of it,
the homelessness of veterans. And there are Iraq and Afghan
veterans now that are homeless, families that are homeless in
my district.
And I think we are trying to break down these walls and
silos. I would be very interested in how we can get, as you
learn more about the individual issues, the quality of life of
military and their families, and what they are going to have to
transition out.
Because you are going from a very secured, protected, you
know, total lifestyle services there to one out in the civilian
world where you have to see it. Nobody comes to you. Nobody
offers it.
So we ought to at least be able to prepare the record, say
as we hand off at separation to the Veterans Administration and
say, you better jump on this right away. Do we do that? And how
do we do it?

SOLDIER TRANSITION TO VETERANS AFFAIR

Sergeant Major Chandler. Sir, it is a great question. And I
believe I did meet Ms. Brown last year, actually, when she
received her award for being the Army Spouse of the Year. And
actually I think Jane and I both did.
And your questions for us is challenges we face with our
Integrated Disability Evaluation System. Now we have a dual
adjudication system right now, where the soldier who is
transitioning out of the Army is going to be screened as part
of his transition program for any conditions or injuries or
illness or wounds that he may have received while he was a part
of the Army, from my position.
That transition is a screening that is done by the Army,
which provides a certain degree of benefit for those things
that happen. And the V.A. has their adjudication, which is
really the impact of the person's ability to be a productive
member of society.
Mr. Farr. But in that adjudication, we have learned that
that process has taken 2 years in some. So that is a really
slow process to get immediate attention. That is if you are
filing for the disability.
This is a question of just getting some PTSD type services
that may be in the civilian community, because you are no
longer close to a veterans hospital or--is there any way--do
you flag personnel who have difficulties, so that the V.A. can
pick that up?
Sergeant Major Chandler. Again, it goes back to what I was
saying. If a person is diagnosed with a condition, and let us
say it is post traumatic stress, so I am diagnosed with post
traumatic stress.
Mr. Farr. While in uniform?
Sergeant Major Chandler. While in uniform. I am going to be
evaluated. And there is going to be some action taken with that
condition.
And because of the different varying categories, it is hard
for me to sit here and say with PTSD, you are going to get
this. But you have it.
You are also going to then be screened by the V.A. Okay, so
there is a transition. The challenge that you are talking
about, with soldiers that are upwards of, in the Army's case,
more than 400 days, is the fact that you have got to get a
narrative summary for the condition done by specific groups of
people.
That narrative summary has to go to the V.A. and be
translated into what that means for a percentage of
compensation. And it is a very lengthy process.
We have been working, all of the services heavily, with the
V.A. to streamline that process. IDES is the revision. We have
got some challenges.
Many of us will be meeting with the chief of staff of the
V.A. in the next 2 weeks to talk about this and other issues,
and how we can get better at speeding the process up.
What we don't want to do, though, is get so fast at moving
somebody out of the system that we aren't actually making sure
we have covered every single existing condition, and to help
that person get what they deserve for their service.

SUICIDE DETERMINATION

Mr. Farr. When do you count a suicide? Is it only in
uniform?
Sergeant Major Chandler. A suicide, for us, is while they
are in the Army, whether it is the Army Reserve, Army National
Guard, or the active component. The challenge is when you are
in with a state coroner or a county coroner, is whether or not
they are going to rule that as a suicide.
If it is not ruled as a suicide, it is very difficult for
us to know the causation of death. And there are some things
that we have learned over the last few years, that some people
are hesitant to rule someone's death as a suicide.
Mr. Farr. What is your experience, is there a period of
suicide? Is it early in your enlistment? Is it mid career? Or
is it the end, when you are facing these challenges of being
separated?
Sergeant Major Chandler. Sir, for the Army, it is a 17 to
24 year old, who has deployed one time. Okay, that is the
highest percentage of suicides for our Army. Okay.
So it is a younger person who may not have as many factors
of resiliency incorporated into their life. And they have
deployed one time. Soldiers, in the Army's case, that have
deployed multiple times have a greater degree of resiliency and
are less likely to commit suicide, in the statistics that we
have seen.
We have also got a lot of folks, unfortunately, who haven't
deployed at all that still choose to commit suicide. And those
are the ones that are hardest for us to really focus on,
because you just don't know.
You can have a unit that does every single thing that they
are supposed to do, including just recently an Army National
Guard unit that had a soldier that was at risk. They identified
through our ASK program--I mean our ACE, which is Assist, Care
and Escort, took them to some behavioral health counseling in
the local community.
The soldier was released. And unfortunately they chose to
take their life anyway. So you can have people do all of the
things that you want. And at the end of the day, someone will
still choose to take their life, which is for me very sad,
because you always question, what is it that we didn't do?
And I think that leader, especially the one that did all of
the things that we have asked them to do, and this person still
takes their life, that burden that they feel--what if I had
just done this right, what if I had just not done this--I think
it is pretty overwhelming at times.
Sergeant Major Barrett. Thanks, Ray.
One, same answer when it comes to how do we count them. It
is in uniform, active duty and reserves, sir.

SUICIDE PREVENTION AND TRACKING

Next, you referred to how do we kind of track them. Well,
we do a cognitive assessment pre-deployment for any kind of
deployment, to see where they stand in the baseline.
There is a post-deployment health assessment that we
conduct after deployment. And then there is a post-deployment
health risk assessment that is done after deployment. And those
things are done 90 to 180 days after a deployment.
The leadership understands the need to maintain continual
vigilance for any type of characteristic changes. And that is
part of the post deployment health reassessment (PDHRA), the
mental health professional, the corpsman, the doctor who does
these PDHRAs, kind of walks the dog and talks you through any
changes you might have in your day to day living, kind of raise
your own awareness, and that for those of the people around
you.
So we have the cognitive assessments, the Post Deployment
Health Assessment (PDHAs), the PDHRAs.
Next, another thing that we are doing--and we have just
amped up our Transition Assistance Management Program. And we
are actually referring to it now as Transition Readiness
Seminar, because we are taking it to a whole new level.
As this thing starts to grow legs, there is going to be
touch points throughout the Marine's career, from the day they
enter the Marine Corps to the day they decide to walk out of
it.
And throughout the life cycle of a Marine, there will be
touch points for counseling and things of that nature. This is
going to add to the resiliency or strengthening of a Marine.
When it gets to how do we continue to track them, well, in
the core training of this Transition Readiness Seminar that we
will receive throughout the course of their career and towards
the very end, when they receive that capstone course, they do
receive briefings from the V.A., from the Department of Labor,
on how to better set themselves up for success.
So it is tracked. And by way of the reservists, our
reservists, we do have a contract outreach program to Marines,
30, 60 and 90 days post-deployment. And it is part of the
Psychological Health Outreach Program.

SUICIDE PREVENTION PROGRAMS

Master Chief West. Sir, thank you.
Sir, it is really same for the Navy, as far as how we track
them, active and reserve in uniform. We do that as well.
We have the PDHRAs, PDH, as the Marine Corps as well. We
also do something called Returning Warrior Workshops for our
Navy reservists that have deployed, not just for them. But they
have been the majority that take advantage of it.
We have them throughout the United States. It allows an
individual to come in. Also it is a group. It is a setting.
They will have it a resort somewhere, bring in the
professionals as well, to allow some of that one on one time.
We have a program called FOCUS, Families Overcoming Under
Stress, that we have deployed out there. To date, about 250,000
service members, their spouses, children and community
providers have received the training from the FOCUS piece. It
appears to be working very well for us as well move out there
to do what we need to do.
There is other things that we look at, operational stress
control, National Intrepid Center for the Excellence. We do
that as well. You are looking at a guy that just went through
the Navy's TAP Course. So I received the V.A. brief and
benefits, brief that they have.
I think it goes back, again, to the individual. But I think
to some degree, there is a hand off there. I am in the process
of it. I will probably have a better answer for you here in a
few months.
Navy Safe Harbor is another thing that we do. And it is one
of the those that is kind of like the Marine for Life type
event, where we take a Sailor, if they are having an issues in
the military, we can walk them through it.
Now it is not medical care type. But it is all the other
things, the support, non-medical support for that individual,
to help them navigate through all these hard and cumbersome
systems sometimes that may be out there.
But I think we are making some headway, based on all the
things that I am reading. I think we are going to sit down with
the V.A. individuals soon. And I hope to continue to knock some
of those walls and barriers down.
CMSAF Roy. Sir, we track the exact same way. Those that are
active Guard and Reserve, those are serving on duty, but we
don't track once they separate from the military.
I would like to take a minute just to talk about, Sergeant
Major of the Army mentioned Disabled Evaluation System. There
has been a look at that. It is called Records Inventory and
Disposition Schedule (RIDS), as we always put an everything,
remodeled.
There are six different sites out there across the military
that have done that. We have one of them, the United States Air
Force, down at Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina.
OSD P&R has asked for us to kind of take a strategic pause
to that, so that they could send teams out to look at it. The
goal is to get those processed within 295 days. That is the
goal. Much different than that you had heard about.
Mr. Farr. Yes, one thing, would you all take a look at a
Web site called NetworkOfCare.org? It is an attempt to put
every service that is available by county in the United States,
because when you think about it, you are a--I mean, DoD is an
entire family, a city of services.
Veterans is administered at the community level. But it is
a federal agency that only knows its federal family. So how do
you get them integrated into those mental health providers or
parents with children with disabilities like the Army spouse
with a child with autism?
Where is that local support group? It may not be on the
military base. So the network of care is trying to have all
that arranged by every county in America. And Maryland has done
a really good job. I might go to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. You bet. Thank you, Mr. Farr.
And just in passing, very quickly, something that we will
need to address in this subcommittee, I hope we will encourage,
through our bill, the military to adopt, frankly, the V.A.'s
system of medical records. A person can be with the V.A. for
much longer than you are going to probably in the military.
And from everything I can tell--and welcome you all's input
on this--the V.A does a pretty good job of keeping medical
records. And there needs to be some standardization. The DoD is
already moving in that direction.
That would certainly help.
And master chief, you raise an interesting point. Each one
of us should probably look at--and I have just asked my staff
to put me through the briefing that you are going through on
what happens in the transfer.
What does the V.A. tell you when you are about to become
under the V.A.'s umbrella? I would like to know.
Excuse us. This is unavoidably going to take a little
longer than 5 minutes. I know each one of us are conscious of
trying to make sure our colleagues get a chance to answer
questions.
So forgive me for intruding.
Let me recognize my good friend, Mr. Yoder, from Kansas.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here today. It is our honor
to sit here with you today and talk about the concerns of the
men and women in our armed services. Certainly we can't spend
enough time just listening and trying to figure out where we
can help.
And so I have just been listening intently here, taking
notes, and I really appreciate the conversation this morning.
A couple things stood out to me, and I had a couple of
follow up questions that I would love to just get some
additional feedback on.

MORALE

Sergeant Major Chandler spoke about what he remarked the
number one issue that actually affected the morale, maybe, or
the sentiments of the men and women of the Army. And I wondered
if this was similar in the other branches.
I think Sergeant Major said the comments that were being
made to him, `what do you mean the Army can't pay me?' I know
that was a frustration to a lot of us on the Hill as we debated
what are some very serious challenges we are facing
financially, that somehow in that debate, that the partisanship
or the rancor on Capital Hill would affect any of our men and
women in their service.
I know myself and probably many of my colleagues received
calls from military families saying my husband or my spouse is
overseas and I don't know if I am going to get paid--if we are
going to have enough to be able to pay our rent.
I mean, for gosh sakes, if we are putting someone's husband
or wife in harm's way, risking their life for our country, and
they are having to worry about whether their families can eat
back home, I just thought that whole thing was unforgivable.
And I know myself, the chairman, and many others signed on
to legislation that would say: no matter what happens, military
paychecks always go out. Whatever the debate is over here,
whether there is a shutdown, that it is an automatic thing that
goes out.
I think that is legislation that Congress should take up.
It is bipartisan. And I would like to put your men and women,
their minds at ease when they are serving, that no matter what
the battle is on the Hill, they don't need to pay attention to
that, because they are always going to get paid and they are
always going to be taken care of.
So I wanted just a brief follow up to mention to that, and
then to see if that is a concern for the other three gentlemen
as well.

TRANSITION TO CIVILIAN LIFE

And then a second question a little bit on the same lines
is, as we have troop draw down, and as there are changes to our
personnel and being deployed, men and women are coming back to
the United States--some of them without job opportunities when
they return.
We have spoken a little about a transition from active duty
to the V.A. and the different silos, but I thought maybe you
could speak a little bit about the concerns your men and women
have about that.
Is that legitimate concern, folks are thinking, well, if
you are going to draw us down, unemployment is already at 8 or
9 percent; where are the job opportunities for me?

VOW TO HIRE HEROES ACT

Certainly we did pass, with some bipartisanship in Congress
this year, the Vow to Hire Heroes Act, to encourage employers
to hire returning service men and women. And I wondered if that
was something that was positive. How does that affects the
choices folks are making?
And just how everybody is getting ready to transition back
into the private job market? And also, as some folks transition
back into higher education to get new training, how are we
doing in terms of making sure that men and women have all the
educational opportunities for higher education when they return
from service.
CMSAF Roy. If I could add, on the continuing resolution, it
is a concern. It was certainly a concern when it happened, and
many months after that.
I wouldn't draw it to my number one concern for our Airmen.
Our Airmen are not necessarily only concerned about that. They
are more concerned about the overall budget. But when you don't
pay them, they get pretty angry.
But the job opportunities, again, as the MCPON had
mentioned, the transition assistance has been--we have been
doing that in the United States Air Force for many years now.
And I would like to say that our transition assistance program
is one that sets the person up for success.
You know, we start when they come in, basically, and trying
to help make sure that they are highly educated; they have that
training that is necessary to make them successful. And that
transition assistance program is there to help them make that
transition effective.

CONTINUING RESOLUTION AND FORCE REDUCTION IMPACTS

Master Chief West. Yes, sir, if I may as well.
Last year, I opened my statement talking about the C.R. and
how it was causing a lot of prop wash, as we would call it in
the Navy, a lot of churn. And it did.
So anything you can do to stop those type actions, it
really does help us focus on what we should be doing. And that
is warfighting. That is what our job is.
The other piece, when you talk about draw down, we have the
TAP, the transition. Again, I told you I had gone through that
recently. It is a very good program. And there is a lot of good
things that I learned.
You know, 32 years in the Navy, you can teach an old dog
new tricks, in other words.
We also have been going with this draw down for many years,
as I have pointed out, about 60,000 folks over the past 10
years. And we have recently had to do some other things,
Perform to Serve, but most importantly the ERB.
And what we did with that is we have provided some enhanced
employment, you know, placement services. We have, through your
help, enacted TERA, which has helped with some of those folks,
that early retirement for our folks.
We have also provided travel to and from and in conus for
job fairs for our folks. NAVSEA, which is one of our biggest I
guess parts of our Navy--they do the ship--they have
established a program called Shipmate to Workmate.
Not only does it focus on the wounded, ill and injured, the
wounded warriors, I have seen the folks get hired really right
off the stage. With that also said, we have expanded. And they
have been very aggressive for us in targeting these folks that
are with the early retirement.
Mandatory TAP assistance, that TAP program we talked about.
We have enacted for those folks that ERB, to make sure they
have to sit down and get that counseling and that guidance.
And push them or pushing towards our Navy Reserve we think
is also a good opportunity, because if they have the
opportunity to serve in the Reserve, and then maybe in a few
years--you never know--we could be in here saying to you, we
need people; we need your help to get people in, which we have
seen that cycle in the past.
Then it allows them to flow a little easier from our Navy
Reserve back into our active force.
And then there is other things that we have. I think that
our services are set up. I think, you know, always we adjust on
the fly to make them as good as we can for those individuals.

CONTINUING RESOLUTION IMPACTS

Sergeant Major Barrett. On the continuing resolution, yes,
it was absolutely a concern. And when I had an opportunity to
sit on the Consumer Financial Protection Board a couple of
months ago. And I brought that up.
And Marines were addressing the fact that, well, we can
always go out in town and see the snakes. And they were
referring to the predatory loan industry, who in some instances
have learned how to bypass the law that was put out not too
long ago.
And they are still finding a way to put 400 percent down on
top of a loan, for you to pay it back. So that was a concern.
So we would be leading hard on our Navy/Marine Corps Relief
Society, and our Armed Services Young Man's Christian
Association (ASYMCA) and what not, to help Marines to get
through something if this were to happen.
So nothing good would come of it.
When we talk about how do we transition people out of the
service, one of the things that we are very proud of right now
is we are the first service to institute the Transition
Readiness Seminar. And again, it is from the second you walk
into the Marine Corps to the second you decide you want to
leave the service.
When you get to--as you are going throughout the course of
your career, the life cycle of a Marine, one of the things you
are going to be required to do early in your enlistment is take
out what is being presently developed right now, which is a
personal and professional development Marine Corps Institute,
if you will, an MCI, we call it.
And what it does is it prepares you and it teaches you
about the touch points and the career counseling that you get
along the way. And it also breaks it down into four pathways,
the four pathways you will take when you leave the service,
whether you are going to go to college, whether you are going
to get a vo-tech--you are going to learn how to be a welder--
entrepreneurial, or you want to just get out and go back to
work.
Well, inside our PP&O Plans, Programs & Operations and the
life cycle of the Marine, you are going to kind of be taught
along the way, well, which path do you want to take when it
comes time to leave. So from the second you join to the second
you decide to leave, you are being educated on what pathway it
is that you want to take.
When it comes time to leave you are better prepared. We
found that is the best way to keep faith with our Marines who
are deciding to leave the service.

TRANSITION TO THE U.A.C.

Sergeant Major Chandler. Congressman, obviously I already
mentioned the CR. For the Army, our program is actually very
similar to the Marine Corps one. I would tell you that for the
Army Career and Alumni Program, which is what we have had up
until now, we did have some places that we probably were not as
disciplined in as we should have been.
So for an example, part of the process was that a person in
the past, if they were interested in understanding V.A.
benefits, they could attend a workshop. But it wasn't mandated.
And that caused a problem actually for the V.A., because
they weren't sure of how many people were actually
transitioning out of the service and that were looking for V.A.
benefits upon leaving the service.
So part of the process we are going to do now is when
soldiers start our program, very similar to what the Marine
Corps is doing, they will actually have to attend the workshop
and enroll in e-benefits, which is the program that the V.A.
uses, which educates and also helps the V.A. understand what
their requirements are going to be placed on them, by demand
for people leaving the force.
I would tell you, and I learned this from a very educated
woman at one time, I don't think anybody in the service is
looking for a handout. They are looking for a hand up.
And I would think together as a nation, for our young men
and women who have given so much over the past 10 years--and
when you think about it, less than 1 percent of the American
people are willing or able to serve in the armed services.

CONTINUING RESOLUTION IMPACTS

We should be able to find ways that we can work together as
a nation to help these young men and women as they transition
from the service and back into our society. They have an
intangible that I am not sure so many people recognize.
And that is the leadership, the work ethic, the commitment
to values that I think every single business that at least I
have spoken with is committed to.
We are also going to be focused on education, small
business opportunities. We are actually going to ask folks if
they are interested in moving into the Reserve and Army
National Guard. And obviously those that want to stay, if they
have a place, we will work to keep them there.
So I am very excited about this. I think it is a way for
our nation to recognize the tremendous sacrifice. But it is
also a way for these young men and women to give back.
And just as a second note, you know, the G.I. Bill benefits
and its transportability, and the ability to use that benefit
for your family members, I am not sure that we all recognize
just how powerful that is. If I am a young soldier and I have
decided I don't want to pursue a secondary or post-secondary
degree, but I can give that to my spouse or my child, think
about the benefit that that does for our nation.
It is incredible. It is probably the greatest gift we have
been given in our time in the service, anyway. I thank you for
that.
Mr. Yoder. Well said, sir. And thank you, gentlemen, for
your comments.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Mr. Yoder.
I am pleased to recognize my good friend from Minnesota,
Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As pointed out, we talk about quality of life as well as
what we owe our service men and women during the transition
back into civilian life. So there has been a lot of talk about
hardware, pay, and retirement. Those are things that I think as
members of Congress, we feel comfortable talking about, because
it's one of the few things where I think we stand together,
with party labels removed.
The other thing that has been touched upon is sexual
assault and suicide areas where--I can't speak any louder. I am
sorry if you can't hear me.
The whole issue of sexual assault, suicide, spoken at the
Department of Defense Subcommittee, spoken of here, spoken of
in the policy committees, both in the House and Senate. We read
about it in the paper.
And I know that the military is working hard on this issue.
But one of the quality of life issues in which the chair I
know wanted to focus part of this discussion today is our
schools, is our children.
All you gentlemen, maybe you are fathers. Maybe you are
not. If you are fathers, you have had children, because of the
amount of time that you spent in, that probably attended
multiple schools. Heads are shaking. This isn't just about one
school, multiple schools, multiple states.

EDUCATION

Talked about the transferring of credits. And I speak with
reluctance a little bit. But I know a little bit about it,
having brothers, sisters born around different air bases around
the country, and being transferred back and forth, even at
first grade, from Texas to Ohio.
So education is something that I experienced a little bit
first hand. Now my father left and separated early. And so I
had an opportunity to go to a high school in my father's
hometown, same high school that--same year, in fact, 1972, that
Attorney General Alhalter. We graduated together.
And I think as two kids who probably didn't know what our
destiny was going to be, the one thing that guaranteed that we
had the opportunity for a successful destiny was a good quality
education. I am going to take this hearing a little bit back to
some of the focus that has been before.
But as a daughter of a former--my father has passed--of a
severely disabled veteran, all the things that have been
mentioned up here are important. But we have oversight
responsibility in the full quality of life.
So I am going to go back talking about our schools, and
asking questions. If you don't have the answers, you can get
back to us.
There was a report that was put that--it was in the media.
And it talked about families who live on military installations
send their children to 100 of 94 bases and schools operated by
the Pentagon around the world.
There are 159 base schools that are operated in conjunction
with the U.S. Department of Education, doing some oversight,
but it is primarily local school districts that you do that
work with.
There is a report just on those 194--excuse me, 159 base
schools. And doing some rough math here--if I had a magnifying
glass, I was trying to read this chart. Oh, my gosh.
We have some schools that are in pretty big trouble. And so
I want to ask you a little bit about that.
We have 59 schools that are really in the not needs
improvement, but maybe needs to be demolished category, because
of structural deficiencies. So that probably means that school
is not wired for technology.
That probably means that that school, when that young
student walks into it, isn't saying I am part of a military
family; we are the best of excellence and we are treated with
honor, dignity and respect, is reflected on that child at all,
or that family, or that military parent that is sending that
child to that school.
So part of our oversight responsibility is to find out how
we turn that around. So some of my questions would take longer
than 5 minutes. And I am starting from ground zero at the end
of the hearing, after 2 hours.
So part of what I would like to know--and I know you talked
about the school liaison officer. And if I understand how that
is kind of working, that is to help kids like me who make the
transition so I don't get my German Measles shots for the third
time because my medical card hasn't followed me.
But you have oversight responsibility. We have oversight
responsibility for Impact Aid. That goes to a school district.
And if we don't put the tools in the toolbox and the teeth
behind the Impact Aid, for you to be able to go in and say,
excuse me, school district, this is unacceptable, the quality
of education, or this building, the facility our children have;
I am going to hold you accountable and responsible for that
Impact Aid.
So if you could maybe address what we can do to help give
you the tool in the toolbox for the impact aid, and what our
failure, our collective failure, Democrat, Republican,
independent, for making sure that Impact Aid has kept up with
the cost of that child going to school.
Because I am very concerned about what is going on. To the
chairman's point, charter schools are great. I don't have a
problem with public oversight of charter schools. But dilution
is not the solution to this problem.
And so if you could just give me a few minutes a piece
about how we can work together with what we are all fighting
for, with you putting your lives on the line, and us, you know,
up here trying to make good decisions in the fight, to make
sure that every child in this country--every child in this
country has the same opportunities that Tom and I had, and that
Tom's children deserve.

SCHOOLS

Sergeant Major Chandler. Congresswoman, thanks. You know,
that is a fantastic question. My mother was a school teacher at
both the middle school and high school level for more than 20
years before she retired and chose to do something else in
life.
And so as a son of an educator, I understand exactly, in
many ways, what you are talking about. Because from time to
time, we will talk about how we are doing in schools. I will
tell you that, from an Army perspective, number one, the school
liaison officer does more than just making sure the records are
straight.
They actually provide liaison with the school and the
military community to try and resolve problems like Impact Aid.
My awareness of the entire Impact Aid program is limited. But I
will tell you that I know that in some circumstances, Impact
Aid is not completely used just to make sure that the education
provided for the military kids that are in that school, it is
more diluted, just like you talked about.
When I was in El Paso, Texas, that was an area of concern
for us down there. And the installation and the state and local
government worked very hard with the El Paso Independent School
District to make changes.
From an Army perspective, I know the DoD has provided
grants for $500 million through the Office of Economic
Adjustment, for schools that are in the conditions that you
talked about.
And for the Army, we have got schools at Fort Bliss in El
Paso, Texas, joint--Fort, Fort Sill and Fort Riley that have
been assessed and grants have been offered to those school
districts to work on improving in either rehabbing or replacing
schools.
Could we use more? Absolutely. You know, I think all the
services would say that we want every single child that is in
our nation, and for us, for the services, to be in the best
possible school our nation can afford.

MILITARY CHILDREN'S EDUCATION PROGRAMS

We look forward to finding out what other ways we can do to
help. And we will definitely get back, in the Army anyway, on
other areas that we need assistance with. Absolutely.
[The information follows:]

Impact Aid is a Department of Education program that is an
important source of federal income for school districts that educate
federally connected children. Impact Aid is intended to offset the loss
of local tax revenue and is deposited into the school district's
general fund account, just as property taxes are. In effect, Impact Aid
is the federal government's ``tax payment'' to local school districts
for property taken off local tax rolls and helps ensure military
children are provided a quality education.
Historically, Impact Aid has been funded at less than the
Department of Education requirement. The Army continues to work with
the Department of Education and DoD to find solutions to this mutual
concern and appreciate the committee's support.
The Army supports collaboration and partnership efforts, managed
locally by School Liaison Officers, to encourage strong working
relationships among school systems and the installations they support.
The Army supports partnerships with school systems and school boards to
facilitate opportunities to educate school personnel, parents, and
communities about the importance and benefits of Impact Aid. This
includes informing commanders and parents about the importance of
completing federal forms so school districts receive the Impact Aid
allocation for each eligible student.

Sergeant Major Barrett. Ma'am, we have no charter schools
in the Marine Corps. We do have the School Liaison Program that
covers down on 70 districts across all 17 major installations
in the Marine Corps.
But that is not the answer you are looking for. And I owe
you a better response than that. And you shall have it, ma'am.
[The information follows:]

We can work together through hearings, caucus meetings and
Congressional requests for information, which are good ways to educate
each other on our mutual efforts to improve education. We ask that you
include us as much as possible in your deliberations so that we can
help you craft the most effective and targeted legislation to meet our
mutual goals and needs.
For our part, the Marine Corps has taken several steps to ensure
our children receive the education they deserve. Our School Liaison
Program operates as a military-civilian community communication and
support program intended to support children who are within the
geographic region of our installations. The program addresses the
unique issues and challenges faced by the 66,000 Marine Corps school-
age dependents as they relocate six to nine times during their K-12
academic years. At the policy level, our Headquarters Marine Corps
Senior School Liaison participates in a K-12 Partnership with the
Department of Education, Department of Defense Education Agency and the
other services to provide a coordinated effort to address the needs of
all military school-age children.
At the installation level, our School Liaisons (SLs) act as the
single point of contact for the commander for educational matters of
school-age children. They provide materials, training or other support
services to increase and enhance the Local Education Agencies' (LEAs)
awareness of the unique educational needs of military families. Our SLs
provide support to more than 70 school districts and over 1,750 schools
that have a high percentage of military dependents. As a result, over
70 partnerships have been formed with local schools that enhance
services to military school-age children. Our SLs provide LEAs with
information and guidance on the Impact Aid program to assist LEAs with
their decisions regarding the use of these federal dollars.
We strongly support the work of the Office of the Secretary of
Defense in gaining state signatories to the Interstate Compact on
Educational Opportunity for Military Children, which enables reciprocal
acceptance of enrollment, eligibility, placement and graduation
requirements. In addition, our children would benefit from authorizing
the Common Core State Standards in English, Language Arts and Math,
which is coordinated by the National Governors Association Center for
Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers. These
standards will promote common curricula for students regardless of
their location and will provide a smoother school transition for
students.

Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you for all of us.
Master Chief West. Yes, sir.
Ma'am, great question.
As I pointed out earlier, we have two charter schools in
the Navy, one in Key West, the other one in New Orleans. I have
two sons, 24, he is a Navy diver currently. And I have a 21
year old that is going to George Mason.
And you know, I would also say that when you look at that,
what makes us a good military, like someone up here pointed
out, it is not about the hardware or the technology we have. It
is the people we put in place.

IMPACT AID PROGRAM

I think there has been a renewed focus over the past few
years in schools, in getting out and, you know, focusing on
things like Just Move. So I think that all those things are
very helpful.
Compact Aid or Impact Aid, I too have been involved in
Hawaii, along with my counterpart to the right here, with how
that was spent. And I think it is, like the Sergeant Major
already pointed out, to some degree it gets diluted.
I think this is something that you are right. This is our
seed--you know seed corn.
Ms. McCollum. That is okay. I am from Minnesota.
Master Chief West. So you know what I am talking about.
Ma'am, it is our seed corn for the nation. And I think this is
one thing that we could really focus on to make sure we are,
you know, staying focused in technology and all those things
that make America the greatest country in the world.
We have to be out there. But it starts, like you said, in
those classrooms. Those classrooms aren't the best. And we are
doing a disservice not just to our military. I think we are
making huge headway with this school liaison officers and all
the things that we are focusing on.
But if we are not providing the best environment for our
personnel throughout the nation to learn in, then we are
missing something as a country.
[The information follows:]

Since 1950, Impact Aid has been, and continues to be, a vital
program for local communities in which the Navy works and lives. While
the program falls under the U.S. Department of Education (ED), the
calculation for Impact Aid payments includes our presence in local
communities. Districts may use the funds in whatever manner they choose
in accordance with their local and state requirements. Impact Aid
provides critical supplemental Federal resources to local school
districts, thereby, contributing to quality education for ``Federally
connected students''. Most Impact Aid funds, except for the additional
payments for children with disabilities and construction payments, are
considered general aid to the recipient school districts.
The Department of the Navy (DON) is proud of a strong history of
working very closely with our community partners. The efforts of our
Commanders and the commitments from communities serving Navy families
have laid the groundwork for successfully planning for and carrying out
our mission requirements. Our goal is to support our families and local
education agencies with the K-12 education challenges facing military-
connected children. DON recognizes that Impact Aid is an important
source of funding for school districts; however, we do not have a role
in the development, determination, or distribution of the U.S.
Department of Education (ED) Impact Aid program.

CMSAF Sergeant Roy. Ma'am, again, thank you for your
service. And thank you for serving alongside your father.
I am not familiar with Impact Aid as much as I should, even
though I was involved with distributing it out in the Pacific.
When you have got the preponderance of people that live on a
Oahu, but yet some of this Impact Aid is going to another
island, it doesn't make sense.
So we owe you a better answer to that and we will get that
to you.
[The information follows:]

I would recommend three things. First of all, Congress needs to
develop statutory requirements mandating that school districts report
on the use of federal Impact Aid programs. Secondly, allow for the
Department of Defense Education Activity to have a part in the
distribution of resources at military impacted schools. Finally, Impact
Aid for Large Scale Rebasing Program has been authorized annually;
however, appropriations have not been received since 2007.

I myself, like you and many of the others down the table
here, I have children as well. My children are 12 years old.
And they have attended their third school. And it is quit
ironic. One has been a DoD school. Another one has been on the
installation in Hawaii, but yet a part of the local community's
school system.
At that particular school, you are exactly right. We had to
come up with money to purchase the air conditioners for those
classrooms. That is ridiculous.
Why would we expect the parent to have to do that?
To the point to where we are today, in this environment
here, in the national capital region, where I wouldn't even put
my kids in the school system.
I put them in an individual school system, one that I pay
for, because I am not putting them in a local school system.
And it is a personal choice. I understand that.
But I also understand, just like one of my son's friends
that--he is just a few years younger than he is. And he was
absolutely failing in school, absolutely failing in elementary
school to the point where the family was going to move away,
split up.
The member was going to stay here. The family were going to
move to northern Pennsylvania just because they were trying to
get back to the school system in which they grew up in.
The charter school comes in within a year, that child has
turned around. Not just in their academics, but also in their
behavior. That is what a good school system can do.
And I absolutely agree with you. And I owe you a better
answer, but I absolutely agree with what you are saying.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chairman, I think we should ask our staff
maybe to work--to put up a small document on it--doesn't have
to be in great detail, as much as people want to get--what
impact it is.
It is a formula based aid which has not kept up with
inflation at all for years and years and years. A kid assigned
to a school district, and unless you have a school district
that is really working with the base, that sees having the base
with a military installation there as part of its economic
growth and development, they can quite often absorb the money
and put it towards whatever.
It is a formula without any--as Mr. Farr was saying,
without any teeth. And if we are to work with school districts
about--talking about public charter schools, I think that gives
us some teeth with it.

ACCOUNTABILITY OF IMPACT AID DOLLARS

But I also think that we should be asking for
accountability, transparency, and oversight on those dollars.
Those dollars are given in lieu to the school district for
not being able to tax the federal land.
So, I am not saying that 100 percent of it has to go there.
But there needs to be a formula with accountability and
transparency that makes sure that that child, and that child's
family, is getting what they need.
The other thing is the transfer of credits becomes another
issue. With leave no child behind in all 50 states being able
to accept their own standards, some of the children who are at
highest risk for kind of being pinged around, are children in
the military, or even some of the folks in the private sector
where they find themselves moving around a lot.
Because one school can have one set of standards for math.
A state right next to it can have something different.
And a child can go into third grade thinking that they were
fully prepared, top of their class at the district that they
were at, and be in a different state and find themselves at the
bottom of the class. Or bored out of their gourd because of
what is going on with our schools.
And if we want families to stay together, soldiers not be
concerned about what is going on back home, part of that is
your homework done. Are you succeeding? And what is going on in
school?
Because that is the thing that I hear my families talk
about when I watch the video conferences.
But thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to getting the
stats.
I think we are going to have to just drill down on the
schools and maybe just take an hour and do that with CRS or
some of the----
Mr. Culberson. Yes----
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. Staff here. Maybe having a
huddle before we do our next meeting on this.
Thank you, thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Culberson. Absolutely.
And Mr. Nunnelee, would you permit me just a brief moment
to follow-up.
I couldn't agree with you more, Ms. McCollum, on this. And
the impact data she said is designed to compensate local
publicly funded school district.
But the fact that they cannot tax federally owned property,
because obviously the federally owned property is tax exempt.
And that places a real hardship on the school district's
ability to raise revenue. And the formula is designed to help
compensate them for that.
And the example you mention, Chief Master Sergeant of the
Air Force Roy, of the young man, you told me he was 11 and he
was enrolled and was having the trouble----
CMSAF Roy. Right----
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. In the local Prince George's
County is----
CMSAF Roy. He was nine. He was having troubles in the local
Prince George's County school system, which is a charter
school.
Mr. Culberson. In Prince George's. Are there any military
bases in the District of Columbia at all?
I mean that they are like for example, they are both based
at the military base.
Was he going to the D.C. public school?
CMSAF Roy. We do, yes.
Mr. Culberson. You do----
CMSAF Roy. Down at Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling.
Mr. Culberson. Bolling.
CMSAF Roy. Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling.
Mr. Culberson. Okay. One thing we might look at that is--
and all of us--I am going to tell you something.
I am going to come your way on something that I never
thought I would ever say publicly, but make an opportunity
scholarship in the District of Columbia available for family
members of the military.
Because there has been some contention about that in
general for kids that live in the District of Columbia. And--
got to make those into this--maybe some way through this
subcommittee to the extent that we have got jurisdiction with
our friends on the other subcommittees influenced with--and
excuse me.
To make--duty scholarships available for the kids that are
going to Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling or any other--I mean for
example, if they are going to the D.C. schools--because we have
got the--Congress has jurisdiction over those funds.
And then secondly, you all remember Nancy Johnson from
Connecticut, who had for years worked with--and I think she did
this with Judy Biggert and somebody else, they passed a bill a
couple of years ago.
I don't know if the Senate passed it or not. But the
federal government would get in to help and pay for local
public school construction which caused me to fall over and
faint as a fiscal conservative, because of the amount of money
that would be nationwide.
But you mention a report, Betty, that said there were 159
base schools. I would love to have that as a part of the record
and work with you on that.
And think about what, for example, of those schools are
serving members of the military, ought to be a real benefit for
a public school district to be next door to a military base.
And one of those benefits might ought to be in addition to,
obviously access to charter schools, opportunity to
scholarships, that need help would impact a--but then finally,
Betty, that why don't we--frankly that would be one area you
would actually get a guy like me, as conservative as I am, to
agree that we ought to get into the business of helping that
local school that is serving the military if they need
technology, if they need to be rebuilt.
I can't believe I am saying that, but that actually is an
area--I almost fell--I can't believe I am saying it, but it is
true.
She is right. I mean, I am with her.
Ms. McCollum. Well, we should be doing it for our D.C.
schools too, because----
Mr. Culberson. I know----
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. Part of the reason why they are
in so much disrepair is members of Congress sent their children
to private schools.
Mr. Culberson. What do you do?
Ms. McCollum. The public--well, but then they weren't
invested in making sure that the public schools had the
infrastructure that they needed, because their children weren't
going there.
And we have oversight. We have been the police. We have
been the police. We have been the nanny. We have been
everything the D.C.--on what to do.
At the same time, that is not doing it ourselves, because
we don't live here.
So, there is work to do with D.C. And I think that that
needs to probably pulled out separate from what we are doing
here.
Gentlemen, if there is a report available from the Pentagon
on the 195 Pentagon run schools----
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. 95.
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. Because there are two sets of
schools we are talking about here. And I was unable to find on
that.
And also, your request--I know CRS has been trying to get
it from the Pentagon--the request for educational
appropriations for 2013 is not available to us as members of
Congress right now, as we are moving forward making our
decision.
Mr. Culberson. We are going to work arm-in-arm on this with
Betty helping us take the lead on this.
Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. You have been generous. You have given me 15
minutes to talk about this whole thing.
Mr. Culberson. There is nothing more important, actually
nothing more important in our lives than our children, our
families, and so we understand that.
Thank you, Mr. Nunnelee. Forgive me for indulging and
taking some of our time, sir, thank you.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One thing about being a gentleman at this end of the table,
everything has already been said, just not everybody said it.
[Laughter.]
So, I will try not to be redundant. But I do want to
follow-up on Mr. Yoder's questions and comments.
I walked in the room, Sergeant Major, when you were making
the observation about what do you mean the Army can't pay.
That got my attention, I wrestled with issues like every
member of Congress did last year. And the thing that kept me
awake at night was that question.
If you will allow, I may plagiarize Sergeant Major
Barrett's motto, ``keeping faith works both ways.'' I am going
to borrow that.
I may give you credit the first couple of times. And then
start to use it.
And the context in which I am going to borrow it is that
keeping faith does work both ways. We have men and women that
are standing in harms way defending our freedom.
And as a member of Congress, my obligation to them is to
make sure that they don't have to ask themselves--and their
families don't have to ask themselves the question that you
asked, Sergeant Major Chandler, what do you mean, the Army
can't pay me.

SEQUESTRATION

Mr. Nunnelee. Now, a question, we have talked a lot about
sequestration and its impact on national security.
This is appropriately where most of our questions ought to
be directed. But my suspicion is that if sequestration takes
effect, one of the greatest casualties of sequestration is
going to be quality of life issues for our men and women.
Because if you are forced to make difficult budget
decisions, and those decisions involve on one hand, cuts and
issues that will involve national security, and on the other
hand cuts and issues that involve quality of life issues for
families, it becomes a no-brainer.
So, I would just like to ask you to share, as much as
possible; I don't know whether you have begun the planning for
sequestration, but specifically what impact will that have on
quality of life issues specifically for families that are
serving in the military?

IMPACT OF SEQUESTRATION

Sergeant Major Chandler. Congressman, it is a great
question, the follow-up first.
What we have got to remember is we--I was talking
specifically about the active component. But the CR last year
in April, caused some of our guard and reserve units not to
drill.
And if you think about that, specifically for a traditional
guardsman, who many of them do rely on that drill pay to
support their income, that was a huge impact already.
So, when you think about sequestration, you know, a course
of action may mean that some of our guard and reserve units are
not going to be able to drill just in the minimum standards
that they need to, even if they are not in--have been alerted
for deployment.
And when you talk about the impact of quality of life and
family programs, I would argue that any impact in any program
indirectly impacts national security. So, if we make a decision
to cut a family program because of sequestration or a series of
programs, that has an impact because it is about that soldier.
And if that soldier's concern is on whether or not his
family is going to get child care, whether or not his family is
going to be able to seek domestic violence counsel, those all
have an impact on the readiness, at least from the Army's
perspective, on the Army.
Now, the other--I am sure the other services would want to
speak to that. But all of these things are connected.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACT ON MILITARY FAMILY PROGRAMS

There is not one thread that you can pull that solves all
of the problems or answers the question of sequestration. They
are all linked, because as we say in the Army, you recruit a
soldier, but you retain the family.
And so that faith that--or what we do in turn we receive
this, that faith could be broken. And for our Army, anyways,
that will have a detrimental impact for years to come.
Once you break that faith, it is really hard to get it
back. And I am sure--it is like a handshake means so much. You
know, when you shake someone's hand that is a commitment.
Saying that we are going to support soldiers and their
families for the Army is a commitment. If we break that
commitment, I am concerned about where we will be as an Army,
immediately.
Sergeant Major Barrett. Yes, and I will jump right on the
bandwagon. And I will echo all quality of life issues, all
those behavioral health areas, all the societal issues that
will come to surface even more so: drugs, alcohol, domestic
violence, criminal mischief, sexual misconduct, hazing,
operational stress--suicide. That is all going to ramp up.
I can't give you a percentage, but it is definitely going
to ramp up.
Upkeep to our infrastructure and facilities will be in
jeopardy.
Force modernization, so all the things that we have,
everything from our ground combat vehicle strategy to full
spectrum battle equipment, all the things we need to stay ahead
of our adversaries and our enemies, to include the going to the
field, putting bullets in our rifles, go to the rifle range,
training and maintenance, sending people to school, that has an
impact to quality of life.
Because now what you are doing in the Marine Corps, you
know, idle hands, nothing good happens.
You need to keep them busy. You need to keep them engaged.
Keep them in the field. Keep them training. Keep them doing
those things.
We don't have those monies. We are not modernizing force.
We are not taking care of operations and maintenance. And it
affects all those societal issues that I brought up.
Master Chief West. Sir, you could put everything they said
and put Navy or Sailor in front of it. It really is the same
thing.
But one other congressman pointed out earlier is well, this
is not just military. This is going to be across the nation,
which again, affects the future too, those generations that we
are looking at.
I have nothing further to add.
CMSAF Sergeant Roy. Just like you, sir, down at the end of
this table, everybody said it already.
One other point I would bring up is, you know, everybody
was talking about dwell, just as a point of reference.
Certainly sequestration could certainly drive that dwell up
affecting the quality of life of our folks as well. So, I just
reiterate everything that my fellows have talked about as well.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Nunnelee.
We rely a great deal on Jim Moran's expertise and
knowledge. He serves both on this subcommittee, has for many
years with great distinction, but also on the Defense
Subcommittee.
Jim, we are glad you are here. And understand you were
across the hall with Secretary Panetta on your Appropriation
Subcommittee for Defense. And, of course, welcome whatever he
had to say to you about sequestration as well.
Mr. Moran. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, the secretary and
General Dempsey were very clear that we cannot tolerate
sequestration in the amount of--$1 trillion over the next
decade in the Defense Department period.
He says it is impossible. We are not making plans. We can't
do it.
So, one approach though in that regard is what has been
offered by Senator McCain and Chairman McKeon which is to cut
the federal civilian workforce by 10 percent. And that would
enable the Defense Department to delay, by 1 year,
implementation sequestration.

SEQUESTRATION-NAVY CIVIL SERVICE IMPACTS

But the problem is that two-thirds of our civilian
workforce are involved in national security. So if any of you
have any comments about that, I don't necessarily want you to
feel obliged to pipe in.
But if you have something to add to our understanding, we
would appreciate it in that regard to one of the proposals to
delay sequestration for a year.

IMPACT OF SEQUESTRATION

CMSAF Sergeant Roy. Absolutely. And as you mentioned, sir,
the two-thirds of those folks work within national defense.
We rely on our civilian workforce, just as much as we rely
on that warfighter out there on the end of the spear.
So, to say that we could reduce our civilian workforce
would dramatically affect our ability to perform the mission.
Mr. Moran. Interesting.
Master Chief West. Sir, from a Navy's perspective, I echo
that. I will tell you, we have a total force, our Navy Reserve
and our Navy civilians.
And I have to say that our Navy civilians contribute
immensely to everything that we do. They are absolutely
embedded. They are part of our team.
And when you start cutting folks, and you start talking
sequestration, you know, it is going to be very tough for
everybody, and not a good thing at all. And it has the ability
to take our military--when I talk about our military, I include
my Navy civilians, and it is going to be bad.
Major Barrett. Sir, I had the same thing written down. I
was cheating off of them. I had down total force. And it
absolutely will affect us.

IMPACTS OF SEQUESTRATION

Sergeant Major Chandler. My brothers here and I echo the
same sentiment, sir, that from an Army perspective--not to
criticize anyone else's idea, but it sounds kind of like a
self-licking ice-cream cone.
You reduce the size of the civilian workforce, and you have
to put military folks to do some of those key and essential
functions that a civilian is now doing. But you are also going
to reduce the size of the services in uniform at the same time
through sequestration.
I am not sure you can get there from here.
And at the end of the day, there are things that we need
our soldiers, sailors, and airmen, and Marine to do and do
extremely well.
So, if you take them to do something that a civilian has
done in the past, they are not going to be doing that core
function that each of us say that we are warfighters, and that
is what we do.
Mr. Moran. That is very instructive information to add to
our consideration. We appreciate it very much. And it does seem
as though there may be some counterproductive aspects to that
proposal.
Health care costs--if I could, Mr. Chairman, let me just
give a couple of statistics and then ask for comment.
In 2000, the Pentagon spent $17.7 billion on medical
benefits. In 2012, that amount has grown by 150 percent to
$44.3 billion.
It is largely because of the expansion of benefits and the
beneficiary population.
We have created new programs. We have added new benefits.
We have extended eligibility to new categories of
beneficiaries.
The defense health program currently includes more than 9
million eligible beneficiaries. That is 3 million more people
than in 2000.
Now, many argue naturally that providing care to immediate
family members whose eligibility has been expanded, it does
help ensure peace of mind. And that can have a major positive
effect on readiness.
But my question would be do you think the increase in
family readiness is proportionate to the increase in health
care costs which are having a profound impact upon our
budgetary considerations. It is a zero sum game now in terms of
how much we can spend on the military and on health benefits.
Or are there more cost effective methods to increase family
readiness?
That will be my only question, Mr. Chairman.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Who wants to go first? You all are
looking at me. [Laughter.]

FAMILY READINESS

CMSAF Roy. I will take the first whack at it.
Let me just say that when you look at the health of the
force, if you will, it is not just the member. It is the family
as well.
You know, if you have somebody's mind that is not focused
on the mission because of an illness or some type of--something
going on with their family member, that is not one that you
want to send to the battlefield.
So, I would be an absolute supporter of why would we want
to take away from those benefits that we give to our family
members? I don't think that is the right venue to look at this.
But I think there is something here that we need to look
at. And that would be, just simply, you know, Sergeant Major of
the Army mentioned earlier of how many folks are eligible to
even serve in the United States military today.
A lot of that is because of our health condition across
America. A lot of them are just not able to serve in uniform
because of overweight and many other health conditions.
So, you have got to understand that that is also the fabric
of our military as well is, you know, a lot of our families fit
in that category.

NAVY FAMILY READINESS

So, the more that we focus on total force, total family
fitness, is one that helps us long term to cut those costs of
health care down.
Miss Paula and myself and the boys are the representatives
for the United States Air Force Fit Family Program.
We struggle at it every day. When do we walk? What do we
do? What do we eat?
But those are things that America needs to do if we are
going to drive these health care costs down.
So, I would just throw that out at you.
Master Chief West. Well said, shipmate.
Anyway, sir, one of the things I would like to just point
out is this is an all-volunteer force. And I think to have a
very good sustainable voluntary force, you have to make sure
those folks at home are getting everything they need.
He pointed out that we have a huge population of our nation
that can't even serve in the military.
Well, our recruiters can only go after 23 percent of the
nation right now for all those things that Chief Roy mentioned.
Other than that, I really don't have a lot more to add. I
think he articulated that very well.
Major Barrett. Same thing, sir, they again, I stole off of
both of them, the volunteer force, but also just like to
reiterate the amount of sacrifice that the families have been
giving over these great many years.

FAMILY READINESS

Sergeant Major Chandler. Sir, I do think that there may be
some efficiencies that are gained at looking at more
opportunities to use the facilities and the tools that each of
the services have.
I know there has been discussion about a unified health
command. I think we should explore that.
Each of the services has a different culture. But it is
about the delivery of medicine, and care.
And so I think we should explore that as rigorously as we
can to see where we can gain efficiencies and whether or not a
soldier or a family member is being treated at an Air Force or
a Navy hospital, I think we can do a lot of work there.
The other thing though I would echo the same sentiment.
Only about 23 percent of the 17 to 24-year-old male population
in the United States of America can serve and meets the
requirements to serve in the Armed Services.
Most of those are for medical disqualification. Many of
them are also because of issues that they have had with some
problem in their past that they have gotten into trouble.
But a lot of it is medical. We have got to incorporate this
culture of prevention and well-being back in our society which
I think that we have lost a lot of personally.
And prevention and well-being, I think, is going to drive
down costs. But this has got to be part of what we say is
important to our country and not just for our national defense,
because it impacts everybody.
And finally I do think there is an element of
accountability here. We have a tremendous, tremendous benefit.
You know, Jeanne and I's children are almost all professionals.
Their average upfront cost of their yearly health care is more
than $5,000 for each one of them.
Ours is very, very, very less especially if you are a
retiree.
There has got to be accountability that in return for this
gracious benefit, you have got to be more educated on ways to
gain access, like using the Telenurse program that TRICARE had
to drive people from going to the emergency room immediately,
which causes cost.
But I think we have got to do a better job there too, sir.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Chairman, obviously I don't think any of us
disagree that we need to be more physically fit. And take
advantage of--services--a unified health care command, we are
in the process of implementing. It hasn't saved any money yet.
But it may show promise. It certainly does on paper.
But, Mr. Chairman, the fact that health care costs have
gone up by 150 percent in the last decade, and we have 3
million more eligible beneficiaries, I do think is something we
need to take a close look at, because it is not that we don't
want to spend that money, but it does mean that we have less
money to spend in other areas. And that is why we need to
evaluate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Mr. Moran.
It is intriguing that we started out with all our questions
about suicide prevention and what a concern that is. And so
much of this circles back to is--you just mentioned, sir,
prevention, wellbeing.
And what so much of it also of course, to the extent we are
able to do so, to encourage every young man and woman in the
military to develop a strong religious faith, whatever that may
be, and encourage strong families.
Sounds like you have got a program in the Marine Corps to
do that.
A lot--if they are happy at home, if they feel like they
have got a strong spiritual life and are loved and--not only--
maybe if they don't have the family at home, certainly by the
new family they have acquired by joining the Armed Forces, that
means a lot.
And your story about the Marine Corps, those two young men
in the Marine Corps, one guy spotting another one, was able to
help save his life. It is often all it takes, just a little bit
of TLC makes a huge difference.
If I could ask, just--and in a couple of areas quickly and
turn to my friend, Mr. Bishop, is I wanted to ask when it
comes, you know, barracks, dormitories, families ask the
sergeant major of the Marine Corps in particular, when it comes
to Guam, there has been some discussion about modifying the
realignment roadmap and replacing permanent party Marines on
Guam with a large rotational component.
What would that, in your opinion, do to Marines and family
members if they had continuous rotations over an extended
period?
What would be the impact on Marines and their families?
Major Barrett. Well, sir, I am not sure if you have ever
been to Guam. But it is not very big and there is not a whole
lot to do.
So, we would not put that many married families on to Guam
is what I could share with you.
Mr. Culberson. Not a happy family friendly place.
Major Barrett. Yes, no, sir, well there is not a lot to do
there.
Mr. Culberson. Yes.
Major Barrett. But I owe you a better response than that,
sir. But I do know that we would not put that many families
onto Guam, because of space, sir.
Mr. Culberson. It is the effect of the continuous rotation.
I understand there has been some discussion about replacing the
permanent Marine contingent on Guam with a continuously
rotating Marine contingent.
What effect would that have on the Marines there?
Major Barrett. Well, sir, actually that would be a positive
effect because it is--we are getting back to our amphibious
roots and getting back into the Pacific. So, you are getting
Marines back on the unit deployment program.
We are keeping them busy. Keeping them deployed.
Because one of our biggest fears is you take this force
that has fought for the last 10 years and everything that we
have done and what we have become, and now to just go to idle
hands, that is not good for any of the branches of service, so
going back out there, sir, going to Australia, going to Guam
and those forces back into the Pacific.
They would be a positive--sir.
Mr. Culberson. Very good, thank you.
I recall last year, Sergeant Major Chandler, there was some
discussion from the Army about moving married families to ask
that come into this--I am going to use a formal request, but
there had been some discussions that Mr. Bishop of building up
facilities in Korea to allow families to come over.
And they may not just be the Army, if it affects any other,
probably maybe the Air Force as well, perhaps, maybe the Navy.
Could you talk to us a little bit about that? I know the
costs would be pretty significant.
And from your perspective, Sergeant Major, the benefit of
allowing, you know, if we were to invest the money to build out
those facilities and allow families to move in out there, what
in your opinion, and from your perspective are the benefits
of--it would be a pretty dramatic.
Always better to have your family there with you----
Sergeant Major Chandler. Absolutely----

TOUR NORMALIZATION

Mr. Culberson. My life revolves around my wife and
daughter. But just talk to us about the benefit of that----
Major Chandler. Absolutely, Chairman.
You know, it is tour normalization. And we have basically
put a pause on that program.
We do have about 3,700 command-sponsored families. So, we
have got the infrastructure and the facilities to take care of
them.
But if we want to expand the program, there is going to be
a tremendous investment.
You know, part of the things that the chief and the
secretary have talked about is this rotational force. And so,
it may be better, sir, for us to actually rotate forces through
there.
Now, we have to think about this----
Mr. Culberson. So, the Marines are thinking about doing it
in Guam?
Sergeant Major Chandler. Right.
If you take that similar approach, you may have an
equipment set that is left in Korea, in our case. And you
rotate units through there as part of their Army force
generation process.
So, they go through a training--a reset period. They go
through a training period. And their deployment may be to
Korea.
The challenge for most of the Army units in Korea is a
readiness challenge, because right now, we are on an individual
rotation basis.
So, if you rotate soldiers in, you have 300 or 400 people
that are rotating in there every single month from a tanker by
background. That is a four-man crew. You have got to work
really closely together and be able to use the weapon systems
and the vehicle appropriately.
If you have got 25 percent of that crew, one in four,
changing, you know, every 3 months, you are never going to have
as good a crew as if you had trained together, and then
deployed for a period of time and then return.
Mr. Culberson. That is true.
Sergeant Major Chandler. So, we think the rotational model
for the Army in Korea may be a way.
Now obviously, there are some political considerations with
the Korean government that have to be taken into account.
But we think that this may be a way for us to make sure
that we retain readiness for our Army and provide a better
trained force on the Korean Peninsula in support of our
national objective.
Mr. Culberson. Because of the unique security challenges in
Korea that you have got these lunatics north of the border that
could launch at any moment, that you really need to----
Sergeant Major Chandler. There are some----
Mr. Culberson. [Off mike.].
Sergeant Major Chandler [continuing]. Dangerous people
there, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Yes. You need your very best there ready to
go at all times.
Sergeant Major Chandler. So, there may be----
Mr. Culberson. Are there concerns of our military members
to have their families right there, I mean, just south of the
border, within missile range of those nuts?
Sergeant Major Chandler. If--it is a concern.
CMSAF Roy. Sir, I served in a couple of capacities, a lot
of capacities in the Pacific, two tours and on the Peninsula, a
tour in Japan, and obviously at the United States Pacific
Command. And I will tell you, yes, we would like to normalize
Korea.
But realization is as the budget comes towards us, I think
the mention of rotational forces is probably the way that we
need to go.
Is it a concern to have family members over the border in
Korea? I wouldn't say necessarily over the border, as much as
maybe even Japan.
Japan was more concerned about North Korea than sometimes
South Korea was.
Mr. Culberson. Interesting.
Sergeant Roy. So, it is one that we don't think of it in
those dynamics. But for us, the rotational forces works better
for us.
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.

CHILD CARE

I want to go back to another issue which is child care
which is an issue that I wanted to touch on also.
Obviously, the military parents need to have reliable
access to high quality early childhood care and early childhood
education in order to minimize the worry about the disruption
that is caused by frequent deployments, other duties,
requirements.
And of course, we have talked about it over the past 3
years quite a bit.
And last December, the National Association of Child Care
Resource and Referral Agency announced the military child care
liaison initiative, which is a 2-year pilot program with DOD to
expand availability and the quality of affordable community-
based child care for military families.
Could each of you, starting with the Army, talk about the
programs available to service members where child care is
needed?
And Sergeant Major Chandler and Sergeant Major Barrett,
many of the Soldiers and Marines who are severely injured in
combat, sometimes can't return to duty right away.
Are there programs available to these service members with
regard to child care during their recuperation period?
And of course, Sergeant Major Barrett, last year Sergeant
Major Kent talked about the Marine Corps developing a child
development program and a facility master plan.
Could you talk to me about the status of the plan and
whether or not the lower fiscal year 2013 budget will affect
the implementation of that plan?
And finally, Sergeant Major Chandler, what specifically
with Fort Myer--we had an opportunity to spend some time at
Fort Myer a couple of months ago. And in talking with some of
the personnel there, they indicated that the child care
facility that services Fort Myer has a waiting list of about
300 plus.
And that there is a tension there, because the children of
service members who are assigned to the Pentagon get priority
over the service members who are actually stationed at Fort
Myer, and as a consequence of limited capacity, there is a 300-
child waiting list.
So, do we need to try to address that overload by
modification of facilities and making others available?
And if you would, please tell us status of overall child
care programs, and then, of course, we could focus on Fort Myer
and Pentagon--Fort Myer Soldiers.

CHILD CARE

Sergeant Major Chandler. Yes, Congressman.
First of all, I will just go backwards.
We have the child care facility at Fort Myer does in fact
take care of the families at Fort Myer, but also at the
Pentagon.
Back in 2002, there was a decision made because of security
reasons to close the child care facility that was on the
Pentagon ground. There was an expansion of the Fort Myer child
care facility to do that.
Just as of last week, the current Fort Myer infant waiting
list, and this includes 9 months for pregnancy, is 9 to 12
months.
So, if you have had a child the waiting list right now is
one to 4 months.
Pre-toddler and toddlers are 2 to 6 months, preschool is 2
to 6 months, and kindergarten is just over a month.
So, we have done better at that.
What I think we need to do for the folks that are
specifically at Fort Myer is to make sure they understand that
that is not just for Fort Myer. But it is also for folks at the
Pentagon.
So, it is a Pentagon solution for family members.
We have for our wounded warriors in the Army, provided a
reduced cost for child care, for wounded warriors and their
families. If you are in the lowest total family income
category, category one, we provide a person the 20 percent off.
So, let us say that you are at a higher income. You are a
dual military person.
You are automatically, as a wounded warrior, going to go to
the lowest total family income category. And then we are going
to provide you an additional 20 percent off if you are already
in that category.
If you have more than one child, we are going to give you
an additional 15 percent off of your child care costs.
And so, we think we have met the need for our wounded
warriors and families.
Across the Army, I think we are doing very well in child
care and child development facilities. We are going to take a
look at maybe deferring some new child care facilities because
in the Army, the reduction of the Eighth Brigade combat teams,
and then from there what is the impact on MILCON?
You know, so we are going to defer some of those.
If there is an obvious need right now that we know we need,
we will do it. But if you are at a post camp or station that as
time goes on we identify as one of the places that may lose one
of those brigades, we are going to take a look at that MILCON
project and others to see if we are still going to need that
need.
Mr. Bishop. But you have Fort Myer though--.
Sergeant Major Chandler. But Fort Myer is what I was
talking about earlier----
Mr. Bishop. Yes----
Major Chandler [continuing]. The wait time. We have done
pretty well there, I think.
And it is one of those things we can----
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. 9 months?
Sergeant Major Chandler. Nine to 12 months for an infant.
But that includes pregnancy. So, it is actually 1 to 3 months
if you have delivered your child.
That is not a very long waiting list. And if it is an
emergency, we can supplement a family member's cost for care
outside of the child development center.
But there are some private firms that we say meet the
quality standards for a child development center. They are much
more expensive----
Mr. Bishop. Do you make provisions for that?
Sergeant Major Chandler. Yes, sir, we do.
Major Barrett. Thank you, sir.
The Marine Corps does meet our child care demand through a
multifaceted approach through the construction of facilities,
child development centers.
The subsidy program, specifically fee assistance to
geographically dispersed Marines, something greater than 30
miles from a facility. And we provide the monies to help
augment that through a subsidy program.
In regards to our wounded, yes, when a Marine is wounded,
he is not going immediately back and we have the children and
the families come and stay at a Fisher House or the Walter Reed
Military Medical Center for any length of time, one of the very
first things that is done is a needs assessment is done on that
family to identify any needs that that spouse and those
children may need.
And through the recovery care coordinators, they will help
facilitate any of those needs. And through the family support
coordinators, they will work with the other care coordinators
to ensure all those needs are met.

CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS

In reference to the master plan Sergeant Major Kent
referred to last year, the Marine Corps did complete its child
development program and facilities master plan, which reviewed
the child care capabilities and costs across the entire Marine
Corps.
And to answer the question, as far as the fiscal year 2013
budget, sir, I will need to get back with you just exactly how
the fiscal year 2013 budget will affect our child development
program.
[The information follows:]

Child care services remain a high priority in the Marine Corps. The
Marine Corps has completed its Child Development Program and Facility
Master Plan, which reviewed child care capabilities and costs across
the Marine Corps. This plan facilitated efforts to build multi-capable
and adaptable services, reexamined structure, and ensured that we are
delivering child care in an efficient manner.
The Master Plan confirmed that we are on the right path in child
care facility growth. In Fiscal Year 2011, we provided 15,927 child
care spaces, which reflected an 18 percent increase in capacity from
Fiscal Year 2010. The Marine Corps opened five new child development
centers in Fiscal Year 2011 and plans to open five more in Fiscal Year
2012. We will continue to standardize our processes in Fiscal Year 2012
and will work to enhance child care for Marines and families serving on
independent duty or at locations that are isolated from military bases
and stations.
The proposed Fiscal Year 2013 budget will not impact these plans.

Master Chief West. Yes, sir, from a Navy's perspective,
this year we are meeting our OSD goal for potential need for
our child care services.
Last year, we opened up 7,000 new spaces for our folks. And
by doing and using a mix from our CDCs, our child development
centers, and our youth programs, we have taken our waiting list
from about 8 months down to 3, sir, which is a really
manageable from our perspective.
I think no matter what you do with child care, there will
be always a continual need to stay focused on it, keep it on
our radar, and make sure that we are doing everything we can.
But at this point, I am very happy with the child care that
our military members receive.
From a perspective of our wounded warriors, there is a hand
out there. We use a mix of services. We not only utilize the
Wounded Warrior Program with our Marine Corps brothers and
sisters, but we also utilize the Navy Marine Corps Relief
Society.
They provide some respite care along with our Navy Safe
Harbor.
So, I think we are moving in the all the right directions.
And we made a lot of headway this past year with this program.

FAMILY AND CHILD CARE

CMSAF Roy. I would just like to add just a couple of things
unique to the Air Force.
We have taken on this idea of a family child care where it
is not so much the brick and mortar child care center that you
have. But also you have families that are looking for work as
well.
And we have certified them to be able to watch children as
well. That has worked tremendously for us.
To the point that we are able to get to some of our unique
missions of missile--say for instance, missile maintenance of
sort, we are out on a missile silo for 2 days. Somehow you have
got to have that overlap of childcare.
It is not just the eight to four, eight to five kind of
job. So, we have been able to utilize it through that.
Also, through the National Association of Child Care
Resource and Referral Agency, we have a contract with them to
help with some of the other uniqueness of the Air Force.
Certainly with the Guard and Reserve have helped with that,
but also our missions that we have out at Creech Air Force Base
and other locations.
As the MCPON mentioned, one area of focus for us is that
with the exceptional family member, and the respite care. We
have put an awful lot of attention to the respite care for
those families.
Wounded Warrior, I would say, I have--Des is here with me
today. Des is a proud parent of a 2-month-old baby boy, by the
name of Cameron.
And Cameron will receive that care certainly with the help
of the regional care coordinator that Des and Lisa have been
working----
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that very much.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
Let me just--there are a couple of other areas very
quickly. In particular dealing with barracks and dormitories, I
wanted to ask you all about the unaccompanied housing as well
as housing for accompanied soldiers in each one of your
services.
If you could talk to us about the plans that your
department has to improve the--any plan or program you have got
that you have asked the Congress about that you have already
got underway to improve the quality of your barracks or
dormitories.
And when do you expect them to be completed?
And what, in your opinion, do you have adequate facilities
for accompanied soldiers?

ELIMINATING INADEQUATE DORMITORIES AND HOUSING PRIVATIZATION

CMSAF Roy. Dormitories--let me take the dormitories first.
We currently have 9,800 inadequate dormitory rooms. We are
attacking that by obviously the construction pieces.
One of the areas that we have been doing at basic training
is making living facilities also a training facility as well.
We also have taken a deliberate pause on some of our military
construction for a reason.
We have got to see where the forces are going to be in the
future. We certainly wouldn't want to build a brand new
facility and not have a use for it.
So, we have taken a deliberate pause this year to kind of
rethink where the forces are going to be. And then we will
resume with military construction.
As far as the housing is concerned, we have had much
success through our privatized housing contractors. We have
four more groups at many bases, that still need to be competed
yet.
Of the four, three of them are well on their way. The
Continental Group is lagging, but we have some headway on that
one as well.

BARRACKS AND HOUSING PROGRAMS

Master Chief West. Sir, for family housing, I will tell you
in my 32 years, I have never seen it better through PPV or
public-private venture. I think we have done a lot of good
things in that perspective for our military members.
Mr. Culberson. Spectacular in San Diego, what the Navy's
done with that public----
Master Chief West. It is actually incredible. And that is
family housing I was speaking to.
Now, if you talk barracks, the CNO has committed this year
to improving the overall quality of all of our bachelor
housing. And we are submitting, you know, the funds to that, to
bring it back up to where we need it to be.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. San Diego was for single----
Master Chief West. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. I don't think that is a
paradise.
Master Chief West. I will get to that one.
Mr. Culberson. Single adult.
Master Chief West. We actually have PPV barracks where our
single Sailors live. And that is absolutely incredible.
Through your support, PPV, Homeport Hampton Roads, in
Norfolk and out in San Diego, I forget the--Pacific Beacon is
the name of that. It is absolutely phenomenal.
And we are actually studying now to see whether we can
expand that in certain areas.
Mr. Culberson. I hope you can. That is great----
Master Chief West. I hope so too. It is----
Mr. Culberson. All of you ought to look at it----

MILITARY HOUSING AND BILLETING

Master Chief West. We have gone a long way.
The thing with that, with our barracks too, we are on track
also. We still have about 5,000 of our sailors that live on
board ships.
We call that Homeport Ashore and bringing those folks on.
And we are on track to meet that goal by 2016.
So, I think we are doing what we need to do to get it right
and making it better every day.
But, sir, thank you for your comments on PPV San Diego. You
are right. Just doesn't get any better than that.
Mr. Culberson. Yes, it is an amazing operation.
And private sector is happy or the tenants are happy?
Master Chief West. I think everybody is--I am happy even
when I walk through it, sir.
Sergeant Major Barrett. I will echo the Navy, sir, our
housing is magnificent. Our BEQs from 2006 to 2011 we got very
aggressive on throwing up brand new bachelor enlisted quarters,
stayed in a great many of them as I travel around.
That is where I actually spend my nights. I will knock on a
young Marine's door and say, hey, you have got an extra rack?
And that is where I spend the night.
Mr. Culberson. He had enough room for you.
Sergeant Major Barrett. Sir, I have room for you as well,
sir.
Mr. Culberson. I need to try it sometime, I really do. I
think it would be terrific.
If you are going to put me through my paces at boot camp--
--
Sergeant Major Barrett. We absolutely are, sir.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Kill me.
Sergeant Major Barrett. We are getting ready--we are going
to throw up four more BEQs this year alone. Our BEQs are
adequate.
As a matter of fact, right now we account for 90 percent of
all bed spaces for our single Marines. And as we start to draw
down, we will be closer to housing our single Marines much
greater than 90 percent, shy of 100 percent obviously for bed
spaces.
And so doing with the new BEQs and again, the generosity of
the Congress for providing all those amazing resources, the
scarce resources in terms of dollars, you have given us such
great places to live.
And we saw a fiscal efficiency in our own way in the Marine
Corps when we stopped Marines from applying to go and live out
on town on--for bachelor allowance for housing own right.
We stopped doing that in June, the 29th or July 29th. And
since we have done that, we have had a considerable fiscal
savings.
As a matter of fact, the Marines that previously lived out
in town, Basic Allowance Housing own right, on their own, they
have moved back into the barracks.
We did not order them back into the barracks. They came
back in because of just how nice the new BEQs are.
So, there are fiscal savings in them coming from out in
town, living back in the barracks.
So in essence, when you built us our new barracks, you also
saved us money.
Mr. Culberson. So, the Marine Corps is on track with BEQs.
We fully funded every one of you I believe last session. And
you are on track with the BEQs.
Sergeant Major Barrett. We are, sir.
Mr. Culberson. On track with your family housing.
Sergeant Major Barrett. We are, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Okay, very good, sir.
Sergeant Major.

BARRACKS

Sergeant Major Chandler. Sir, we are on track too.
We are going to take a tactful pause however in many of our
barracks programs, specifically training barracks and in
unaccompanied personnel housing, until we sort out the draw
down.
It is going to have an impact. We just don't want to spend
money where we don't need to.
I am sure we will have those answers here in the near term
future.
Accompanied personnel housing, family housing, we are
complete with our privatization program. Many of the partners
are beyond their initial development plans.
So in other words, they have taken over the properties,
revitalized or built new properties, and are now moving into
the sustainment of those properties.
Tremendous impact on soldiers and families, obviously, you
want every kid that is in the service to have the best possible
place you can give them.
We have made a tremendous amount of work in our sustainment
and restoration and modernization to upgrade the things we
currently have besides just building new.
And I think that the position we have taken now is we need
to take a pause. Let us make sure we know where we are going to
have our troops and the facilities associated with them. And if
it doesn't make sense to build something new, because we are
not going to have the population, let us apply that someplace
else with the help of Congress.
I think that is where we are, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
Navy and Air Force on track with both the barracks, dorms,
family housing----
Roy. We are. When we say privatized dormitories, a little
bit different than housing, great success with the Navy and
what they have done with that.
Just one caution with that is that if you privatize all
your dormitories that means that you don't necessarily have to
tell an Airman, in my case, that they have to live in that
dormitory.
We consider that continuing the blue--our Airmen. We lock
them into the dormitory per se, not literally, but per se. And
that is where we continue with the development of our Airmen,
so, just a word of caution.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Bishop.
CMSAF Roy. One more--go ahead, sir----
Master Chief West. No, sir----
CMSAF Roy. Master Chief----
Master West. I am just gearing up, posturing. [Laughter.]
Mr. Culberson. The Navy is always ready.
One other question about TRICARE in the fiscal year 2013
budget that the president submitted, he has proposed new
enrollment fees for TRICARE, higher deductibles for TRICARE,
standard and extra new enrollment fees, if you are 65 years or
older, increases.
He proposes also increasing pharmacy co-pay.
How will those proposed increases be received if--again, it
is a proposal. But if the president succeeded in each one of
those, how would those increases be received by the men and
women under your command?

TRICARE

Sergeant Major Chandler. Chairman, many of those proposals
will affect our retiree population.
I am going to be a retiree here in the not too distant
future.
Mr. Culberson. This got your attention.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Absolutely. As a matter of fact,
we were all part of the Department of Defense, and we were
actually brought in on this. And I am very grateful for the
Secretary of Defense and the chairman to include the senior
enlisted advisors in this.
But we understand this. You know, at the end of the day,
these costs are escalating.
We have not really raised the rates very much over the past
several years. And I think that we all understand that there is
going to be increased responsibility here, and there is going
to be an increased cost associated with that provided the
Congress chooses to enact the budget.
Mr. Culberson. But these are just proposals?
Sergeant Major Chandler. Yes.
The idea that the co-pay for pharmacies though, you know,
it is really to drive people and change behavior.
If you want to get way from going to, for instance,
Walgreens to get your prescription, well what we want you to do
is either use the military treatment facility or use mail
order, which does have a much greater reduced cost.
And so if we can gain those efficiencies by changing some
behavior, because those rates are actually lower than the
traditional pharmacy outposts, we think that is a good thing.
Mr. Culberson. Have you all heard any feedback yet from--
probably not--may not even be aware of it. But how do you think
most of the men and women of your command would respond to
higher enrollment fees, higher deductibles, and increased co-
pay for pharmaceuticals?
Sergeant Major Barrett. That is--well, if you were living
aboard an installation, you are on active duty. So, it is not
going to affect you that----
And I go right back to what Sergeant Major of the Army is
saying, it is going to affect those VSOs, those veteran service
organizations. They are going to be the very first ones that
are going to come after you when this starts happening----
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Proposing----

PROPOSED TRICARE CHANGES

Sergeant Major Barrett. Yes, sir. Yes, sir, threw that out
there for that effect.
But there is a breaking point associated with this. You
talk about slow growth for retirees pay. You start talking
about increased costs for co-pay. For pharmacy, you start
talking about raising standard and prime.
And now, let us start messing with the commissary too.
There is a breaking point in there somewhere. And then we
start breaking faith with those who have served prior.
Mr. Culberson. That is a key part of this, Master Chief, is
the when you all signed on, the government, the United States
of America made a promise to you and a contract.
You might want to stick with whatever the deal was you
entered into.
Master Chief West. Yes, sir. And I think that is exactly
what my two counterparts on my left said.
But I also think, as we all do, and Sergeant Major pointed
out earlier, there is efficiencies to be looked at, I think,
everywhere we look. And we need to capitalize on those where we
can.
I think you would say all of this stuff about the budget,
none of us really want to do it. But it is something we have to
do to sustain the forces and really, our military, our
government throughout in the long term.
Mr. Culberson. Sure. And we are all keenly aware of it. We
have got immense budget problems.
But----
Master Chief West. You bet.
Mr. Culberson. For everyone who is in the military active
duty, the government did make a promise to you and a contract.
And would you agree that is a key part of this, is that for
those of you who have already signed up, seems like we ought to
honor that deal.
If you are going to change anything, maybe for new folks
that are joining, just so they understand at the time they sign
up and shake hands, here is the new deal.
CMSAF Roy. Once again, the proposal is not breaking faith.
There is nowhere in that contract does it read what our TRICARE
prime will be, what our TRICARE standard will be. It says it
will be provided basically.
And we have got to understand, since 1992, 1993, that
TRICARE rate has not increased at all. If you compare that to
the civilian sector which all of us have family members in the
civilian sector, and we understand how much those----
Mr. Culberson. Sure----
CMSAF Roy [continuing]. Are and----
But a lot of it is how you present it as well.
As we have all mentioned, the VSOs--we have got to be able
to address this with VSOs, because obviously for somebody that
would come out of the wall, if you will, the black and say, I
don't understand this. We have got to be able to explain it to
them. And it is part of the explanation piece.
We absolutely have to be clearer.
Mr. Culberson. Sure.
As a general rule then, you don't think the men and women
under your command would necessarily object to any of these
changes?
CMSAF Roy. Again, that----
Mr. Culberson. You all are being very----
CMSAF Roy. The statements were made though for the bulk of
us. We all live in an installation----
Mr. Culberson. Yes----
CMSAF Roy [continuing]. Or close to an installation. It is
not going to be a huge factor.
Certainly when we look at our Guard and Reserve, certainly
some of them may increase rates may be because they are not
around an installation like that.
But I think overall, I think these are very--I hate to tone
them down but they are slight increases.
Yes, and it is one that we have got to accept.
Master Chief West. No one likes change, sir.

TRICARE

Sergeant Major Chandler. From those that are on active
duty, I hear very little if anything about this. From our
retirees it has been an issue from time-to-time when we have
met with them. I am sure that everyone else has heard the same
thing.
I am not sure, you know, when it comes time for me to
retire, I am going to have to make a personal choice on whether
I want to stay with TRICARE or if I want to seek other health
care insurance.
And I think that is part of the equation.
Mr. Culberson. Sure.
Sergeant Major Chandler. People gravitate towards TRICARE
because it is a outstanding benefit. And I think that if the
costs do go up, it may cause people to reconsider other
options.
I don't think there is anything wrong with that.
Mr. Culberson. They did--the president did exempt TRICARE
from Obama Care.
Obama Care was such a great deal. The nation wanted to be
sure to exempt TRICARE.
Never mind.
I did note the DVD apparently did light people up a lot
more though. When, you know, when the DVD was published and
that went viral on compensation retirement, that lit people up.
This one is not really----
Okay.

SYNTHETIC DRUGS--SPICE

I want to make sure is--and we will have other questions
for the record, I know perhaps Mr. Bishop shares this with me.
Just want to make sure what have we--anything else we have
not asked you about here for the record? I mean on the record.
We will submit other things in writing for you, other
questions, to follow-up.
What do--if you could, sir, if each one of you tell us
anything we have not touched on that you would like Mr. Bishop
and I and our colleagues to be sure we are paying attention to
that we perhaps have not yet touched on?
Master Chief West. Sir, if I may. I have been doing this
for 4 years along with some of the other folks here. But this
is probably the best session I have seen, honestly.
So, for your leadership, thank you very much.
Mr. Culberson. You are very kind, thank you----
Master Chief West. Seats were----
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Rookie at this. So, I----
Master Chief West. Well, seats were full. And, you know,
there is a lot of questions today. So, that is a good thing.
I guess this is more of a comment. We need your help on a
few things, really one.
The synthetic compounds are something that is called Spice.
They are coming across.
Now, I know probably not the venue to do it. But it does
affect a lot of the quality of life that we have. And it has
touched all of our services that we have today.
As of 21--or December of this last year, 40 of the states
is actually controlling some of the chemicals associated with
Spice. I would ask that if you would, just take a look at that.
This is something we have to push across, I think, all 50
states. And we have to make sure we have a handle on it. And
ban those substances where we can.
Because it is going after not only our military, but it is
going after our nation's youth. And it is similar to what you
would say is marijuana. It is a controlled substance.
But there is still--you can get it over the Internet. And
you can get it across many of the states' counters as well.
That is just something, please takes----
Mr. Bishop. Something that they smoke?
Master Chief West. Yes, sir. You can smoke it. There are
other things like bath salts that, believe it or not, they are
snorting using those.
They are finding ways. But the Spice piece, I think almost
all of us in here have had personnel hospitalized for that
substance.
And it is growing. We don't get our arms around it more so
sooner than later, then it is going to be even a bigger
problem.
CMSAF Roy. I don't have anything more to add. Just again,
like the MCPON said, I mean, this is my 3rd year at this as
well, and this is by far the most inquisitive panel that there
has been. And are really appreciate your continued support.
The items that you hit on, and talked about, are things
that we are focused on and should be focused on. And we
appreciate your attention to them as well.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. You can detect every one of us
care deeply about----
Sergeant Major Barrett. Well, this was my first one. So,
you have set the bar. So I expect it to be this way every year
now. [Laughter.]
And I do have one final thing I would love to enter. You
know, Navy medicine has substantially increased the number of
mental health professionals in the past 2 years to care for
just what we have been going through for the last 10.
Now, they have an aggressive plan to further expand their
training pipeline even more. However, I have been briefed that
the national pool of mental health professionals is limited and
under stress from the increasing need.
I appreciate Congress' energy and commitment of resources
in this area of psychological health, professional recruitment,
especially in this time of economic stress.

OTHER AREAS OF IMPORTANCE TO ARMY

Sergeant Major Chandler. Sir, as the largest service, I
have got two things, not one.
First one is I was asked by Congressman Bishop about the
issue with women in combat, and specifically for the Army women
in the Army.
This is really about talent management for us and finding
the best athlete, the best qualified person to do the job.
And we have embarked on a program and--to look at the role
of--and where women are.
I believe wholeheartedly that this is a good thing and the
right thing for our Army to do. And we will look to see what
the results are.
What I would ask for everyone is patience. We put a lot of
hard work into the repeal of don't ask, don't tell. And I would
like us to have the same consideration at least from the Army
perspective, of how we broaden the opportunities for women in
the Army.
And let us work through this as an Army as we move forward.
The other one is that for us not to forget that we are
still in war. We are still in combat.
And there may be a rush to make additional cuts because we
need money. But it is going to take us at least through 2014
for the Army to start to transition completely out of
Afghanistan.
And we will need a period of time after that to reset the
Army in personnel and equipment and training. We are going to
need to sustain that so that we can continue to have the Army
that you have today.
And I would ask for your support in that.
That is all, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Well, I know you will certainly have it.
From my personal perspective, as a Texan, I know certainly
my friends in Georgia probably feel the same way. We, all of
us, are proud to support you and to help you in any way that we
can.
But when it comes to women in combat or don't ask, don't
tell, frankly women in submarines, which I still don't
understand that. It just doesn't make any sense.
Master Chief West. Successful.
Mr. Culberson. I hope so.
That ought to be up to you all. I mean, that sort of thing
truly ought to--without being any political pressure--it ought
to be based on your own good judgment and what is best for the
services and the type of mission that you are on.
And I just wish we would get the--I wish politicians would
just get the heck out of it and leave you all alone.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Chairman, I am not going to speak
for any of the services, because we each have our own culture
when it comes to how we do business.
Just for us, it is about talent management, and really
finding the best athlete.
Mr. Culberson. Without political pressure though. I would
just love us to get out of it.
Sergeant Major Chandler. Well, we appreciate the oversight.
Mr. Culberson. Yes.
Sergeant Major Chandler. We do.
Mr. Culberson. Yes, but when it comes to things like that
abut how do you sharpen the tip of that spear the best, and who
needs to be right there at the tip of the spear, that ought to
be entirely up to you without any interference from any
politician, anybody anywhere, any time.
And we are immensely proud of you. We trust your good
judgment. And it is a privilege for us to serve on this
subcommittee to help make sure that men and women under your
command have everything that they need for themselves and their
families, so they never have to worry one nanosecond about the
quality of their life.
And it is a privilege to be here with you today, sir. And
we thank you for our service.
And congratulations on your retirement, Master Chief, and
we are immensely proud of you, your wife, the sacrifice that
your family has made.
You, Des, thank you, God bless you and your family.
We wish all of you the very best. We will do all we can to
help you.
Master Chief West. Sir, you never know. We might see each
other--I am actually looking at Georgia or Texas to retire in.
Mr. Culberson. We would love to have you.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.173

Thursday, March 29, 2012.

PACIFIC COMMAND/KOREA--PACOM COMMANDER AND U.S. FORCES KOREA

WITNESSES

ADMIRAL SAMUEL J. LOCKLEAR, III, U.S. NAVY, COMMANDER, U.S. PACIFIC
COMMAND
GENERAL JAMES D. THURMAN, COMMANDER, UNITED NATIONS COMMAND, COMMANDER,
UNITED STATES-REPUBLIC OF KOREA COMBINED FORCES COMMAND, AND
COMMANDER, UNITED STATES FORCES KOREA

Chairman Opening Statement

Mr. Culberson. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. The
Appropriations Subcommittee on Military Construction and
Veterans Affairs will come to order.
It is a privilege to welcome you all here today to our
fiscal year 2013 force posture and military construction
request for the U.S. Pacific Command and the U.S. Forces Korea.
Our Nation has an increasing interest in the Pacific region. It
has always been vitally important to United States interests
and those of our allies, especially important now in light of
the increasing aggressiveness of the Chinese towards our
friends in the Pacific, our long-time allies in Korea and Japan
to whom we are so devoted and so grateful for the friendship of
the Japanese people and the Korean people, of our allies and
friends in the Philippines and throughout the Pacific region,
and the importance of keeping those sea lanes of commerce open
for our allies, for world commerce.
It is especially important today that we are here today to
talk about the Asia Pacific region. The President has
recognized the growing importance of the Pacific to the United
States and to our allies by recommending that we, as a Nation,
pivot our forces to focus more on the Pacific. And maintaining
our friendship, our partnerships with Korea and Japan and all
of our allies is especially crucial to maintaining the regional
security in the Pacific.
We are also, as a Nation, deeply grateful to the Japanese
and Korean people for their investment that they and their
taxpayers have made with their dollars, with their hearts and
their support and friendship for our troops. It is really
important, and we recognize it with immense gratitude.
We have with us here today, as more members come in, we
will be recognizing them, but I want to be sure to recognize
our ranking member, Mr. Bishop, for any remarks he would like
to make.

Ranking Member Opening Statement

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much for yielding, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, let me first say congratulations on becoming PACOM
commander, and I wish you nothing but good luck on this tour.
General Thurman, I am glad to have you here as well this
morning and want to thank you for hosting our subcommittee
staff a few weeks ago in Korea. I know your time is valuable,
so I just want to say thank you for your kind hospitality to
them.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, Admiral Locklear's plate is
pretty full. For example, the relocation of the Marines has hit
some roadblocks in being renegotiated. In addition, we are in
the process of repositioning our forces, General Thurman, in
Korea.
Probably the biggest item on your plate is rebalancing
forces towards the Asia-Pacific region. I believe that this is
the right move by the administration and the Department of
Defense because roughly, $5.2 trillion in commerce flows
through the South China Sea, and much of it belongs to the
United States. I think that the United States must maintain its
ability to project power in areas which our access and freedom
to operate are challenged by potential adversaries.
Further, I also believe that rebalancing our forces to the
Asia-Pacific region will deter those potential adversaries and
prevent them from achieving their objectives and probably, most
importantly, will keep us from going to another war.
Admiral and General, as you can see, we have some pretty
important issues to cover. I want to thank you both for being
here today and I look forward to your testimony.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Mr. Bishop.
It is a privilege to welcome you both here today, Admiral
Locklear, making your first appearance before the subcommittee.
We are very, very grateful to you for your 35 years of service,
graduating from the Naval Academy in 1977 and for your work as
the Commander of the Third Fleet and U.S. Naval Forces in
Europe, executive assistant to the Vice Chief of Naval
Operations, and congratulations as well for your appointment as
Commander of Pacific Forces in March of 2012.
I also am very grateful to you, General Thurman, for your
service to the Nation. I am delighted to have you here today,
sir, as the Commander of the U.S. Forces Korea, the Combined
Forces Command there for the United Nations as well, of course,
and also making your a first appearance before our subcommittee
as Commander of U.S. Forces Korea and those of the United
Nations.
You also have had significant Army and Joint Staff
experience, including Assistant to the Chief of Staff for Plans
and Policy and Allied Forces for Southern Europe's Regional
Command South in Italy. I see that you earned your commission
through ROTC at East Central Oklahoma University and are a
native of Marietta.
We are deeply grateful to you both for your service. Thank
you for being here. Of course, your written statements will be
entered into the record and we would welcome your summarization
of your remarks.
We would be glad to begin with Admiral Locklear. Thank you,
sir.

Statement of Admiral Locklear, III

Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Congressman Bishop and members of the committee. I really
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the military construction needs and initiatives in the
United States Pacific Command.
I would first like to thank Congress for funding the
military construction accounts in the past, which have improved
U.S. Pacific Command's readiness and our quality of life for
our service members who are deployed. I would also like to
thank the committee for your interest in the Asia Pacific
region. I recommend that members of this committee continue to
visit Pacific Command (PACOM) and to meet with its leadership.
This sends a very powerful message and it demonstrates to all
of those around the U.S. commitment to the Asia-Pacific. I also
hope that you include time in your schedules to visit our
headquarters in Hawaii so that I can brief you on the region's
security issues. You are always welcome in Hawaii and we
appreciate you coming.
PACOM's area of responsibility covers half the planet. The
size of this mission area requires a strategy of forward
deployed forces and enhanced rotational presence that are
essential to security and deterrence throughout the region. And
MILCON is the key to this forward presence.
Natural disasters likes floods and tsunamis are regular
occurrences. Forward presence allows our forces to rapidly
provide much needed humanitarian aid and assistance throughout
the region. Military construction also facilitates the
strategic flexibility, our crisis response capability and
deterrence required to fulfill commitments to our very
important regional allies as well to underwrite the security
for the entire Asia Pacific region.
Specifically, MILCON provides necessary facilities for new
weapons systems, it supports increases in force efficiency and
effectiveness, it offers warfighters and their families quality
of life improvements, and it renovates facilities that,
unfortunately, get beyond their useful lives.
Now, the growing significance of the Asia Pacific
highlights the importance of MILCON funding and supporting
forward presence. That presence is currently concentrated in
Northeast Asia due to the extensive U.S. basing facilities and
access agreements that exist in Japan and South Korea. Thus,
the focus of our current MILCON requirements remains in this
sub-region.
With MILCON funds, our intent is to enhance our capacity to
support our allies and our partners, to maintain a ready force
that meets our Nation's commitment to the region, and also as a
deterrent to those who would challenge our freedom of action or
coerce our allies and partners.
In closing, I would like to again thank the committee for
the strong support you provide to the men and women of the
United States military. With your advocacy, this all-volunteer
force remains extremely well-trained, well-equipped and one of
the most impressive forces I have seen in my 40 years in the
military. Our retention and recruiting rates continue to be
high, which, in no small measure, is a reflection of the
infrastructure and the quality of life initiatives you and the
American people continue to support.
So on behalf of the 330,000 American men and women of U.S.
Pacific Command, please accept our sincere appreciation for the
work that you do for our great Nation.
I look forward to your questions, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Admiral Locklear, thank you very much, sir.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.185

Mr. Culberson. We welcome your testimony as well General
Thurman. Thank you, sir.

Statement of General Thurman

General Thurman. Chairman Culberson, Congressman Bishop and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity this morning to update you on United Nations
Command, Combined Forces Command and United States Forces
Korea. It is a great honor to lead the Soldiers, Sailors,
Airmen and Marines serving our country in the Republic of
Korea, and I thank the members of this committee for their
support for our warriors.
The relationship with South Korea is the finest military
partnership I have experienced in my 37-year career. U.S.
military presence in the Republic of Korea supports United
States national interests and a key ally in the Northeast Asia
region.
Since the United States and the Republic of Korea forged an
alliance in battle over 60 years ago, the Republic of Korea has
become a vibrant democracy, economic success and global
security partner currently serving beside us in Afghanistan and
off the Horn of Africa. Together, our militaries deter
aggression and maintain stability on the Korean Peninsula. Our
deterrent capability is based on United States and Republic of
Korea's military readiness, and this is my primary focus. I
have conducted a thorough review, including two combined
exercises, and I have determined our forces remain ready to
defend the peninsula. The ROK military is a modern, well-led,
well-trained and professional ready force. It is also essential
that we maintain United States force readiness at the highest
level given our requirements to fight tonight.
However, the nature of the security challenges that our
alliance faces are ever-changing. When Kim Jong-un became ruler
of North Korea following his father's death, uncertainty on the
peninsula increased. North Korea's recent announcement and
intent to launch a satellite with a ballistic missile has
increased tensions on the peninsula. Additionally, North Korean
rhetoric protesting and denouncing the Nuclear Security Summit
and alliance exercises indicated that Kim Jong-un is pursuing
policies and strategies similar to those of his late father and
grandfather.
For example, North Korea continues to adhere to its
``military first'' policy. They maintain the fourth largest
conventional military force in the world, the world's largest
special operations force, and significant long-range artillery
capabilities. Over 70 percent of this combat power is arrayed
within 90 miles of the Demilitarized Zone.
North Korea also continues to pursue asymmetric
capabilities, especially in the areas of nuclear, missiles and
cyber. As North Korea further develops these asymmetric
capabilities, the nature of the security challenges facing our
alliance will change.
In order to posture U.S. forces and the alliance to meet
any future security challenges, we have undertaken three major
transformation initiatives: Tour normalization; the Land
Partnership Plan; and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. It is my
assessment at this time that expanding tour normalization
beyond our current authorization of 4,645 family members is
unaffordable under the current construct. However, the two
bilateral force relocation initiatives, the Land Partnership
Plan, which relocates 2nd Infantry Division from north of Seoul
to a consolidated footprint at Camp Humphrey, and the Yongsan
Relocation Plan, which moves U.S. forces out of Seoul, are on
track.
The expansion of Camp Humphreys to support the
consolidation of U.S. forces in Korea is sized to accommodate
the service members and accompanying families within the 4,645
authorized command sponsored positions. I continue to review
these plans to ensure they are operationally focused, placing
the right capabilities in the right places to meet our
operational requirements.
There are four military construction projects in the Fiscal
Year 2013 President's Budget Request that support our future
force posture by modernizing and increasing our capabilities in
the Ryeonytack area enduring hub. Osan and Kunsan Air Bases
will both receive modernized and expanded medical facilities
which improve the ability of these bases to meet their wartime
requirements and provide quality modern medical care to their
assigned military personnel. The replacement of a 29-year-old
Osan elementary school is part of the Department of Defense
Education Activity worldwide program to replace substandard
schools.
Finally, the new battalion headquarters at Camp Humphreys
is for a unit locating from outside of Korea to provide
capabilities required in our war plans.
These projects are designed to support service members and
those families authorized within the 4,645 cap that was
specified in the National Defense Authorization Act this year
and will ensure our service members have the infrastructure
they need to be prepared to do their wartime mission.
The charge to maintain the Armistice, defend the Republic
of Korea and take care of our warriors and their families is my
primary concern. I thank the members of this subcommittee for
their support in providing our warriors the key infrastructure
they need to execute their wartime mission in Korea.
I also thank you for your support for our Soldiers,
Sailors, Airmen and Marines and Department of Defense
civilians, our veterans and their families. Your actions over
the years have improved the quality of life for our Nation's
most valuable treasure, and that is the men and women of this
great nation.
I am now ready to answer any questions you may have. So
thank you very much.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, General Thurman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.204

U.S. FORCES IN THE PACIFIC

Mr. Culberson. Admiral Locklear. We have I know with us
here today, I understand, press from Japan, maybe from--
primarily Japan. I am delighted they are here. So the
committee, on behalf of the United States Congress, certainly
the people of Texas, I know the people of Georgia and the
United States, have a deep appreciation for the friendship of
the people of Japan. I am very proud to have that wonderful
nation standing alongside the people of Japan in the Pacific in
light of the increasing aggressiveness of China.
I want to, if I could, give you both an opportunity to talk
about how our U.S. forces in the Pacific, working together with
our allies in Japan and Korea, are working together to protect
the Japanese people, the Japanese islands and the Korean
Peninsula from the threat of ballistic missile attack from
North Korea, beginning with the ballistic missile threat from
the North Koreans, and also if you could talk to us about the
threat you see from the communist Chinese and how that has
changed in recent years.
I really would like to make it open-ended, so you could
talk to us about the security situation in light of the new
regime in Korea, and then secondly, the changes we see in the
posture of the Chinese.
General Thurman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will start and
I will discuss our current assessment of the security situation
on the peninsula.
First off, as we all know, we have a new leader, Kim Jong-
un, after the death of Kim Jong-il that occurred on the 17th of
December. I believe we are in a period of uncertainty on the
peninsula in regard to which azimuth the regime will take. It
is clear to me that we are following some of the same patterns
that we have in the past of the policies that Kim Jong-il and
Kim Il-sung had.
I believe Kim Jong-un is being modeled after his
grandfather as we have seen him dress like him, and it is clear
he is very active with the military. I do think he is being
closely shepherded by his uncle, who was Kim Jong-il's brother-
in-law, Chang song-tack.
So what we have been seeing on the peninsula is quite a bit
of rhetoric. This latest announcement to launch this satellite
with a ballistic missile unequivocally violates United Nations
Security Council Resolutions 1874 and 1718, which prohibits
them from testing any ballistic missile technology. That has
increased tension on the peninsula and also in the region, and
it is my assessment that left unchecked, North Korea will
continue to be a threat, not only to the region, but
potentially to the continental United States.
They have a conventional force. Seventy percent of that
conventional force of 1.1 million resides south of Pyongyang
and Wonsan within 90 miles of Seoul. Seoul is a city of 24
million people. We have quite a bit of indirect fire, well over
13,000 artillery pieces, that could range into Seoul and do
damage.
On the peninsula, I am confident we can defend the
peninsula with the ROK military forces and U.S. forces. We do
have a combined alliance, a very strong alliance and treaty,
bilateral. As I have seen, it is the finest partnership that I
have experienced, very competent and professional people that
are committed to defending the peninsula.
I do think over the next few years, we are really going to
have to watch the overall security situation. It is very
important that we maintain trained and ready formations on the
peninsula, and the importance of staying forward deployed with
U.S. forces is a stabilizing influence in the region.

SECURITY SITUATION IN THE PACIFIC AOR

Mr. Culberson. Thank you, sir.
Admiral Locklear, could you talk to us about the security
situation on the Korean Peninsula and the Western Pacific.
Admiral Locklear. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson. I will leave it open-ended so you could just
talk to us in general about what your concerns are and how you
assess the current situation.
Admiral Locklear. Yes, sir. The North Korea situation is
certainly, I think, the most pressing security situation based
on the recent events, and we will have to continue to be
positioned to ensure security from those type of provocative
events that the North Korean regime seems to be intent on
pursuing.
But let me talk in a little bit broader context of the
Pacific AOR, the Asia Pacific area of responsibility. There are
3.6 billion people. The AOR is about half the world; Thirty-six
countries in this. They have the world's largest economies in
those countries. Most of the world's largest militaries are in
this region. There is a continuing need by all nations in the
Asia-Pacific, including our own nation, to ensure the proper
flow of energy which supports the global economy, which
supports the flow of goods across those boundaries.
We are fond of saying in the Navy that 90 percent of
everything that moves in the world moves on the ocean, and that
has been true for a long time, just because of economies of
scale versus air travel. But what has changed over the last
couple of decades is that, 20 years ago until today, the amount
of goods and services that flow through these global commons
has increased four-fold and is going up exponentially as the
global economy begins to thrive and we start to do the things
we need to do between the economic powers.
So the real question is, if you look back from World War
II, this very critical alliance we have with our Japanese
partners and our Korean partners has underpinned an alliance,
and several other allies here (we have five allies in this
region), that have underpinned a security environment that has
allowed this miracle to take place in the Asia Pacific. It has
allowed relative peace and prosperity, it has allowed economic
prosperity between all of our nations, and has brought
countries that a number of decades ago would have not been able
to compete in a world economy to produce that capability.
So as we look forward, I think the question is how do we
ensure that what we have enjoyed for the last 60 years in a
security environment, is brought into the future so that our
children and our grandchildren have the same opportunities as
this global economy, the global system develops.
So we have to look at; our job is to kind of see how do we
secure this. Our focus has to continue to shift. It is not that
we are not as concerned about the north, but we have an
infrastructure that was built around post-World War II and that
now has got to change, because the effects of the global
security environment, the effects of the security environment
in the Asia-Pacific, make us have to look at a lot of different
areas, including the Straits of Malacca, the Indian Ocean,
areas to the south that in recent decades past we were just not
too concerned about. So it makes us have to address our force
posture and how we are doing that.
But at the center of this remains the strength of these
alliances and the partnerships that we are building with other
significant partners in the area, because it is in everyone's
interest in the Asia-Pacific to be a valuable participant in
the security environment. So we have to use, I think, U.S. and
alliance leadership to form this together.
So now that takes us to the question of the People's
Republic of China and how do they figure into this. They are,
as we know, an emerging regional power, certainly an economic
power. They have benefited, in my view, as we all have, by the
security environment that has been in place in Asia Pacific.
And it seems to me that it is in all of our best interests that
in the future they be a productive participant in that and that
we participate alongside so that our children and grandchildren
can share in what we have.
So right now, I would say that the relationship, as I have
said before between the PRC and the U.S. and probably between
our allies, is cooperative, because we have to cooperate across
more than just military. We cooperate very much across economic
lines and diplomatic lines. So it is cooperative, but it is
competitive. And there are places where we don't agree and we
need to continue to have dialogue about where we don't agree.
But, in the end, there are decisions also that we all have
to make, including the People's Republic of China. Choices that
have to be made that can lead us to a productive security
environment, or that could create tensions and cause us to go
down another path, which I think would be unfortunate for
future generations.
So, as we look at the coming months and years, we need to
ensure that we have alliances that are strong and a security
environment that is in place that helps all of us make the
right choices for the future in security.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
U.S. Forces Korea has got a lot going on right now
currently because I think you are in the process of realigning
or repositioning the forces in Korea. And, of course, there are
two plans to do this. They are called the Land Partnership Plan
and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. Both of these plans will
benefit the U.S. and the Republic of Korea.
General Thurman, as you know, the Republic of Korea will
conduct general elections this year. What potential changes in
the alliance and impacts to our troops do you expect when the
ruling party is predicted to lose in the election coming up.
And, of course, as you know, both sides of the subcommittee
staff recently visited Korea, and reported to the chairman and
myself regarding the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan
Relocation Plan. Can you explain to the subcommittee what these
two plans will do, starting with the Land Partnership Plan.

LAND PARTNERSHIP PLAN

General Thurman. Congressman Bishop, first off, the Land
Partnership Plan was a U.S. initiative that was actually
started in 2004. The purpose of that was to reposition U.S.
forces north of the Han River into the area called Camp
Humphreys. The purpose of that was to better consolidate U.S.
forces, and reduce the number of overall bases. We had 107
installations. We now have 74, and we will reduce down to 49.
The purpose was to relocate forces into two enduring hubs,
Pycongtack and Daegu. Pycongtack is around Osan Air Base also.
The whole initiative was to consolidate our formations so we
get better continuity of effort that allows for better
coordination. That program was, as I said, was a U.S.
initiative.

YONGSAN RELOCATION PLAN

The second program was Yongsan Relocation, which was a
request by the Korean government to give back some very prime
real estate to the Korean government, completely funded by the
Korean government, and we will move out of Yongsan.
With both of these plans, they will be completed by 2016.
Under the Strategic Alliance 2015 that was agreed to by the
U.S. Government and the ROK Government, the ROK military forces
will be given operational control during wartime of their
forces in December of 2015. The Land Partnership Plan, as I
said, is on track. The Yongsan Relocation Plan was a little
behind. We got that back on track now, and as I said, that will
be completed in 2016. So that is the first part on that.
Your other question in regard to the political environment
over there. I am responsible for the defense of the Republic of
Korea agreed to by both governments, the ROK Government and the
U.S. Government. My focus is on maintaining a strong readiness
posture. We have a great partnership, the alliance is strong,
and whoever comes into power over there with an election, I
will continue to do what I am doing on a daily basis. So I
don't see any change to that, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Very good. So you think that the election
changes will not adjust or impact the troops or our
relationship with the alliance?
General Thurman. I will continue, sir, to maintain a close
relationship that I do every day with the ROK Government.

ENCROACHMENT ISSUES

Mr. Bishop. General, I was reading the staff trip report
and one thing that jumped out at me was that the staff had some
concerns about Osan where there appears to be serious
encroachment that makes the perimeter security of Osan
extremely challenging. Is there anything that this subcommittee
can do to enhance your force protection and give relief to the
problem?
General Thurman. Congressman Bishop, currently it is not
only at Osan, but we do have encroachment issues that I am
working with the ROK Ministry of Defense on, particularly at
not only Osan, but also at Camp Humphreys.
Mr. Bishop. I was going to ask you about other
installations too.
General Thurman. Camp Humphreys, we do have some down at
Kunsan, and we are working with the Ministry of Defense to
create a buffer zone, particularly down at Camp Humphreys. But
I think right now we can work through those issues and I will
come back and report back to you if we cannot.
Mr. Bishop. Okay. So you don't need any immediate help from
the subcommittee in terms of MILCON with regard to dealing with
those issues?
General Thurman. From MILCON or for----
Mr. Bishop. Military construction. Is there anything that
we can do military construction-wise to help you with those
encroachment issues to enhance the security challenges that you
face with the encroachment?
General Thurman. In regard to military construction, no,
sir, not at this time. The projects that I have for the 13
budget are the ones we need help on, and I can restate those
again, if you want me to.

LOGISTICS

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Bishop. Mr. Austria.
Mr. Austria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, Admiral, thank you for being here and giving us a
very important briefing on the Asian Pacific region. I think it
is very important that we continue that long-time relationship
and friendship we have had with many of our important allies in
the Asian-Pacific region. I think you have outlined very well
the need and the significance, how that has grown in that
region as we move forward with the uncertainties, the new
challenges and the importance that we have that presence there
and that we be well equipped.
Admiral, if I can start with you. First of all, let me
thank you for your service to our country and being here with
us today. Your role as the Commander of the U.S. Pacific
Command is critical to our national security, particularly
following the new, as I touched on, strategic guidance that
emphasizes the increased focus on the Asian-Pacific region.
What I would like to kind of focus on a little bit and
briefly discuss is your ability to maintain the logistic supply
chain via multi-modal means. A recent decision by the Air
Force, they have proposed retiring 20 of the KC-135 aircraft.
As I understand it, the demand for air refueling consistently
pushes the limits of our current capabilities. In a region as
vast as PACOM, air refueling certainly enables the Nation's
ability to execute global reach.
How will these reductions, whether it be the KC-135 or
other aircraft reductions, impact your ability to provide rapid
response, power projection across the Pacific and how concerned
are you about the overreaching reductions to aircraft and
personnel in regard to your ability to meet whatever future
requirements or needs are in that region?
Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you for the question, sir,
and your comments. Thank you. As we talked about earlier, the
Asia Pacific region covers half the world and most of that, a
lot of that, has water in it. So our ability to sustain forces
forward both in peacetime and in any conflict or contingency
that might come up are extremely important to me and I have to
consider that, as our allies must consider it also.
So it is important that not only do we have the ships and
aircraft necessary to support our logistics flow, but that we
have the airfields and the port facilities and the access to
those in the time that we need to be able to respond
effectively with what we all know will be a smaller, more
efficient force because of the budget directives and the budget
issues that we have dealt with.
Now, when it comes to the specific decisions that have been
made by the Air Force, I have to go back to my friend at
Transportation command (TRANSCOM), the TRANSCOM Commander, and
he has a global force responsibility to see how he can manage
that. And I have and I will continue to highlight where I think
there are shortfalls in my ability to flow forces in both
peacetime and contingency operations that range from
Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief (HAD) operations all
the way up to potential conflicts that might occur in a
particular region of Asia.
So any reduction from the status quo obviously causes a
Commander concern. The question is, as we look at our global
priorities, where I think mine are pretty high now as a PACOM
Commander, but will they be answered? And I can assure you that
I will make sure that we have identified where those shortfalls
are.

ABRAMS TANK

Mr. Austria. I appreciate that answer. Let me, if I can
switch, General, if I can ask you a question similar to it but
focusing in on the M1A2, Abrams battle tanks. I think you
mentioned that briefly in your testimony. You highlighted the
significance of how it has upgraded the combat capability used
by the Second Infantry Division.
Can you briefly describe the added capability your soldiers
have gained from this new equipment? As much as I know, it
comes out of my home State in Lima, we are trying to get a
status of that as to the impact that is having.
General Thurman. Congressman, thank you. First off, the
M1A2 System Enhancement package (SEP) tank is the best tank I
believe in the world, and the Army has done a very good job of
giving us brand new equipment. We have upgraded the First
Brigade of the 2nd Infantry Division not only with the M1A2
SEP, but also with the new Bradley Fighting Vehicle. So we have
completely modernized the 2nd Infantry Division. So we have
very good equipment, the best this Nation has.
A little bit about the M1A2, a very good system, on-the-
move capability, excellent flare tech capability and the
ability to engage multiple targets. It is a piece of equipment
that I believe is much needed on the peninsula and will
outmatch anything the North Koreans have.

SEQUESTRATION

Mr. Austria. One last question, Mr. Chairman, if I may,
just kind of following up on both those questions. You know,
the well-being of our troops is our top priority, and with the
budget constraints that are before us, and in particular,
sequestration lingering in the background, can you update us as
to, number one, the impact that sequestration would have on of
your operation in PACOM, but also as far as how our Soldiers,
Sailors, Airmen, Marines are doing morale-wise, knowing this is
all lingering out there. I am sure they are all reading things,
hearing things, as Congress struggles with this as we move
forward.
Admiral Locklear. Yes, sir. Well, the issue of
sequestration, I think, was summed up by the Secretary of
Defense (SECDEF) pretty well. It would be devastating to us;
devastating, and it would have to force us to have to rethink
our theater strategies because of, first of all, the magnitude
of it, and second of all, the way it would be implemented in
the reductions.
My guess is, if there wasn't some relief in the way it was
going to be implemented, and I am not an expert on this, but my
guess is it would seriously curtail near-term operations that
would very much influence our ability to maintain with our
allies the security posture in there. So it would be
devastating.
I think the question of how our troops feel about it, I
think they are aware of it, but we keep them pretty busy on the
point of the spear, particularly in PACOM. They are worried
about provocative actions in North Korea today, they are
worried about ensuring security in the sea lanes, and they are
worried about maintaining those close relationships they have
with our wonderful allies in Japan, Korea and other places. So
I don't think it is weighing heavily on their minds, and I
think that they anticipate that folks like me and like in this
room will work this out and protect their interests.
General Thurman. Congressman, first off, I would just echo
the comments Admiral Locklear made. It would be devastating in
regard to our ability to maintain readiness in my estimation.
And I think we have to be very careful right now. The world is
watching us as well as our allies. So I would just tell you
that anything that perhaps could degrade readiness is something
that we need to be very mindful of.
In regard to our Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Marines, the
folks on the peninsula are very focused because we've got a
real world mission to perform and, frankly, we should not have
them worried about this. They need to know that they are going
to be taken care of, and that is what I have tried to do to
reassure them. They need to be focused on the day-to-day
mission that we have to do, which is very important.
Mr. Austria. Thank you both. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Culberson. General Thurman, Admiral Locklear, you are
exactly right. Please reassure everybody under your command
that they will absolutely be taken care of. No matter what
happens, the Congress is always going to make sure that our men
and women in uniform don't have any worries, they get all the
help that they need.
I am privileged to recognize my good friend, Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. Yoi ichinichi o to our friends
from Japan, and good afternoon to you. I would like to just
take a second, I think, and reflect how many of us in Congress
feel as Japan goes through its first anniversary from the
terrible earthquake and tsunami. It was our honor and our
military's honor to assist our friends in Japan in delivering
goods and working in partnership during the very dark days that
Japan faced after the earthquake and tsunami, and we wish Japan
all the very best as it continues to heal and rebuild itself.
And one last apology: The cherry blossoms. People are
coming from Japan to celebrate the 100th anniversary gift, the
beautiful gift, the cherry blossoms from the people of Japan,
but the cherry trees couldn't wait and they have already
bloomed early. So thank you so much for that gift.
Just before I ask my questions, I want to redirect
something possibly on sequestration. You know, not everybody
here is a big fan of sequestration, but that was the budget
agreement reached by the Senate, the House and the President of
the United States. So when you are talking to Congress about
not liking sequestration, it is, from what I have heard from
Secretary Panetta, the President of the United States and the
Joint Chiefs, that they feel that the service men and women
will have what they need to perform their duties and their
missions. Is that not correct?

SEQUESTRATION

General Thurman. Congresswoman, I have what I need right
now in this year's budget.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. Admiral.
Admiral Locklear. I would agree.

GUAM BUILDUP

Ms. McCollum. Thank you. I would like to talk about the
Guam buildup for a few minutes. Especially that is probably the
overlying reason why we have--never had this much press in the
room, Mr. Chairman.
So, Admiral, I want to thank you for testifying today and I
would like to thank you both for the service for your country,
for our country. I am the daughter of a disabled veteran, Army
Air Corps, so I know that a lot goes back home with your family
also serving alongside and with you.
Now, the U.S. Pacific Command budget request makes it clear
that U.S. military readiness and Japan will play a vital role
in our long-term military strategy, and I couldn't agree more
with that. But in your testimony, you alluded to the importance
of transforming Guam into an Air Force strike force hub and a
refueling asset in the Asia Pacific.
With the time and resources that have been invested in the
military Guam buildup, it is clear that it will play a major
role, that that is where we are looking to have a forward
expansion from. But the cost of this extended transition that
has been going on for quite a while now under two Presidents,
it just isn't President Obama, the political environment in
Japan, which has been through many political changes, and the
lack of a master plan from the Department of Defense continue
to play a role in delaying the Guam buildup.
So from your testimony last year, last year's defense
reauthorization restricted Guam from building up funding until
we had a more detailed plan from DoD. So could you maybe let us
know, because we have been visited by very important
dignitaries from Japan about their wanting to know what our
plans are and how that is going to fit into them moving forward
with doing some of the economic development that they would do.
If you could maybe talk about where you are with the Guam
buildup, and what this Congress needs to do to give you the
green light to work with the Department of Defense to go ahead
and make this project a reality rather than phases; phases that
aren't even completed.
Admiral Locklear. Yes, Congresswoman, thank you for that.
Before I start, can I just also echo my compliments to the
people of Japan on their resiliency one year after this tragedy
that occurred to their country. It is really quite amazing to
see how they are responding. I think we can all take a great
bit of inspiration from the way they have dealt with this, and
we are real proud of them.
I will start in my first three weeks in this job to take a
look at this issue. I start from looking at the Defense Posture
Realignment Initiative which has the Guam buildup initiative in
it, and over time, our critical alliance, alliances in this
area, we have to be able to respond to changes on both sides of
the alliance so that we strengthen the alliance and we make
good decisions. So I think that is where we were in 2006 when
this started.
We thought, in 2006, that there was a plan between the two
governments that was a solid plan, that was affordable with
great cost sharing by our allies. The way that plan was
constructed, it had certain caveats in there that you are aware
of, that before you could move forward with any movement to
Guam, certain things had to happen in relationship to what
happened on the island of Okinawa.
The people of Okinawa, first of all, should be praised for
what they do and what they contribute everyday to the success
of this alliance and the defense of this region. And we
understand, because we have issues in our own country about how
our military presence impacts on neighborhoods and people. So
we have to understand that that had to be brought into the
equation. But at the same time, we have to agree between
alliances how to ensure that we have the warfighting and the
deterrent capability in the right place at the right time. So
the 2006 agreement was fundamentally, I thought, a good
agreement and we moved forward with it.
But over time, things change and have to be reassessed, and
because of some of the timing of events, it caused what was, in
reality, a process where we couldn't make decisions, we
couldn't move forward with the critical elements.
Now, DPRI has about 19 initiatives in it, and many of those
get fulfilled, but this central one, which is a big one, a big
one that gets a lot of attention, seemed to be slowed down. So
a few months ago, I think you have been briefed that there was
a dialogue reopened with the government of Japan between our
Defense Department to look at how could we kind of get this
thing going, I mean, how could we eliminate whatever was
stopping it from moving forward and causing these costs to be
excessive and making this thing not look like it was on the
right path.
My sense is that is being done. I am not in the direct
negotiations, but I think that we are not far from having at
least what would look like government-to-government, how do we
shape this so that we get past the things that prevent it from
being successful, that would then allow us to move on to doing
the things in Guam which we need to do to get our Marine forces
moving to Guam and to get the upgrades in the MILCON and all
those things in place, and that it is affordable over a time
period that is acceptable in the security environment we are
in.
So I think you are going to see a plan soon, I would hope.
That is my expectation, that we will see a plan that is
proposed by the defense areas of each of the governments that
would look at this and make sure that we meet all those
criteria.
But, in the end, as I look at the global or the strategy
for PACOM in a larger context, Guam is a very critical piece of
any strategy we have going forward in the future. It is a
territory. It is very important that we get this right and that
we make the right investments in Guam for a sustainable future
that gets us not only the next 10 years, but 100 years into the
future.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Ms. McCollum, I want to especially thank you
for recognizing the anniversary of the earthquake. It is very
appropriate, and our thoughts and prayers have been with the
Japanese people. We do admire them immensely for the way they
responded to it. And for recognizing 100th anniversary of the
gift of the magnificent cherry trees here. We treasure our
friendship with Japan and Korea, and I really appreciate you
bringing that to everybody's attention today, Ms. McCollum.
Thank you.
Let me recognize my good friend, Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, I guess one challenge I am having as a freshman is
getting up to speed on real complex issues. I have read your
testimony. I have listened to what you say. Let me kind of
describe to you what I understand and just tell me if I am
missing anything.
It is a very vital region of the world. It has some of our
closest allies. It is also a region that has got some of the
most volatile parts of the world, countries with very strong
militaries, countries that are very vital trading partners with
the United States.
I take it from your testimony that you are based out of
Hawaii; we have a presence in California and Alaska. I have
heard you talk about base presence in Korea, in Japan and in
Guam. Are there any other base presences that I don't know
about or that I haven't asked about?

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION NEEDS AT INSTALLATIONS SUPPORTING PACIFIC AOR

Admiral Locklear. That is a fine, fine question. I think,
as I look at it, there are many ways that the U.S., and to some
degree, our allies produce presence. One is that we have
forward bases that may have a U.S. or a joint flag flying on
it, and the MILCON Committee is very familiar with those
because we keep putting money into them. And then we have
places that I wouldn't call bases, but they are places where we
go and that we use the good will of our partners and our allies
to be able to access their facilities in a way that is mutually
beneficial to the partnership or to the alliance.
So we have a number of those places throughout the region.
And as our partnerships grow and we invest in the partnerships
of those countries, our access to those types of things should
grow as well. So those I wouldn't really put in the category of
bases. But primarily, the places where we invested over time,
where you have U.S. folks that are there, as you articulated,
is in the Japan and Korea area, but we do have access to a lot
of other places.
You have heard conversations recently about our desire with
the people of Australia to start using some Air Force and
Marine Corps counterpart or interaction with some facilities
they have there. Those activities may, at some point in time,
require some U.S. MILCON to kind of make sure that the forces
we have can be supported in those maybe more remote locations,
and it will also require support from the host nation who is
there, and that is all recognized. But I don't see a future
where we are going to have any more U.S. bases forward than the
ones you already see on the plate.
Finally, we have a force that, if you think about the
importance in the Pacific Command of having forward deployed
forces, the debate is, well, let's just bring everybody home
and not have anything anywhere, it is too expensive, let's
spend the MILCON in the States. If you were to--in my view, if
you were to try to maintain the security environment where our
national interests are so important in this region from a
rotational force at home, coming completely from the United
States, would be a force of such a size and such an
unaffordable size that--I mean, I think in general terms, we
get a pretty good deal by having these forces forward with the
great support of key allies where we will support an economy of
force that can get the job done in both building partnership,
deterrence, and eventually warfighting capacity.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you. I am studying hard and trying to
learn. Also there has been a lot of discussion this morning
about sequestration. Admiral, you and General Thurman both used
the term ``devastating.'' I understand that term. Are you doing
anything today to plan for sequestration, to plan for that
devastation, and, if not, at what point do you start planning
for it?
Mr. Culberson. I think it kicks in January 2nd,
automatically unless we do something.
Admiral Locklear. Well, for much of my naval career I was
on the resourcing side, and now in this job I am on the
consumer side, which has a responsibility of its own, and
certainly I wouldn't try to tell you that the thought of
sequestration isn't on our minds if it comes into being. But on
the consumer side, we are not right now in a planning process
for the implementation of sequestration. We are not. And I
don't plan to be in the near future.
General Thurman. Congressman, what I would tell you, I am
very cognizant of requirements, and anything that we generate
has to have a full cost-benefit analysis. And we have done that
in our requirements generation to make sure we are not coming
up with something that is not, at least in Korea, focused on
the operational mission over there. And that is what I have
done. But beyond that, that is the thing that I have talked to
the command about.

SEQUESTRATION

Mr. Nunnelee. I still don't have a feel for what you are
doing to plan for sequestration. I accept your word
``devastating.'' Is there a point between now and January the
2nd, when it kicks in, that the appropriations process needs to
act to avoid that devastation, or will you wait until January
2nd to implement it?
Admiral Locklear. I can only give you a hypothetical
answer, Congressman. Certainly, if we move closer to the day of
implementation of sequestration and there hasn't been an action
to either stop it or to change the nature of it, I would
assume, at some point in time, there would have to be some
planning going on for that. But at this point in time, there is
not any planning.
General Thurman. Congressman, I would just tell you that I
have an obligation every month to do a readiness report. If I
see anything that is hurting our readiness and our ability to
do the mission, I will report that.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much. It is our job to make
sure there are no bubbles in that pipeline. We are grateful for
you guys staying focused on the tip of the spear, and we will
do our very best to make sure there are no bubbles in the
pipeline. We have two votes going on. There is about 11 minutes
left in the first vote. We will work right up until the tail-
end of this vote, recess very briefly, go up and vote, and then
catch the beginning of the second vote, if we could, folks, and
then come right back.
I recognize my friend from California, Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Thank you much, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry I was
late. I am cochair of a Base Military Communities Caucus and
Secretary Panetta was there answering a lot of the questions
that you are asking here.
Thank you, Admiral, for coming in and both of you for your
service. I represent the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) and I
just want to ask, there is a program that was started there
after the terrorist bombing of the USS Cole which was to
initiate regional security education and cultural awareness
training for deploying Navy carrier and expeditionary strike
groups. This program is called Regional Security Education
Program (RSTEP) and it was created to ensure commanders and
personnel assigned to deploying naval forces, the deploying
naval forces are aware of the historical context and strategic
importance of and current issues in the regions to which they
will operate; essentially, stepping off the ship and knowing
something about what you are stepping into rather than just a
wild night on the city.
I wondered if, in your opinion, has the NPS Regional
Security Education Program been a benefit to the forces
deploying in the Pacific Command?
Admiral Locklear. When I had command of the Nimitz Carrier
Strike Group, I benefited by the RSEP program, prior to my
deployment to the Western Pacific and then to the Arabian Gulf.
So the answer to that is it has been a benefit.

UNDERSEA WARFARE

Mr. Farr. And the other question I have is that there is an
undersea warfare, submarine warfare, anti-submarine warfare,
mine warfare, sub-sea warfare, our priorities for our submarine
force, and, again, the Naval Postgraduate School's naval
officers can earn a degree that includes this subspecialty code
in the warfare area.
The question here is while the current quotas for officers
being awarded the undersea warfare subspecialty code are being
filled, do you believe this quota should be increased in light
of the heightened importance of undersea warfare in the Pacific
areas? We're hoping that the quota could be increased from 14
to 21 per year, a 50 percent increase.
Admiral Locklear. Well, certainly, Congressman, from my
theater, I have a vested interest in assuring that the anti-
submarine warfare training is the very best that we can
produce. My sense is that the Naval Postgraduate School
provides unique capabilities in our ability to focus young
warriors in this particular area. So I highly value what they
teach.
I can't give you a quantitative answer on whether going
from 14 to 21 would satisfy a need, but I can tell you that it
is important and we need to continue to support the curriculum
and make sure it is producing the type of thinking that we need
to address the threats we will see in undersea warfare in the
21st century.
Mr. Farr. Do you think that in this whole area, that school
certainly has the capacity to do a lot of very smart research.
I am just wondering if there is interest in increasing the
support for thesis work and other related research undertaken
by the faculty and students at the school.
Admiral Locklear. Well, I will have to defer the details of
how they manage inside the school to the Chief of Naval
Operations because he uses that tool to ensure that he supports
the combatant commanders well. So, again, I would say that
there is capacity, there is capability, great capability at
this institution, it is highly valued. It is particularly
valued to me in the areas where we might not have that same
focus coming from our other civilian graduate education places
where a postgraduate school can focus on things that other
universities may not have the need nor the desire to do.

LANGUAGE

Mr. Farr. I knew that when Admiral Mullen was before this
committee, he was very interested in the Foreign Area Officer
(FAO) program and actually directed that it become more trained
like the Army has done. We have created an advanced training
course for FAOs from all services because of the language
capability of the Defense Language Institute (DLI) and the
faculty at the Naval Postgraduate School to really provide--and
I spoke to these officers last week. I was fascinated by them,
their linguistic capability. They are essentially as skilled or
more skilled than our ambassadors, I think. And with the idea
that we are going to have to do more regional training, it
seems to me that this whole area of post-conflict--I mean, it
is a combination of what do we do to do post-conflict
stabilization.
We are going to have to really understand the culture, the
language, the community better. We are now positioning
ourselves with a new strategy of taking our allied forces and
equipping them and training them to be essentially as capable
as we are in helping maintain the peace.
It just seems to me that the growth area is going to be in
this sort of, for lack of a better term, in the Military
Occupational Specialty (MOS) of a FAO, and yet we don't really
have developed a lot of the jobs that are needed to be
developed. Because what happens is. I just had this experience
with friends who have come out of Afghanistan and Iraq and
really got interested in the culture. They want to really get
into a program to really do stabilization, whether they do it
with our government or an non-governmental organization (NGO).
But they would stay in the Navy or the Army if there was a
position for that.
So I would hope that you might be able to use your--as we
move in this direction and begin developing careers for people
with these skill-sets, because you are going to need more and
more of them, and I am not sure that just the FAO position or
MOS is enough to satisfy the challenges you have.
I am really interested in the services sending more
officers to get this training and making sure that all FAOs, I
forget all the different titles they are giving in different
services, but they get this advanced regional expertise with
the DLI and the Naval Postgraduate School.
It is just a comment. I don't know whether you want to
respond to that, but it seems to me the direction we are going
is going to require us to think a little bit deeper about how
important it is to retain these skill-sets in the services and
not lose them because we don't have a place for them, we don't
have a mission for them, because we haven't created that yet,
so they have to go off and do something else that doesn't use
the skill training.
Mr. Culberson. Excuse me, Mr. Farr and Admiral and General.
We have about 4 minutes left in the vote. If you want to
respond briefly to Mr. Farr's question, we will need to recess
and come back to Mr. Carter when we reconvene. Do you have a
brief comment?
Admiral Locklear. I do. Just the Foreign Area Officer
Program that you talked about Admiral Mullen, I am very
supportive of. I think it plays heavily into the day-to-day
operations of how we shape the security environment in a
growingly complex Asia-Pacific area, and as we do the
rebalance, I think a critical part of that rebalance is taking
a look at how we manage the people who are Asia Pacific
experts. It is important that they remain--that they come from
an area where they understand how the military services work.
So we have to work on those skills. They have to know how ships
and airplanes and soldiers fight. Otherwise, they are not
effective as FAOs. But then we need to get them into FAOs and
we need to ensure we have career paths that make sense to them
that they compete for, but that values that skill-set. Thank
you, sir.
Mr. Culberson. We are down to less than 3 minutes. We are
going to have to recess. We will come back and start Mr.
Carter. The committee will stand in recess. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Culberson. We are going to come back to order. I will
recognize my good friend from Texas, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral Locklear,
welcome. General Thurman, my good friend, welcome. We are proud
to be here with you folks.

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS ON THE KOREAN PACIFIC PENINSULA

You know the President has put a spotlight on PAC Command.
I will let you know that the White House's emphasis is now on
the Pacific. I thought about General Thurman, he and I are
pretty good friends, and I thought about you when I first heard
the State of the Union. You seem to always get in the middle of
the spotlight, don't you?
General Thurman, you have got a command that is very
important over there, and yet you have a lot of emotion going
on with your preparation of readiness. You are having to move
people around the country. How does that affect your challenges
of the readiness situation on the Korean Peninsula, and more
importantly, as you move elements to Yongsan, from Yongsan to
Camp Humphreys, are there going to be MILCON requirements that
we need to know about so we can be prepared to make sure you
have the resources you need?
General Thurman. Thanks, Congressman Carter. First off,
what we have done in regard to the movement is we have
programmed that out pretty well, so we mitigate the risk,
because we can never take our focus off our primary
responsibility to be prepared to activate the defense over
there if that is required. So I feel pretty good about how we
have mitigated that with the Army forces.
We have already moved some forces down to Camp Humphreys,
but we will balance that risk. That is an ongoing thing that we
look at predominantly with Army forces. The Air Forces are okay
and our Marine forces come out of Okinawa if we have an
emergency, and then we get the U.S. 7th Fleet out of Japan if
there is an emergency there.
In regard to the MILCON projects, first off, I want to
thank you for the projects that we got in the Fiscal Year 2012
budget. Those were very much needed. And just to cite those, at
Camp Carroll these were necessary for a barracks and vehicle
maintenance shop, and then at Camp Henry another barracks
complex and a DFAC, dining facility. Then at Osan, a 156-room
dormitory down there. So we are very thankful for that. You
talk about morale, that helps Soldiers, Sailors Airmen and
Marines when they see something like that.
For '13, the key things that were submitted are four
projects. There is going to be a chemical battalion that is
going to be repositioned from the United States, and that is a
capability we need on the peninsula over there to meet our
warfighting requirements. That is a project that is in this
Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP). Then also the other important
project was the extension for the 51st Fighter Wing at Osan,
which was in addition to the hospital. We need that for
operational requirements as well as taking care of the families
down at Osan. Then the other requirement was for a medical
clinic and a dental clinic at Kunsan, where our other fighter
squadrons are. So those are needed very much to meet the
operational requirements.
The Department of Defense Education Activity is replacing
schools globally. They have an initiative on that. There is a
29-year-old elementary school at Osan that pretty much needs
replacement, and that is what is in this request. So we would
ask for help on that.
The other thing that we need to be mindful of as we move
down to Camp Humphreys, I have placed a lot of emphasis on our
communications, command and control and eliminating single
points of failure, which is very much needed to meet our
warfighting requirements. So there will be a bill that will be
coming forward that we are working with the Army as the
executive agent. That will be funded primarily between ROK and
U.S., but we will need some help on that. So the total U.S.
bill on that right now is going to come in at about $362
million because there are some unique communications
requirements that we need to meet our warfighting requirements
over there, and we would ask for support on that.
Mr. Carter. The personnel turbulence, is that affecting
your mission? I understand short tours are a significant factor
for soldiers, and that sometimes means they are not in theater
very long. The constant churn of soldiers, does that put a
strain on readiness?

ARMY READINESS

General Thurman. Congressman, yes, sir, it does, primarily
with Army forces. First off, we have 1-year tours, for the most
part, for the ones that are not command-sponsored, and then
some soldiers elect through what we call the AIP program,
Assignment Incentive Pay to stay an additional year in Korea.
Some soldiers sign up for that.
But we have predominantly a young force. Many of the young
soldiers that come over there, it is their first tour as they
come into the Army. So we generally lose about 600 to 700
soldiers a month either coming in or going out.
I have gone back to the Army. I have asked General Odierno
when he just recently visited, as well as the G-3 of the Army,
to look at how we can build readiness a little better so we can
eliminate the constant churn. Because as you can imagine, that
is the turnover inside those formations, and we are constantly
having to requalify combat crews on tanks and Bradley Fighting
Vehicles, Howitzer crews and that sort of business.
So I have asked the Army to go back and look at what is the
best model to build the best readiness at best value, because
as I said earlier in here, it is important to look at the cost-
benefit trade-offs. But that whole personnel turbulence is
probably one of my biggest challenges in a given month.
Mr. Carter. My time is probably up, but I wanted to mention
that when we were with Secretary Panetta, he was being
questioned, and I wish my friend from Mississippi was here to
hear this, being questioned about sequestration, the Secretary
is a former Congressman. He knows a whole lot about this
institution. And he just said the concept of sequester was
unacceptable and he has confidence that our Congress would get
to work so that we don't have to have a sequester. And that
would better explain the position that the Navy and the Army
are in when the question was asked.
Our job is to fix it so this doesn't happen, and the
Secretary's comments, are reasonable. I agree with him 100
percent, it is unacceptable, and it is the job of this
Congress, if we have to work on Christmas Day, to get this
fixed.
Thank you for your service, both of you. I appreciate you
very much.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Judge Carter. We will, I know all
of us, work arm-in-arm to make sure the sequester doesn't kick
in. It would be devastating to our military.
I did want to ask both of you if you could an open-ended
question to give you a chance to talk to us about your military
construction needs for this year. Is there anything that you
would like the committee to pay particular attention to,
anything extra, or in addition to what has been submitted to
the committee that you would like us to be sure that we take
care of for you?

MILCON FUNDS

Admiral Locklear. There is one thing I would just like to
highlight based on the DPRI initiatives. As you know, the
fiscal year 2012 National Defense authorization Act (NDAA) put
some restrictions on any funds being applied towards MILCON
projects or projects that do DPR until certain criteria were
met. One of those was a Secretary of Defense assessment of the
East Asia force laydown; the Commandant of the Marine Corps
preferred force laydown perspectives. So there is a hold on
those funds right now.
There is one project that technically falls under the DPRI
but it is a continuation of an authorization that was for
fiscal year 2010. It is in Guam. It is in the Marine Corps'
request for $26 million. It supports the second increment of a
ramp expansion that eventually goes towards the aviation wing
transfer to Guam. It would be good if we could, as we work
through this in the coming months, if we could assure that
project doesn't stop. We need that ramp extension no matter
what happens in DPRI, and it needs to continue, and I think
stopping it would be not a good thing from a fiscal
perspective.
Mr. Culberson. General Thurman, anything in particular you
want us to pay attention to this year, sir? Is there anything
you would like to add to the list?
General Thurman. Congressman, or Chairman, other than what
I just put out for this year, those are the key requirements. I
would just say as we go forward in the future, if we realign
any capabilities in there for some reason, then there could
potentially be a requirement. I don't have that right now. But
I think what is important over there we make adjustments is for
it to be operationally focused. That is what I would tell you
today as I look at any requirements that come up on the
peninsula.
Mr. Culberson. I want to ask also about Guam, the current
civilian infrastructure. We had both of our staffs go out and
visit Guam recently and got a lot of good information back.
Admiral Locklear, I want to ask you in particular about the
civilian infrastructure on Guam. It is our impression that that
civilian infrastructure cannot sustain the impact of the Marine
Corps relocation as previously envisioned, let alone the
separate Navy and Air Force buildups, and making this work is
going to require an enormous effort by the entire government.
In light, Admiral, of the changes to the number of Marines
and their families potentially to be relocated to the island,
are you satisfied with the progress you are seeing on the
civilian side, sir?
Admiral Locklear. Mr. Chairman, could you clarify for me
``civilian''? You mean government civilians, or are you talking
about the local population and the industrial base in Guam to
be able to support the buildup?

GUAM

Mr. Culberson. The infrastructure there on the island, yes,
sir.
Admiral Locklear. I understand that there have been some
concerns. I understand from my dialogue with the representative
from Guam that based on the thinking of the numbers of Marines
and equipment that may come there, that they are working
through the concerns of the past. Certainly it is something we
have to take into calculation as we look at what the total
costs will be as we come to the end of this thing. But my sense
is that some of their concerns may be allayed as we move
forward depending on the timeline we are on and the size of the
force that is ultimately decided to be moved there. But it is
something I will certainly pay close attention to.
Mr. Culberson. But you are comfortable with the progress
and where we are and meeting the timelines that are out there?
Admiral Locklear. I would say that I have got to see the
timelines that we--as the discussions occur between the
Department of Defense and the defense folks in Japan of how
this force flows based on the decisions that are made about
what happens in Okinawa before I could give you an assessment
of that. But I would be happy to come back to you and give you
that assessment once I understand that timeline.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, sir. I will have a number of
questions I will submit to you in writing.
I am happy to recognize my friend, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. I don't have any questions, Mr. Chairman. I
think my questions have been covered by other members, by the
chairman. I just thank the two gentlemen for their assistance.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you. I have got a hard stop coming up
for me at 12:30.
Mr. Carter, any further questions?
Mr. Carter. No. I have asked my questions. Thank you,
gentlemen. I want to thank both of you for your service to our
country. God bless you.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for this
hearing. I wish we could really do this in kind of a seminar
format, because I think we in Congress need to begin
understanding what the awesome responsibilities are of PACOM. I
live in California. We call it the Pacific Rim. It is how big
that incredible Pacific Ocean is.
But you look at here, and Judge Carter and I have flown
around the world over it, and been in several of these
countries together, 36 countries under this command, 52 percent
of the Earth's surface, 50 percent of the world population,
3,000 different languages spoken in 16 different time zones.
Our knowledge of that part of the world is so limited because
our heritage, most of it comes from Europe and the Atlantic,
and our focus is always there and our huge bases are there. And
I hope that as we move into the future, that we can spend a
little more time.

INTERNATIONAL MILITARY EDUCATION

I just want to ask you this question about the value of
international military education. I had, I don't know, maybe 50
officers here yesterday sitting with me who were at the Naval
Postgraduate School studying. They are going to get a master's
degree. They are going to spend two years, the longest time any
foreign military will spend in the United States, living in a
small community in America. And it seems to me we need to spend
a lot--if we are going to indeed engage in sort of a U.N.
peacekeeping stability ops, all those things, we are going to
have to invest in educating their military commands as much as
our own.
And how much--I mean, this is interesting, because our
committee, appropriations, not this committee, funds that, not
under the defense contract, but the military education comes
under State Department. And I just wondered what your reaction
or feeling about it is. I was excited to see all these young
officers, a lot of them from Singapore, Taiwan, and it just
occurred to me that we got so much work to do, and it is all
under your command. You are the one that can pull it all
together. And we need some more feedback as to where we ought
to be downsizing, squeezing and trimming. We still have to make
some smart investments, and certainly military education is, I
think, a very smart investment, particularly when it is co-
national or bi-national or multi-national.
Admiral Locklear. I couldn't agree with you more, sir, and
particularly as it relates to how we interact the State
Department and the embassies out there. I will guarantee that
if I go to all 36 American embassies in these countries, that
one of the things they will say is keep the International
Military Education & Training (IMET), the education and
training funds that are provided to allow those up and coming
leaders in their country to be socialized into the way that we
do business, for us to understand how they do business, is
really a tremendous investment, a return on a very small,
relatively small amount of money invested. But, like everything
else, it has a tendency to be kind of at the end of the food
chain, and I think we need to make sure it is in the funding
chain, it is in the right perspective.
There are a number of programs that way, that we get
tremendous return on our investment, and it really does portend
what the future looks like in this theater of how the future
leaders in these countries understand how we understand them
and how they understand us, and what we share and what we
disagree on.
Mr. Farr. Well, I appreciate that, because I think so often
we hear from the Pentagon across the street, which seems to
become Washington priorities, when we get the feedback from the
combatant commanders in theater, that look, these little IMET
and these other international investments are extremely
important to stability. We need to hear that and make sure that
is part of our strategy, rather than just an option to cut,
squeeze and trim. I appreciate your comment. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Mr. Farr.
Admiral Locklear, General Thurman, thank you so very much
for your service. Again, we deeply appreciate your commitment,
your lifetime of service to the Nation, and please communicate
to all the men and women under your command that Congress is
going to work arm-in-arm to make sure they don't have any
worries about the supply chain coming in behind them and
encourage them to stay focused on their mission.
Thank you very much for your service. The hearing is
adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.319

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.320

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.321

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.322

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.323

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.324

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.325

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.326

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.327

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.328

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.329

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.330

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.332

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.335

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.338

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.339

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.340

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.341

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.342

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.343

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.344

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.345

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.346

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.347

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.348

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.349

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.350

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.352

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.353

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.354

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.355

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.356

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.357

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.358

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.359

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.360

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.361

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.362

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.363

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.364

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.365

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.366

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.367

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.368

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.369

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.370

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.371

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.372

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.373

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.374

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.375

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.376

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.377

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.378

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.379

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.380

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.381

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.382

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.383

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.384

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.385

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.386

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.387

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.388

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.389

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.390

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.391

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.392

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.393

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.394

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.395

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.396

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.397

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.398

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.399

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.400

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.401

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.402

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.403

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.404

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.405

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.406

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.407

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.408

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.409

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.410

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.411

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.412

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.413

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.414

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.415

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.416

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.417

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.418

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.419

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.420

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.421

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.422

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.423

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.424

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.425

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.426

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.427

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.428

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.429

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.430

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.431

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.432

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.433

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.434

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.435

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.436

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.437

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.438

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.439

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.440

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.441

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.442

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.443

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.444

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.445

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.446

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.447

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.448

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.449

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.450

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.451

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.452

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.453

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.454

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.455

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.456

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.457

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.458

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.459

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.460

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.461

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.462

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.463

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.464

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.465

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.466

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.467

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.468

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.469

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.470

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.471

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.472

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.473

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.474

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.475

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.476

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.477

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.478

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.479

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.480

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.481

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.482

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.483

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.484

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.485

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.486

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.487

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.488

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.489

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.490

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.491

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.492

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.493

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.494

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.495

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.496

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.497

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.498

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.499

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.500

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.501

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.502

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.503

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.504

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.505

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.506

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.507

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.508

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.509

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.510

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.511

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.512

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.513

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.514

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.515

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.516

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.517

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.518

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.519

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.520

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.521

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.522

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.523

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.524

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.525

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.526

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.527

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.528

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.529

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.530

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.531

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.532

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.533

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.534

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.535

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.536

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.537

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.538

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.539

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.540

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.541

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.542

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.543

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.544

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.545

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.546

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.547

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.548

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.549

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.550

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.551

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.552

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.553

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.554

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.555

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.556

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.557

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.558

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.559

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.560

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.561

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.562

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.563

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.564

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.565

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.566

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.567

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.568

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.569

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.570

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.571

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.572

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.573

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.574

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.575

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.576

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.577

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.578

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.579

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.580

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.581

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.582

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.583

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.584

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.585

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.586

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.587

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.588

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.589

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.590

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.591

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.592

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.593

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.594

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.595

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.596

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.597

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.598

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.599

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.600

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.601

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.602

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.603

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.604

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.605

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.606

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.607

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.608

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.609

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.610

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.611

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.612

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.613

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.614

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.615

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.616

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.617

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.618

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.619

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.620

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.621

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.622

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.623

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.624

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.625

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.626

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.627

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.628

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.629

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.630

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.631

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.632

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.633

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.634

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.635

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.636

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.637

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.638

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.639

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.640

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.641

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.642

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.643

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.644

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.645

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.646

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.647

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.648

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.649

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.650

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.651

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.652

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.653

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.654

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.655

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.656

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.657

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.658

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.659

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.660

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.661

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.662

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6023A.663


