- DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
DENNY REHBERG, Montana, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        NITA M. LOWEY, New York
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          BARBARA LEE, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Steve Crane, Kevin Jones, Donna Shahbaz,
John Bartrum, Susan Ross, and Lori Bias,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 6
Page
Improper Payments................................................    1
National Labor Relations Board...................................  111
Department of Labor Job Training Programs........................  175
Examining Fragmentation and Overlap of Federal Education Programs  333
United States Department of Labor................................  377

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 6--DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION,

AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
?

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN

SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
DENNY REHBERG, Montana, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        NITA M. LOWEY, New York
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          BARBARA LEE, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Steve Crane, Kevin Jones, Donna Shahbaz,
John Bartrum, Susan Ross, and Lori Bias,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 6
Page
Improper Payments................................................    1
National Labor Relations Board...................................  111
Department of Labor Job Training Programs........................  175
Examining Fragmentation and Overlap of Federal Education Programs  333
United States Department of Labor................................  377

S

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-340                     WASHINGTON : 2012

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 17, 2011.

IMPROPER PAYMENTS

WITNESSES

ELLIOT P. LEWIS, ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT
DANIEL R. LEVINSON, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES
KATHLEEN S. TIGHE, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
PATRICK O'CARROLL JR., INSPECTOR GENERAL, SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Rehberg. Good morning. I apologize for the timing. As I
think you have been informed, we anticipate a vote at 10:15
a.m. And so, what we will do is we will stay here until about 5
minutes left on the vote, so 10 minutes into the vote.
Hopefully, that will take us to about--if it is at 10:15 a.m.--
take us to about 10:25 a.m.
We will go over and vote. We have two. I anticipate a 15
and a 5, which never works out that way, and we will get back.
And we will just suspend the hearing, and then we will get back
as quickly as we can so we can have as much time with you.
I will end the meeting at noon, at 12:00 p.m. And so, if I
could ask you to if at all possible to summarize your opening
statement, just as, one, a courtesy to the rest of you and,
two, so that we will have more time for questioning, that would
be very helpful.
So we normally go in order of the titles of the bill. I
think you have been informed of that as well. So, Mr. Lewis, we
will start with you.
Oh, I am sorry. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. That is fine. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, again.
And happy St. Patrick's Day to all.
I want to thank today's panelists for coming to testify
before us this morning. I think everyone in this room agrees
that our Government should be as efficient as possible, and I
know that the Administration has made improving program
integrity and reducing improper payments a very high priority.
And to that end, the administration has moved aggressively
with a vigorous effort to ferret out waste, fraud, and abuse.
The President has signed an Executive Order 13520 to this
effect. It requires that improper payments be reduced by
intensifying efforts to eliminate payment errors, waste, fraud,
and abuse in the major programs that are administered by the
Federal Government, while continuing to ensure that the Federal
programs serve and provide access to their intended
beneficiaries.
And to help implement it, this Congress included
$37,500,000 in the 2010 Consolidated Appropriations Act. The
funds also establish a Partnership Fund for Program Integrity
Innovation, helping States to create pilot projects to reduce
improper payments without reducing participation among eligible
populations. And every project must save at least as much as it
costs.
And I see for the first time, we have tried to dedicate
discretionary funds to fight waste, fraud, and abuse. The
subcommittee has focused on these issues. The bill that
reported out by the Labor-HHS, this subcommittee, last year
included three major program integrity initiatives totaling
$1,400,000,000--an 89 percent increase above the level 2 years
earlier--in the areas of healthcare, Social Security, and
Unemployment Insurance.
The bill also took specific steps to respond to reports by
the GAO concerning possible fraud in some of the discretionary
programs at the Department of Health and Human Services'
Administration on Children and Families. The bill responded
with $7,500,000 for the Inspector General to conduct
comprehensive audits in those areas, funds to the program
offices for better monitoring of grantees, a requirement that
the Secretary report quickly concerning the steps that she was
taking to address the GAO's concerns.
My hope is that our subcommittee will continue this
commitment to taking concrete steps that will actually improve
program integrity.
Unfortunately, right now, this Congress seems to be going
in a different direction. We are going to hear today about
problems of improper payments at Medicare. Yet even as the
number of Medicare beneficiaries is rising, H.R. 1, the
majority's appropriations bill that passed the House last
month, cuts appropriations for Medicare and Medicaid operations
by $458,000,000, or 13 percent below last year.
This is a reckless cut, in my view, that will stop any
progress on reducing fraud and improving payment accuracy dead
in its tracks. The Center for Medicare Services will have a
hard enough time just paying bills on time for services to
Medicare patients by doctors and hospitals. Under the
majority's budget, they will have very little chance to
actually pay attention to and review what it is they are
paying.
Similarly, as a result of increased need during the
recession, Social Security has a large backlog of claims for
disability benefits. Families are waiting for resources they
both need and deserve.
But the resolution cuts funding for the Social Security
Administration by over $1,000,000,000 below the President's
request. That means less staff, probably furloughs, even bigger
backlogs, less chance to detect fraud and improve accuracy.
In the end, denunciations of waste and fraud are not
enough. Adding more rules is not enough. Addressing problems of
improper payments requires careful attention from skilled
people who can scrutinize claims to look for troubling patterns
and to make sure systems are working correctly. You cannot
furlough workers and reduce the size of the workforce and
expect to get better results in program integrity.
We should also be focused not just on social insurance
programs. There may be a tendency to concentrate on Social
Security, Medicare, and UI because they are large and,
therefore, produce dramatic numbers and because techniques are
available for measuring payment accuracy rates. But we also
need to be looking at other places where waste and inefficiency
abounds, like Federal contracting. We ought to try to take a
look at defense contracts as well.
Spending on contractors increased at an average rate of 12
percent per year between 2000 and 2008. Yet many agencies
seemed to have little idea how many contract personnel were
actually working for them or what they were all doing. The
administration and the last Congress had been working to get a
handle on those expenses and bring some rationality to the
process. I hope those efforts will continue.
We also need to look at our tax system, the billions of
dollars in tax revenues that are being lost through tax
avoidance schemes, poor enforcement, companies that set up tax
accounts overseas with the opportunity to limit their financial
tax obligations to the United States.
In everything we should do, we should not just be looking
at the little guy, but let's look at the large corporations,
wealthy individuals who are gaming the system. No one should be
allowed to commit fraud. No one should be getting more than
they are supposed to. But in a time of limited resources, good
business sense argues for concentrating our efforts where the
biggest possible savings might be achieved.
I thank you again, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, as well. I
look forward to your testimony.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. Lewis. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for inviting----
Is it on now? Okay.
Good morning, and thank you for inviting me to testify
today in my capacity as the Assistant Inspector General for
Audit at the Department of Labor. I am pleased to discuss
improper payments in the Unemployment Insurance program.
Recently, both the Administration and Congress have placed
renewed focus on eliminating improper payments in benefit
programs, such as UI. Pursuant to Executive Order 13520, OMB
has designated UI as one of 14 high-error programs in the
Federal Government.
For 2010, DOL reported an 11.2 percent improper payment
rate, which represents $16,500,000,000 in overpayments and
$936,000,000 in underpayments. Consistent with the committee's
request, I will discuss OIG's audit oversight work in the UI
program.
In 2003, OIG first audited the Benefit Accuracy Measurement
program, or BAM, which is the Department's means of monitoring
the accuracy of unemployment benefits. At that time, we found
that the BAM generally identified and projected improper
payments accurately. However, we identified the need for
improved detection of benefit payments to workers who had
returned to work, which is still the primary cause of UI
overpayments.
The OIG recommended ETA expand the use of the National
Directory of New Hires to all States as a tool to identify
overpayments early in the process, thus potentially preventing
losses of unemployment funds. The National Directory is a
consolidated database maintained by the Department of Health
and Human Services that contains information on persons who
have returned to work.
Our audit recommended that ETA revise its performance
measurement system to give priority to measures aimed at
preventing overpayments, use the BAM to identify trends, and
work with States on initiatives to prevent overpayments. We are
pleased to note that the Department is now planning to mandate
that all States use the National Directory of New Hires.
ETA has also made changes in its performance measures and
now includes overpayment detection as a core measure for
States, consistent with our earlier recommendation. We also
note that recently passed legislation requires employers to
report the first day of earnings for new hires.
The OIG reviewed the Department's May 2010 report on
improper payments, as required by the executive order. We found
the Department's reduction plan did not include specific
targets for preventing improper payments, sufficient details
regarding meeting targets, or supporting analysis related to
its integrity initiatives and their expected impacts. For
example, five of seven initiatives focused primarily on
detection rather than prevention.
Mr. Chairman, our audit work in the UI program is
continuing, given the overall increase in unemployment benefits
over the past few years, the rising improper payment rate, and
new statutory mandates in this area. One of the areas we are
currently focusing on is the quality of data that States are
reporting to the Department and its usefulness in preventing
improper payments.
In the year ahead, we have plans to conduct audits to
evaluate the technique States are using to detect and prevent
improper payments, how States assess the effectiveness of those
techniques, and whether any States have best practices that
other States should consider implementing. Additionally, we
plan to look at the adequacy of systems operated by States to
recover overpayments.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, with 60 percent of States
currently borrowing Federal unemployment funds to pay
unemployment claims, the expenditure of more than
$124,000,000,000 over the past three years for extended and
emergency unemployment compensation, an increasing overpayment
rate, and the current economic conditions, identification of
overpayments is simply not enough. As we have previously
recommended, the Department and the States must identify
strategies not only to detect improper payments, but which
successfully prevent them in the first place.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify
at today's hearing. I would be pleased to answer any questions
you or other Members of the subcommittee may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.005

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Levinson.
Mr. Levinson. Thank you.
And good morning, Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member DeLauro,
and Members of the subcommittee. My testimony this morning
summarizes our recommendations to prevent improper payments in
HHS's two largest programs--Medicare and Medicaid.
Although our recommendations are tailored to specific
vulnerabilities, the actions we recommend to CMS fall into the
following four categories: increase prepayment and post payment
review of claims, increase oversight and validation of
supporting documentation, strengthen program requirements to
address vulnerabilities, and provide education and guidance to
providers.
OIG has consistently recommended that CMS enhance both
prepayment and post payment review of claims. For example,
OIG's analysis of claims for diabetes testing supplies
identified $270,000,000 in improper payments. Prepayment edits
could have helped prevent improper claims for these testing
supplies.
We also have recommended increased oversight and validation
of supporting documentation. We found that for 18 percent of
Medicaid claims for personal care services, the provider's
qualifications were not properly documented. This resulted in
$724,000,000 in improper payments.
In certain areas, CMS should strengthen program
requirements to address program integrity vulnerabilities. For
example, we have recommended that CMS establish a payment cap
on chiropractic claims to prevent improper payments for
maintenance therapy.
Provider education is also critical to ensuring compliance
and protecting beneficiaries. We found that 82 percent of
hospice claims for beneficiaries in nursing facilities did not
meet at least one Medicare coverage requirement, requirements
that are in place to protect beneficiaries' health and well-
being.
Medicare paid about $1,800,000,000 for these claims. We
recommended that CMS provide hospices with guidance on the
rules for certifying terminal illness and a checklist of items
that must be included in the plans of care.
For our part in provider education, OIG is conducting free
training seminars in six cities to educate providers on fraud
risks and share compliance best practices. We also recently
published ``A Roadmap for New Physicians," which provides
guidance on complying with fraud and abuse laws.
Furthermore, we believe that error rates could be reduced
by directing efforts to areas of recurring vulnerability, such
as documentation deficiencies and providers with a history of
claims errors. For fiscal year 2009, inpatient hospitals,
durable medical equipment suppliers, hospital outpatient
departments, physicians, skilled nursing facilities, and home
health agencies accounted for 94 percent of Medicare improper
payments. OIG plans to conduct additional analysis of the
claims of individual providers with a history of claims errors.
Although not all improper payments are fraudulent, all
payments resulting from fraud are improper. And our efforts to
combat fraud are achieving historic results.
Just last month, OIG and DOJ strike forces engaged in the
largest Federal healthcare fraud takedown in history. Teams
across the country arrested more than 100 defendants in 9
cities, including doctors, nurses, healthcare company owners,
and executives. Their alleged fraud schemes involved more than
$225,000,000 in Medicare billing.
To prevent improper payments from depleting the Medicare
Trust Fund, OIG refers credible evidence of fraud to CMS to
implement payment suspensions, helping to turn off the spigot
to prevent payment for fraudulent claims.
Improper payments cost taxpayers billions of dollars each
year. Executive Order 13520 states that the Federal Government
must make every effort to confirm that the right recipient
receives the right payment for the right reason at the right
time. OIG is committed to this goal.
Thank you for your support of our mission, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.012

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Tighe.
Ms. Tighe. Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member DeLauro, and
Members of the subcommittee, today I will quickly summarize our
written testimony, focusing particularly on two program areas.
The first of these areas is the Federal student aid program.
In this area, I would particularly like to highlight a
series of audits we issued on improper special allowance
billings by lenders. A report of one lender, the National
Education Loan Network, or Nelnet, found that the lender had
improperly billed the Department for loans that did not qualify
under a special allowance rate.
We estimated that Nelnet had received about $278,000,000 in
improper payments for the time period reviewed. And if the
abuse was not stopped, an additional $882,000,000 of improper
payments would be paid over the life of those ineligible loans.
The Department concurred with our audit and ceased payment
on that particular type of special allowance to 40 different
lenders until independent audits were conducted. We worked in
collaboration with the Department to develop a methodology to
identify improper loans and also published a special audit
guide to be used by the independent auditors.
These audits, conducted over the next year, identified that
90 percent of the loans billed to the Department were
ineligible and, as a result, prevented well over $1,000,000,000
in overpayments.
Another area at risk of improper payments is within the
elementary and secondary education programs. As part of our
proactive efforts to assist the Department in enhancing
internal controls at State levels prior to substantial amounts
of recovery funding going out, we compiled a report on the
pervasive fiscal issues reported in over 40 OIG audits of State
and local education agencies.
These audits collectively had identified approximately
$62,000,000 in unallowable costs, $119,000,000 in inadequately
documented costs, and $1,400,000,000 in funds determined to be
at risk. These amounts were, in most cases, a direct result of
internal control weaknesses, including a lack of adequate
policies and procedures and a lack of understanding regarding
program regulations and guidance.
To address these weaknesses, we suggested that the
Department enhance its guidance to State and local education
agencies on how to implement the administrative requirements of
Federal grants and ensure that they understood the importance
of complying with the requirements. The Department developed a
technical assistance plan and training for State and local
education agencies that included issues we raised in our
report, such as cash management, recordkeeping, and allowable
activities.
The report was also used by us to plan the first phase of
our Recovery Act audit work of individual States that reviewed
their systems of internal controls.
Department officials have stated that they need to continue
to explore additional opportunities for identifying and
reducing potential improper payments and to ensure compliance
with the new requirements embodied in the recently passed
Improper Payments Act and the President's Executive Order. We
are committed to helping them do so, and we will continue to
provide recommendations in this area through our reviews of the
Department's quarterly reports on high-dollar overpayments, our
mandated annual review of the Department's compliance with the
Improper Payments Act requirements, and otherwise.
I note that we have initiated a review to more closely
examine the Department's methodology for identifying high-
dollar overpayments.
Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.017

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
And this is your day. Mr. O'Carroll.
Mr. O'Carroll. And I am the only one--I am the only one
with no green. [Laughter.]
It is probably in protest since I am not in New York at the
parade. [Laughter.]
Good morning, Chairman Rehberg, Congresswoman DeLauro, and
Members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the invitation to testify today.
Federal agencies must spend taxpayer dollars wisely and
efficiently, and they must make sure Government benefits are
administered correctly. SSA and agencies across the Government
have increased their efforts to reduce improper payments in
recent years, particularly since President Obama signed the
executive order on improper payments and the Improper Payments
and Elimination and Recovery Act.
Since my office was established in 1995, our primary goal
has been to identify and reduce SSA's improper payments. Our
auditors work diligently to identify program vulnerabilities,
and our investigators achieve hundreds of millions of dollars
in SSA recoveries, restitutions, and savings every year. With a
history of identifying SSA's improper payments, our office was
asked by the IG community to assume a leadership role with OMB
and the Treasury on implementing the improper payments order
and legislation.
For fiscal year 2009, SSA reported improper payments
totaling $8 billion. The agency's Retirement, Survivors, and
Disability Insurance Program had $2.6 billion in overpayments
and $600 billion in underpayments. Its SSI program had $4
billion in overpayments and $800 million in underpayments.
SSA seeks to improve both programs. The agency said it
plans to commit nearly $800 million towards program integrity
efforts this year, with an emphasis on error detection tools,
such as continuing disability reviews, or CDRs, and SSI
redeterminations. My office has continually recommended that
SSA allocate funds to these stewardship tools, and we are
pleased that the agency is dedicated to improving payment
accuracy.
SSA's number of completed medical CDRs declined by 65
percent in recent years. At the end of last fiscal year, SSA
had a backlog of more than 1.5 million CDRs. We estimated that
SSA would have avoided paying $1 billion in 2011 if the CDRs in
the backlog were conducted when they were due.
Redeterminations also decreased by 60 percent from 2003 to
2008. We estimated that SSA could have saved an additional $3
billion during 2008 and 2009 by conducting redeterminations at
the same level it did in 2003.
While it is critical to identify improper payments that
have been made, it is equally important to utilize tools that
can prevent payment errors before they occur. My office for
years has encouraged SSA to use data matching to protect agency
funds.
On an OIG recommendation, SSA sought several thousand
agreements with Federal, State, and local corrections
facilities so that it could match prisoner data against its
records, halting payments to prisoners. In 2006, SSA's Office
of the Actuary estimated savings of over $500 million per year.
Similarly, to reduce SSI overpayments, OIG recommended SSA
obtain beneficiaries' bank account information rather than rely
on self-reporting of resources. The agency in recent years
implemented the Access to Financial Institutions Project, which
allows SSA to check an applicant or recipient's bank account to
verify resources.
We have made other data recommendations to SSA involving
potential matches of beneficiary information to marital status,
workers, compensation, and vehicle ownership. We also are
pursuing an exemption from the Computer Matching and Privacy
Protection Act to facilitate our work in this area.
In conclusion, SSA and other agencies have made strides to
comply with requests to report their improper payments,
identify causes, and allocate resources to prevent future
errors. My office will continue to work with this subcommittee
and SSA in these and future efforts to reduce improper payments
in SSA's benefit programs.
Thank you for the invitation to testify today, and I will
be happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.023

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
For the benefit of the committee Members that were not here
on time, we were going to ask questions until 5 minutes left on
the vote. And then we will adjourn the meeting and come back
after the two votes.
And so, we have about 10 minutes' worth of time, which
probably gets us through me and the ranking member, and we will
get you off to the vote so you don't miss anything.
Thank you very much, and I appreciate all of your hard work
and time that you spend trying to find not just the waste,
fraud, and abuse, but we know that it is accident-related as
well. It is not always one of those three arenas.
I guess, Mr. Lewis, and maybe the rest of you can answer
the question, but it is not nearly as appropriate perhaps as
for Medicare and Medicaid. But how do you hold States
responsible? Is there a mechanism for you to go back on the
States or to tell us where the problems exist? Do we have
anything, an oversight capacity within our ability to go back
on the States and recapture some of the money?
Mr. Lewis. Well, the Department certainly has oversight
responsibility of the program that the States are running. The
UI program is unique in that being a Federal-State program, the
States do have a vested interest in complying.
The bulk of these overpayments we are talking about are
really their State UI tax dollars. So it is in their interest
to recover the funds. But the Department does approve of their
program, authorize their program to operate. So it does have
the means to do oversight and push for enforcement of the
rules.
But I think it is a strong incentive that it is the State's
own tax monies in the trust fund that they are protecting, as
well, by doing this.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. I am still learning a lot about this
subcommittee's work. And at the purest sense, I look at the
Social Security Administration, and I think you have about
65,000 employees versus the Department of Labor. And I have no
idea how that equates into number of seniors per employee or
number of unemployed per employee.
Can you draw any kind of a comparison? Why are there any
mistakes if you have got 65,000, how many employees within the
Department of Labor deal with----
Mr. Lewis. Oh, 18,000 total, roughly. I am not sure how
many are dealing with UI. There are people down in the State
level that are administering----
Mr. Rehberg. And maybe I am not fairly making a comparison.
But it seems to me like they will joke about, ``Why is he
crying? His farmer died.'' It is almost like why are there any
mistakes when you have 65,000 employees? How many of them are
actual caseworkers that are sitting there making these kinds of
determination whether there should be the proper payment? Is
that a fair question?
Mr. O'Carroll. Chairman, SSA is very service oriented. It
is pretty much the face of the Government to many people. And
because of that, service to the public is a hallmark of SSA,
and a lot of SSA's employees are out in the field dealing
directly with the public.
However, there are a lot of complications in terms of the
programs that SSA manages, especially with regard to self-
reporting of income or other eligibility factors. As you
mentioned before, SSA has to deal with the States in terms of
matching of information on death, divorces, other types of
vital statistics.
So even with the large amount of employees that SSA has, a
lot of their time is spent on service. And I think what will
come out of this hearing, our biggest concern is stewardship,
making sure that the right people are getting the right amount
of money, and that SSA is putting the right amount of attention
toward stewardship. As an example, to make sure that their
medical condition hasn't improved and they haven't become
better, and that they don't need benefits anymore.
Mr. Lewis. Well, the UI program has some similarities in
that it is dependent on a lot of self-reporting or initial
self-reporting that is later confirmed with employers. The
program, given the nature of the program, is to be a supplement
or a stand-in for basic needs for folks when they are out of
work. That if the States waited until they had verified
everything before initiating the first payments, then we would
be holding up a payment for a considerable length of time, in
some cases.
So a lot of it is that the volume they are dealing with and
the need to go back to employers, for example, to confirm
things.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your testimony and for your
commitment to public service. You do a great job.
Could one or more of you help us to understand what is
meant by improper payment? It has been alluded to a couple of
times here. I think that when some people hear the term, they
hear there are billions of dollars in improper payments in
programs like Medicare, and they equate that with waste or
fraud.
And some of the payments, quite honestly, undoubtedly
reflect fraud and abuse. I have no question about that. But
also, listening to all of you, there is also overpayment,
underpayment, so I'd like some clarity of what an improper
payment is. In a program like Medicare, aren't many improper
payments the result of things like improper coding, inadequate
documentation?
In other words, it is not that healthcare wasn't provided
or wasn't necessary, but that the services may not have been
properly described or documented as to medical necessity. That
may have been missing in terms of the material.
I don't mean to suggest in any way that we shouldn't try
hard to reduce these kinds of problems. We should. That is what
we ought to be about. We have rules about information and
documentation for good reason. Miscoding of services may mean
that the wrong amount is paid. But I think we need to be clear
about what improper payments are to help put the numbers in
perspective.
So, as I said, I'd like for one or more of you to help us
really to try to understand this.
Mr. Levinson. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro.
And actually, I think that that is a great way of opening
up the subject. And improper payments manifest itself, I think,
in such different ways for different programs that I think you
will get different and important perspectives on this issue
depending upon who you talk to, going right down the panel. And
for that matter, with respect to virtually all of the
department OIGs around Government.
With respect, for example, to Medicare, in fee-for-service,
the main types of errors--and there are three--are insufficient
documentation, medically unnecessary claims, and miscoded
claims. These account for most, the great majority of the
$34,300,000,000 that have been identified as payments that
don't meet program requirements.
Now you are absolutely correct in noting that it is
unlikely that all payments that simply don't meet program
requirements are necessarily----
Ms. DeLauro. Fraud.
Mr. Levinson [continuing]. Bad in the sense of not serving
a particular beneficiary in a way that the beneficiary needed
to be served and, going back and looking at the claim, could be
corrected. It is not a valid substitute for a fraud figure, and
in fact, as we have often said around our office, the best
fraudsters do the paperwork perfectly so that the improper
payment rate is not a good figure. There is fraud that occurs.
Perhaps the best fraud occurs outside of the improper
payment. Because if you are really good, you are going to buy
off the doctor or buy off the beneficiary, and the paperwork is
going to look excellent.
So it is important to distinguish that. That isn't to say
that there are and unquestionably fraud schemes that are
embedded that exist within the figure. But teasing out,
drilling down and understanding what that is, it is so much, of
course, for the size of HHS, it is a huge data challenge. And
it is very, very helpful to have now the monies flowing into
our data systems that will allow for real-time understanding of
transactions and doing the kind of prepayment edits that are
really necessary and the prepayment reviews to understand how
the money actually is getting spent.
Being able to identify patterns effectively before the
money goes out the door so you don't have to engage in so much
``pay and chase,'' very important reforms.
Ms. DeLauro. I was taken with your commentary on the four
areas that we should be focused on in this effort. So I thank
you, really thank you for helping to clarify it.
And let me yield back, Mr. Chairman, because maybe someone
can get in----
Mr. Rehberg. Well, we are going to cut it off right here.
Ms. DeLauro. Going to cut it off right now? Okay, fine.
Mr. Rehberg. And we will be back as quickly as we can.
Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Rehberg. [presiding] Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to all of you.
Mr. Levinson, in your statement, you mentioned that upon
the first day of hiring for new people coming off of the
unemployment roll, that the employer has to report the first
day of hiring. Is that accurate?
Mr. Levinson. I think this is a Department of Labor.
Mr. Alexander. Oh, okay. I am sorry. Mr. Lewis.
Mr. Levinson. That is quite all right.
Mr. Lewis. Yes, it is actually an HHS database that is
maintained.
Mr. Alexander. Okay.
Mr. Lewis. It was set up for a different purpose. But, yes,
the employers are required generally within, I believe, 20 days
to report that they have hired someone.
Mr. Alexander. Okay. And they do that by paper? It is not
something that has to be done electronically?
Mr. Lewis. I am not sure exactly the mechanism they do
that.
Mr. Alexander. I was just thinking about speed. The more
quickly they can report that, the better off we would all be.
Mr. Lewis. Yes, I am not aware--there is the requirement to
report, as I said, generally within 20 days, and I am not aware
that there is a problem with employers not getting their report
in within the 20-day limit.
Mr. Alexander. Okay. And I just have a couple of questions.
Mr. Levinson, you mentioned something about a cap on the
chiropractors and the services that they provide. Why would
they be singled out over other healthcare providers?
Mr. Levinson. Mr. Alexander, the chiropractic example was
exactly that. One example among many. And we would be happy to
provide you details on a wide variety of healthcare providers
where we have done reviews like this, which have indicated that
we can do a better job in terms of the paperwork.
Mr. Alexander. Well, there is one thing I would like for
you to provide the committee that we have not been able to get
in the past. We read various reports about how many healthcare
providers, physicians, whoever, that are found doing something
wrong or inappropriate. And we hear reports that some group
submitted invoices of 1,200 claims from one location and maybe
1,000 procedures done by one individual during the course of a
day, and they were paid for that.
My question is, all of these outsiders that we hear about
that are arrested and some convicted, we have never heard
anything about individuals on the inside that are
participating. Now I have watched ``The Godfather'' and other
shows where organized crime is the subject of matter. You never
mention anything about it, but is organized crime part of the
trouble that we have in some of these cases perhaps?
Mr. Levinson. Mr. Alexander, organized crime unquestionably
is a part of the fraud problem.
Mr. Alexander. Okay. Well, the reason I asked that is,
again, I think it takes at least two or more to be organized. I
don't think one individual robbing a service station would be
considered part of organized crime.
So, again, the point being that it seems strange that we
pay a tremendous amount of money out through fraud and abuse.
Doesn't anybody notice when an invoice comes in and some doctor
does 1,000 procedures in the same day? Does somebody just write
a check and say, ``This is a hard-working doctor.''
Again, it is hard for us to believe that there is a
tremendous amount of fraud and abuse going on without somebody
on the inside knowing about it. And we have not yet had one
name submitted to us that worked at a governmental agency, at
the local, State, or Federal level that was caught doing
anything wrong.
Mr. Levinson. Well, I think this will be actually an
excellent subject to dive down a little bit with your next
panel, which will include CMS, that they can talk about the
efforts to come up with better real-time data so that these
transactions can be understood much more quickly. You know, as
a result of prompt payment, historically there has been too
much of a delay between the transaction and then people looking
to see behind it.
But I can tell you that from our office's perspective,
there is no automatic profile of who a fraudster is when it
comes to healthcare fraud. And I certainly want to add that the
great majority of physicians and other healthcare providers are
honest, highly professional, and doing a very, very important
job for the American people.
Mr. Alexander. And we appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the panel for your hard work.
One of our highest priorities and one that I believe is
shared by all of us on the subcommittee is to reduce Medicare
fraud. First of all, we know it wastes taxpayer dollars. It is
a slap in the face to the more than 46 million beneficiaries
who depend on Medicare.
Mr. Levinson, last week, Secretary Sebelius testified
before the subcommittee that the proposed 10-year investment in
CMS program integrity in the fiscal year 2012 budget request
will yield $10,300,000,000 in Medicare and Medicaid savings. Do
you know how the administration arrived at the $581,000,000
discretionary funding proposal for fiscal year 2012 to improve
CMS program integrity?
Now let me just say one other thing. I understand this is a
substantial increase. But when I hear your testimony,
$56,800,000,000 in improper payments for Medicare and Medicaid
in 2010, I want to ensure that we are doing everything we can
to prevent fraud.
So, number one, if you can answer that $581,000,000, and
does HHS and the Inspector General's office have the capacity
to grow improper payment programs at an even greater rate
beyond what is included in the budget request so that if we
were to invest more today, we would have more to spend
tomorrow? Could you respond?
Mr. Levinson. Yes, I would be happy to, Mrs. Lowey.
On the first question, it is not that I am happy to do so,
but I think I need to defer to the policymakers on your
$581,000,000 issue because CMS will be testifying after us, and
they will be able to speak directly to the Administration's
proposal. So I can't really look prospectively.
I certainly can speak with great confidence about our
budget and the way in which we have been able to contribute, I
think, in a very significant way toward the Department being
able to get a far better handle on the improper payment figure,
as it appears before you today, and coming up with an effective
plan to reduce those figures.
As I explained in my opening statement, so much of the
improper payment dollars don't have to do with fraud so much as
being able to get data collection, and the understanding of
what that data actually means, understood and acted upon far
more quickly. And CMS is taking steps, and I would say many of
them are directly related to what the Affordable Care Act
provided in terms of added funding and giving the Secretary far
greater authority to restrict enrollment in areas where there
has been abuse by fraudulent people easily being able to get
provider numbers and entering the program for the sole purpose
of taking advantage of it.
Provisions like that from the work that we have already
done provide us, I think, with a very great sense of confidence
that, going forward, these kinds of figures can be reduced
significantly.
Mrs. Lowey. I appreciate that point, and I know my
colleague, Ranking Member DeLauro, made it clearly that it is
not all fraud, and we have to really focus on get to the
providers who are involved in fraudulent practices. Some of
those, we have had those cases in my office where they are
still writing them in by hand, and they don't even want to use
the new technology. So this is an issue that we see all the
time.
Another question. Mr. O'Carroll, happy St. Patrick's Day.
You testified that 10 percent of total Supplemental Security
Income payments in 2010 were either overpayments or
underpayments. This seems to be an unacceptably high
percentage, and it is far different than the 0.5 percent
improper payment rate for the Retirement and Disability
Insurance Program.
How does the SSI program, which is far smaller than RSDI,
have such a higher improper payment rate?
Mr. O'Carroll. Congresswoman, that is one of the ones when
I mentioned earlier, a problem with the SSI program is a lot of
it is self-reporting of your wages and your income on it. And
because of that, it is susceptible to fraud in terms of a lot
of people are going to be underreporting what their income is.
And because of that, we are recommending that SSA have
better agreements with States on trying to match information
that the States have on people's wages and information. But
probably more important than that that they are doing now is
this access to financial institutions, where the banks are now
being able--so when a person puts down and says that they are
destitute and they are looking for benefits, SSA at that point
can be checking to see if they do have assets.
What we would like to do kind of again is get agreements
going with the States to see if, for example, a person who
claims that they are destitute has a number of vehicles. So,
again, that is the biggest problem----
Mr. Rehberg. I am going to ask you if you have additional
information to put it in for the record. We would love to have
that.
Mr. O'Carroll. Yes, Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. My intent is to finish this round with Mr.
Flake and Ms. Roybal-Allard and then move on to the next panel
so we have enough time for them to give their testimony as
well.
Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Let me shift to recovery rates for a minute. It
is noted that improper payments totaled $125,000,000,000 in
2010. The agencies recovered about $687,000,000. That would
seem to be extremely low.
In the private sector, you have issues like this. Recovery
rates are far, far higher for vendors that don't pay or
whatever else. And I am wondering, are there incentives that
can be offered, that are offered to these agencies to have a
higher recovery rate? What is the difference, I mean, between
those who are working on recovery, the agency itself?
Is it treated any differently by the Congress in the next
year's budget? Are there employment incentives or bonuses that
are attached? What is the difference to an agency if they have,
what is this, a 0.05 percent recovery rate, as opposed to a 50
percent recovery rate? Is there any material or tangible
difference with how an agency is treated by the Congress or by
the executive branch or anybody else?
Go ahead, Mr. Levinson.
Mr. Levinson. Mr. Flake, this, once more, actually is a
question that will be best handled by CMS, which is supposed to
appear right after me. Because CMS does devote significant
resources to Recovery Audit Contractor programs, a major amount
of the money. Although we are funded several hundred million
dollars in our mission to protect programs against fraud,
waste, and abuse, CMS is in the billion-dollar category when it
comes to program integrity.
And a significant amount of those dollars are devoted to
coming up with a Recovery Audit Contractor program, where there
are major operations employed throughout the United States
whose purpose is to recover improper payments, and there are
incentive programs. In other words, compensation is tied to the
recovery.
I don't have before me the details of those figures, but
those figures certainly can be gotten to you quite easily.
Mr. Flake. Well, with a recovery rate of $687,000,000 on
$125,000,000,000 improper payment, the payment to these
collectors, if you will, may be improper as well. I mean, it is
the fact that we are collecting so little says to me that we
need some new incentives in place or penalties or something
attached to this because would you not agree that this recovery
rate is strikingly low?
Anybody else? I hear a head nod there. Kathleen.
Ms. Tighe. I would certainly agree with that. I think at
Education, I think recovery of monies is a big challenge for
the Department.
I think in part it is due to incentives. I think there are
incentives built into the Improper Payments Act, supposedly
through allowing a certain amount of the recoveries to come
back to departments. I am not sure that is going to be enough
to overcome some of the hurdles to getting money back in
certain programs at Education, for example, Title I programs
going out to States.
I think I mentioned, the 41 audits we had. Thirty-three of
those have been resolved, worth about $53,000,000. The
Department is only going after about $3,000,000 and hoping to
get it back. The reasons for that are built into the statute;
they have to show that there has been harm to the Federal
interest.
And what that means is, look, if the students are already
getting served, and there really isn't-- it is hard to make a
school district pay money back.
Mr. Flake. I understand that more than I do on the medical
services and whatever else. That is bigger money and easier, it
would seem, money easier to be reclaimed.
Anyway, when I look at this, I think we have got to change
the incentive somehow because this is a very, very low recovery
rate.
Thanks.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Inspector O'Carroll, let me begin, first
of all, by commending you for the efforts that the Social
Security Administration is making to reduce improper payments
in its three programs. However, I keep hearing from my
constituents how confusing it is to navigate through the
system, and the paperwork is also very difficult.
And my minority and disabled constituents are the ones that
are the most frustrated, and this makes me think that perhaps
the complexity of your programs and of the paperwork play a
significant role in improper payments, particularly in the
Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental Security
Income programs.
Do you track what proportion of overpayments and
underpayments have resulted from misunderstandings of the
process or confusion about the paperwork? And what is being
done to simplify your programs, improve transparency in the
reporting requirements, and ensure that the process is
culturally and linguistically appropriate for minority
populations?
Mr. O'Carroll. Congresswoman, that is probably better
answered by SSA when their panel is there, in terms of the
simplification of the different forms on it. But to give you
some of the work that we have done in that area, we have been
taking a look at, as an example, with the applying for Social
Security benefits, one of the things is with the iClaims, which
is the Internet claims on it, which has been designed by the
agency. It has been, I guess, vetted. It is simpler.
It seems to be well liked by the claims reps in SSA itself.
And we just did an audit on that, and we found that about 95
percent of the people that have been using this online claims
form are very happy with it. They like it, and they are doing
it. So I am thinking is that SSA is going in the right
direction in terms of simplifying the application process.
As far as if we are finding out on the underpayments and
overpayments if there is a problem in terms of the application
process itself, if you don't mind, let me take a look at that,
and I will get back to you on the record with our findings on
that one. I don't have any recent audit work on that to be able
to give you a direct answer.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. And I have another series of
questions, which I probably will submit for the record if I
don't have time to ask them later.
Inspector Levinson, first of all, thank you for your
testimony and your excellent summary of what HHS is doing to
address improper payments in Medicare and Medicaid. And I
recognize the importance of improving CMS program integrity,
but I would like to focus for a moment on some of the other
programs that you oversee, which also face challenges in
program integrity.
There has been a long history of controversy about cash
welfare programs in this country. And while I understand that
States set their own TANF cash benefits levels and are
responsible for the integrity of their own programs,
$16,500,000,000 annually is a relatively large Federal grant
program, and the Federal Government does have a vested interest
in how States use these funds.
It is my understanding that the application of the Improper
Payments Act to TANF has been contentious and that States have
opposed the development of a national error rate for TANF.
Where does the administration stand on the development of an
official error rate for TANF programs, and what specific
obstacles are you facing in developing a national rate?
Mr. Levinson. Ms. Roybal-Allard, there have been legal
questions regarding how the improper payment calculation would
apply to the TANF block grant, in particular. That does raise
unique issues of the Federal-State relationship. And our
understanding is that the Department, the Administration is
working on options to how they might remedy the issues.
We are outside of that policy loop. So I would defer our
colleagues in ACF to provide a more detailed response.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. Do you have any idea whether or
not the tools that have been developed by HHS to address
improper payments in Federal programs has been effective in
promoting integrity in State TANF programs?
Mr. Levinson. Well, we do have some TANF work, but it
doesn't apply specifically to improper payments. We are
reviewing States' use of smart card technology to validate the
identity of TANF recipients. I mean, this does certainly have
an impact on appropriate payments, to ensure payments are used
for authorized items.
We have a review of ACF oversight, if States is compliant
with TANF work participation and the verification requirements.
So there is important review work being done in the TANF
program.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
We are going to excuse this panel.
----------

Thursday, March 17, 2011.

IMPROPER PAYMENTS

WITNESSES

GAY GILBERT, ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE,
EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ADMINISTRATION
DEBORAH TAYLOR, DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, CENTERS
FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES
THOMAS P. SKELLY, DIRECTOR, BUDGET SERVICE AND ACTING CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER
CAROLYN COLVIN, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL SECURITY
Mr. Rehberg. All right. Let's get going. Ms. Gilbert?
Ms. Gilbert. Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member DeLauro, and
subcommittee Members, thank you for this opportunity to discuss
the Unemployment Insurance program and strategies for reducing
UI improper payments, which is a top priority at the Department
of Labor.
It is receiving the highest level of attention and focus
from departmental leadership, and we are working aggressively
to identify new strategies, tools, and resources to support our
State partners in bringing the UI improper payment rate down.
The entire UI system, both Federal and State, has a
longstanding commitment to program integrity. We use highly
sophisticated sampling and audit methods to prevent, detect,
and recover improper payments.
Unfortunately, the improper payment rate has increased
during the course of this recession. As of the most recent
reporting period, it stands at 11.2 percent, of which 10.6
percent represents overpayments.
The four main reasons for improper payments in the UI
program are, one, payments made to individuals who continue to
claim benefits after they return to work; two, employers
failing to provide timely and adequate information on the
reason for the individual's separation from employment; three,
the inability to validate the individual has met the State's
work search requirements; and fourth, the failure of the
claimant to register with the State's employment service,
pursuant to the State's law.
The recession has severely stressed our UI system and has
been another cause in the rise of the UI improper payment rate.
As a result of the overwhelming workload over the last 2 years,
States have reprogrammed their integrity staff to actually take
claims instead of working to reduce improper payments. And
technology solutions that could have controlled or reduced
improper payments were put on hold during all of the changes in
the Emergency Unemployment Compensation program.
Improper payments due to claimant fault have also increased
during the recession. Improper payments resulting from
claimants' failure to complete their work search requirements
have risen as a result in large part due to lack of jobs. This
type of improper payment is extremely workload intensive and
costly to detect given the size of the UI population, which
today numbers 8.8 million.
Despite these challenges, the department has one
overarching goal, and that is to get the improper payment rate
down. Working with our State partners, the department has a
number of robust strategies already underway, as well as newly
identified strategies for prevention, which is the key to
getting the rate down.
To address the issue of claimants' continuing to claim
benefits after they return to work, the department will be
mandating expanded use of the National Directory of New Hires
as both a detection and a prevention tool and will provide new
protocols, resources, and technical assistance to States to
enable them to use the directory most effectively.
We have appreciated Congress's support for the Reemployment
and Eligibility Assessment Initiative, a critical UI integrity
investment that reduces improper payments through early
detection of eligibility problems and speeds claimants' return
to work. To date, 40 States have REA programs that support
claimant eligibility reviews and development of reemployment
plans at their One-Stop career centers. The $70,000,000
requested in the fiscal year 2012 budget will fund 980,000
claimant REA visits and save State UI trust funds an estimated
$237,000,000.
To ensure that States are able to get timely and accurate
separation information to prevent improper payments when a
claim is first filed, the department has joined with States to
implement the State Information Data Exchange System, or SIDES.
SIDES provides a secure electronic data exchange between States
and employers or their representatives, and it both speeds up
the process and improves the completeness and the accuracy of
the information. The department is actively working with States
now to rapidly accelerate implementation of SIDES.
To improve recovery of improper payments, I am pleased to
report that a necessary regulation and system is now in place
for States to implement the Treasury Offset Program, which
enables States to recover UI overpayments by offsetting Federal
income tax refunds against UI debts. States are already showing
impressive recovery numbers as a result.
Given that States are the key to getting the rate down, it
is our intent to provide new tools and intensive technical
assistance, particularly to high-impact States, to improve
prevention. With Congress's support, we will continue to
provide States with supplemental funding to improve UI
integrity. In addition, the President's fiscal year 2012 budget
includes a request for $10,000,000 for incentive awards to
States with the most improved integrity performance.
In order to get more resources and new tools in the hands
of States, we are extremely pleased that Congress passed two of
the provisions of the UI, the Unemployment Compensation Program
Integrity Act of 2010 in the last Congress. However, we
continue to believe all of the provisions in the Integrity Act
are important to the UI system's ability to control improper
payments.
Therefore, the President's budget also proposes a
reintroduction of the Integrity Act, which includes the option
for States to retain up to 5 percent of their recovered
overpayments and to use those for integrity activities. We
anticipate transmitting the new legislation to Congress in the
coming weeks.
In conclusion, the department is committed to working with
our State partners to bring down the UI payment rate, and we
look forward to working with you as well. And I will be glad to
answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Gay Gilbert, Administrator,
Office of Unemployment Insurance, Employment and Training
Administration, follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.033

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Taylor.
Ms. Taylor. Good morning, Chairman Rehberg and Ranking
Member DeLauro and Members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss
the corrective actions that the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) are taking to reduce improper payments in the
Medicare and Medicaid programs. CMS is committed to reducing
the rate of improper payments and ensuring that our programs
pay the right amount for the right service to the right person
in a timely manner.
Like other large and complex Federal programs, Medicare and
Medicaid are susceptible to improper payments, and CMS does
calculate, on an annual basis, the improper payments rate for
these programs. I think we have talked a lot about it this
morning, but improper payments are generally errors. They are
not fraud.
These errors generally result from the following
situations. First, a provider fails to submit any documentation
or submits insufficient documentation to support the services
paid. Secondly, the services provided are incorrectly coded on
the claim. And thirdly, the documentation submitted by the
provider shows the services were not reasonable and necessary.
CMS is committed to reducing these improper payments and is
working aggressively on corrective actions to deter and reduce
them. I would like to talk a little bit about each of these
programs and the corrective actions we are taking currently.
First, the traditional Medicare fee-for-service program
represents the majority of Medicare spending. This program is
administered by CMS through contracts with private companies
that process close to 5 million claims each day. That is over 1
billion claims a year. CMS uses the Comprehensive Error Rate
Testing program, known as CERT, to estimate an improper payment
rate for this program.
Last year, CMS was able to reduce the improper payment rate
by 1.9 percent, from 12.4 percent to 10.5 percent. The CERT
program provides valuable information to the Agency to assist
in the development of corrective actions. The best way to
address these problems--and I think you heard from the OIG, Dan
Levinson--is robust provider enrollment, increased review of
medical records, and enhanced systems, edits, and automated
processes and analytic tools.
Some of our recent provider education efforts include the
development of comparative billing reports, issuance of
quarterly compliance reports to providers, and conducting
routine forums to discuss Medicare policies and documentation
requirements.
And CMS recently also implemented the national recovery
audit program. This program provides valuable information about
areas where increased education and outreach are needed, as
well as where prepayment medical review is most productive.
Together, these tools provide valuable information to assist in
the development of automated edits that will detect and reject
claims before they are paid.
We believe that all these efforts will go a long way in
helping us achieve the goal to cut the Medicare fee-for-service
improper payments rate in half by 2012.
While CMS administers the Medicaid program, this program is
essentially more than 50 programs. CMS developed the Payment
Error Rate Measurement program, known as PERM, to review
improper payments in three components of Medicaid--fee-for-
service claims, managed care claims, and eligibility cases. In
fiscal year 2010, the Medicaid improper payment rate was 9.4
percent, and this was a reduction from the prior year of 9.6
percent.
While causes of improper payments vary from State to State,
PERM helps CMS identify trends and common errors across States.
States are critical partners to CMS efforts to reduce Medicaid
improper payments. All States must develop corrective actions
to address their improper payments, and based on the corrective
action plans, which CMS does review and approve, many States
intend to enhance their provider education efforts and improve
the responsiveness and completeness of documentation.
CMS also collects and disseminates best practices that are
shared among the States to help them learn from each other and
ensure that they continue to reduce their errors. CMS has made
progress in reducing errors. We believe that the expansion of
the recovery audit program to Parts C and D, which are the
managed care and prescription drug programs, as well as the
Medicaid program, as required under the Affordable Care Act,
will greatly help us reduce errors even further.
We are also looking at private sector techniques, such as
electronic health records, more analytic tools, and other items
that the private sector currently uses to help us reduce this.
I believe that these efforts will help us further reduce error
rates, and we look forward to working with you. And I would be
happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.042

Mr. Rehberg. Boy, right on the nose. Good job.
Ms. Taylor. Thanks. [Laughter.]

IMPROPER PAYMENTS--PELL GRANTS

Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Skelly. We normally go in order of title
within the bill.
Mr. Skelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ms. DeLauro,
Members of the subcommittee.
With one exception, Department of Education programs have
been below the Improper Payment Act threshold for reports on
susceptibility to significant improper payments. The threshold
is 2.5 percent. The one exception at the Department has been
the Pell grant program.
In Pell, we estimate that about 2 percent of the recipients
get overpayments, and 1 percent get underpayments. The
combination 3.12 percent is above the 2.5 percent threshold.
Even though our other programs fall below the threshold for
reports on improper payments, we still subject them to risk
assessments and monitoring, especially the student loan
programs. But Pell is the program that has the required reports
under the Improper Payment Act.
Pell grants provide need-based aid to low-income
undergraduates. The estimated improper payment of just over 3
percent results primarily from incorrectly reported applicant
income data. Our risk assessments found that this incorrect
student and parent self-reported financial information on the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid, or FAFSA form, is
what is causing the problem.
The FAFSA requires applicants to provide nearly two dozen
pieces of information, many of which they also provide to the
Internal Revenue Service on their Federal tax forms. And
sometimes, they get it wrong.
As a check on what applicants report, the Department
requires postsecondary institutions to verify key items on up
to 30 percent of their students' FAFSA forms. Students selected
for verification must provide copies of their or their parents'
tax returns and supporting documentation to financial aid
administrators at the colleges.
The financial aid administrator then manually compares the
applicant's tax return data against the information provided on
the applicant's FAFSA. This lengthy process is burdensome to
students, families, and schools, and it fails to eliminate
inappropriate Pell payments based on inaccurate income
information.
In 2009, our Office of Federal Student Aid implemented a
voluntary process where applicants can access information from
their past tax returns electronically through an automated
process with IRS. They can then put that information into the
online FAFSA form. In the current 2010-11 academic year,
500,000 applicants have used the automated process so far. It
is voluntary.
But most still enter their FAFSA data manually. It is about
20 million, 21 million students who apply for Pell each year.
Starting in the 2012-13 academic year, applicants will be
directed to use the IRS data retrieval process to populate
their FAFSA automatically. They can just press a button. It
would be real-time recovery of that information from IRS into
their tax return. They won't have to do anything more. It still
will be voluntary. Applicants who file their taxes after they
have filed their FAFSA will be reminded to update their FAFSAs
with IRS data.
Finally, most applicants who are selected for verification
by colleges will be required to correct their FAFSA with IRS
data or provide their school with an IRS-approved transcript of
their tax data, instead of simply supplying a copy of their tax
return.
Using IRS data to pre-populate the aid application and
enhance aid verification procedures for financial aid
administrators will simplify the FAFSA application for
students, but it will also reduce the improper payments for
Pell by an estimated $340 million in 2012. And we estimate by
$4 billion over the next 10 years.
That is the highlights of Department of Education improper
payments, and I will submit the rest of the statement for the
record.
[The prepared statement of Thomas P. Skelly, Director of
Budget Service and Acting Chief Financial Officer, follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.047

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you very much.
Ms. Colvin.
Ms. Colvin. Thank you.
Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member DeLauro, and Members of
the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to discuss the
Social Security Administration's efforts to reduce improper
payments. I want to highlight several points regarding our
progress.
We pay nearly $60 billion of benefits to almost 60 million
people each month. As the agency's senior accountable official
for improper payments, let me assure you that we are committed
to making those payments timely and accurately.
In fact, there is an adage in the agency, ``The right check
to the right person at the right time.'' Minimizing improper
payments is so important that we made preserving the public's
trust in our programs a strategic goal. However, inadequate
resources undermine our ability to achieve this goal.
For many years, Congress appropriated less than the
President's budget, and we could no longer fulfill many key
responsibilities. Hearing backlogs rose dramatically, and
program integrity work declined significantly. Since 2007, we
have been reversing these trends. Even as we have had to deal
with surging workloads, we have steadily increased our program
integrity efforts.
As a result, I am happy to report that in fiscal year 2009,
99.63 percent of all OSDI benefits were free of overpayment.
The Supplemental Security Income, or SSI, program is more
complex, and our overpayment accuracy rate reflects that
complexity. Still, we have improved. In fiscal year 2008 our
SSI overpayment accuracy rate was 89.7 percent. In fiscal year
2009, we raised it to 91.6 percent, a positive trend.
Our complex programs require knowledgeable and experienced
employees to analyze cases, make decisions, and implement
changes. Our employees are our best defense against improper
payments, and all of the efforts I discuss today depend on
having an adequate number of well-trained staff to fulfill our
responsibilities.
It is important to understand that these employees are the
same employees who review and decide on the initial
applications for benefits and handle all of our other
responsibilities. We balance serving the public with meeting
our stewardship duties to the best of our ability, but with a
record number of people requesting our services, we simply do
not have enough employees to handle all of our work on a timely
basis.
Operating under a continuing resolution only makes this
situation worse. Our most valuable tools to maintaining the
integrity of our programs are continuing disability reviews, or
CDRs, and SSI redeterminations. We invested $758,000,000 toward
these efforts in 2010, and we propose to invest even more in
fiscal years 2011 and 2012.
We estimate that every dollar invested in CDRs yields at
least $10 in lifetime program savings, including savings
accruing to Medicare and Medicaid. Every dollar spent on SSI
redetermination yields more than $7 in program savings over 10
years, including savings accruing to Medicaid.
We use technology to help us prevent and detect improper
payments. For example, unreported financial accounts and wages
are the major causes of improper payments in the SSI program.
Therefore, we have developed a process called Access to
Financial Institutions, or AFI, to electronically identify
financial accounts of SSI applicants and recipients. We plan to
complete AFI rollout by the end of the fiscal year. After 2013,
we project that AFI could yield a $20 return for every $1
invested. In the past, SSI recipients had to either fax, mail,
or bring their monthly wage reports to our offices. We made
this process more efficient and user friendly by implementing
an automated wage reporting system for SSI recipients to report
wages over the telephone using either voice recognition or
touch-tone software.
Our programs demand stewardship that is worthy of the
promise of economic security. We are firmly committed to
effectively reducing improper payments and to following up with
appropriate enforcement and recovery actions.
In terms of enforcement, I want to highlight the agency's
close working relationship with our Inspector General. When we
receive allegations of fraud, we work with the IG's office to
address these cases.
In fact, one of our most successful efforts against
disability fraud is our Cooperative Disability Investigation,
or CDI, units, the task forces that link our IG and local law
enforcement with Federal and State workers who handle
disability cases. These units are highly successful at
detecting fraud.
The continued success of our programs is directly linked to
the public's trust in them. Properly managing our resources and
program dollars is critical to sustaining that trust. Equally
important to our success is adequate and sustained funding to
carry out our work.
Full funding of the President's 2011 and 2012 budgets will
allow us to increase our program integrity activities and keep
up with the public's demand for our services. For this reason,
I am asking you to support this critical funding.
I am happy to answer any of your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.054

BEST PRACTICES

Mr. Rehberg. Great. Thank you very much.
And in recognition of the time that is remaining in the
hearing, I am going to shorten the questions on the part of the
Members to 3 minutes. And hopefully, we will have time for
maybe two rounds, but I doubt it. So we will limit ourselves to
3 minutes.
Ms. Taylor, you essentially mentioned private sector ideas.
Could you expand upon some of the best practices? And then I
will ask real quickly the rest of you, do you have something
similar going on within your agencies for best practices that
you can learn from banks and insurance companies and credit
card companies and such?
Ms. Taylor. Sure. I would be happy to. And so, one of the
efforts we currently have ongoing right now is encouraging
providers to use electronic health records. Since documentation
seems to be the bulk of our errors, as well as coding, we
believe that electronic health records will help ensure that
providers have in-house tools to help them code claims
correctly, as well as understand our payment policies, so that
they are billing correctly for the services that Medicare pays
for. That is one.
We are also looking at private sector edits that would be
able to be used up front in our claims processing systems to
reject or detect erroneous claims so that we can stop them
before they are being paid.
We are also looking at some private sector tools, such as
buyer authorization, which is used by private insurers, as well
as other Government insurance companies such as TRICARE. We
believe that that also helps ensure that we are working with
the private insurer.
Mr. Rehberg. Anybody else?
Ms. Gilbert. I might mention that we are working with the
Office of Management and Budget and the Partnership Fund that
was mentioned and that Ranking Member DeLauro discussed to
explore and possibly pilot the use of banking payroll deposit
information as a more real-time data source to determine that
somebody has gone to work.
So that is one of the areas.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Ms. Colvin. We are certainly able now, with the AFI
program, to determine whether or not individuals have resources
in banks that they have not reported. We believe that moving to
electronic services will reduce the number of improper
payments. With our SSI wage reporting, as well as the data
exchanges that we use to check our records against other
records, we can see individuals who are working but have not
reported their wages. So we think that we are doing much of
what the private industry would do.

BEST PRACTICES TO REDUCE IMPROPER PAYMENTS AT ED

Mr. Skelly. Two items. One is to contract for recovery
audits, where the contractors only get paid if they recover
money. So there is an incentive. The other thing is data mining
or just using better analysis tools to figure out where there
might be improper payments.
Mr. Rehberg. And you all have the authority for data
sharing now? You don't need any additional authorization from
Congress for data sharing?
Mr. Skelly. We in the Department have that authority. If we
were to, for example, require students to use their IRS data on
the FAFSA form, we would need a different law for that. But we
think within the current law, we can do it on a voluntary
basis.
Mr. Rehberg. And you all do as well? Okay, great.
Thank you very much.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Taylor, I am going to try to do the same thing the
chairman did here. The CMS program in H.R. 1 was cut back by
about 13 percent below 2010, by $485,000,000. Most of that
appropriation is used to process claims for Medicare payments,
as I understand it. I think that is right? Yes?
Ms. Taylor. That is my understanding. But it is not
necessarily my area of expertise. So that is why I am----
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. Let me just say in terms of the effect
of that cut on your effort to control fraud, reduce improper
payments, with the 13 percent below last year's level, how much
review and fraud detection would CMS actually be able to do?
Ms. Colvin, despite the amount of money we have been able
to provide in the past few years as resources for review or
redeterminations--you still have a backlog. We know what the
size of that is. If we were able to get you more funds, would
it produce net results or benefits for the Treasury and to the
Social Security Trust Fund?
And you also are dealing with a backlog of claims for
disability benefits. What does this mean in terms of cutting
back $500,000,000 from the IT and telecommunications investment
fund? That could take some pressure off your operating budget.
So, Ms. Taylor, let me ask you to move first on what this
13 percent might mean--this is about the improper payments.
Also I want to say I appreciate all of you talking about the
fact that there is flawed data, but it is not always flawed.
There are ways in which we can make this better by getting a
better system that would allow for coding, et cetera,
adequately.
Ms. Taylor. Correct. So one of the things that it would
affect would be our ability to expand recovery audits into the
managed care and prescription drug programs, as well as to
Medicaid. And I think you have heard from a fee-for-service
program being able to bring up recovery auditing, in the year
and a half that we have had it implemented, we have already
recovered over $250,000,000 back to the trust fund. So that is
hugely important.
It also does impede our ability to do some of the systems
initiatives that we need to do, such as integrate our
databases, be able to develop integrated data repositories, to
be able to do those analytics of claims to identify places
where fraud and abuse is occurring, as well as improper
payments.
Ms. DeLauro. Ms. Colvin, you have to be quick. My time is
going by.
Ms. Colvin. Yes, let me just say I want to thank Congress
for the resources they have made available since 2007 in the
area of program integrity. Our program integrity activities
directly tie into our accuracy rate. And since 2007 when we got
the funding from Congress and the President, you will note that
our accuracy rate has gone up substantially.
Doing ``redets'' is the most effective tool we have to be
able to reduce the improper payments. If our funds are reduced,
then we are looking at being able to continue to do CDRs at
basically the level that we are doing now. We had hoped that we
would be able to increase the number of redets that we would be
doing in 2011 and 2012, which would have a direct correlation
to the reduction of improper payments.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Please submit it for the record if you have
more information.
Ms. DeLauro. Please, yes.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.055

Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Glad to be here for a change. Finally found the room.
[Laughter].
Let me ask you, and I am actually here to learn more than I
am anything else. So I don't have too many intelligent
questions to ask you. But one thing that we in Congress have a
tendency to think that when we look at whenever we want to save
money and offset, we go to waste, fraud, and abuse because that
is an easy thing to go after.
Same thing with tax gap. We want to raise money. It is what
people should be paying in taxes. Often those numbers are
overinflated and stuff, and you mentioned, Ms. Taylor, in your
comments that most of these are not fraudulent payments. They
are made services with no documentation, services with
insufficient documentation, incorrectly coded claims.
What happens, those are improper payments. If we find those
as improper payments, that doesn't mean we necessarily recover
the money, does it?
Ms. Taylor. What we recover is the actual overpayment we
identify. So these improper payment rates that Medicare and
Medicaid have are estimated overpayments. So we identify actual
overpayments. We do collect that money, and we actually have a
90 percent collection rate on those actual overpayments.
This year, although the Medicare program had about
$32,000,000,000 in estimated improper payments, the actual
improper payments were about $5,000,000. So we have a very good
record of collecting the actual overpayments we identify. But,
yes, those do result in overpayments because we don't have the
records or the documentation to support the payment of
services.
Mr. Simpson. But if we had the correct documentation and
stuff, it wouldn't be an overpayment?
Ms. Taylor. Correct.
Mr. Simpson. If they coded it correctly, as you see it, and
having been involved in the medical field, to some degree,
coding something is sometimes harder than you think. Because
oftentimes, I have had the experience of doing a procedure on
someone and then trying to find a code that fits it.
Ms. Taylor. Correct. And what we do is we work with the
provider. So if we identify an overpayment, we tell them what
documentation is missing. Sometimes they just can't find it.
They don't have it.
But we cannot allow the payment because, technically, there
isn't the log there to show that they did see the patient or
that the patient did have the clinical condition as described
in the code. But we do try and work with them to make sure they
understand what is creating the improper payment, give them an
opportunity to provide the documentation. If they still can't,
we do have to collect the money.
Mr. Simpson. Well, thank you. Thanks for the work you do. I
know it is a difficult task to do, and all of us want to get at
improper payments and especially that fraud that occurs out
there. And what we can do to address that certainly will help
with the budget and the overall situation we are facing.
So thanks for what you do.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. We all appreciate what you are doing because we
are all looking for money so we can spend it. [Laughter.]
For good things, good things. To help cure people. And
frankly, I have been working on this issue for so many years,
and I don't even know if all the recommendations regarding
computers that talk to each other have been put in place.
How long, Rosa, have we been working on that? It is
astonishing because it seems to me if you have the appropriate
technology, you could identify more easily some of these
issues. That is why I wonder, Ms. Taylor, as I mentioned to Mr.
Levinson, last week, Secretary Sebelius testified before the
subcommittee that the proposed 10-year investment in CMS
program integrity in the fiscal year 2012 budget request will
yield $10,300,000,000 in Medicare and Medicaid savings.
Can you tell me more clearly how did the administration
arrive at the $581,000,000 discretionary funding proposal for
fiscal year 2012 to improve CMS program integrity?
Ms. Taylor. I can tell you how we came up with portions of
that $500,000,000. I can speak for the CMS pieces of that. It
is, in fact, to help some of our systems be able to talk to
each other.
We have----
Mrs. Lowey. Are they talking to each other now?
Ms. Taylor. Well, we have shared systems.
Mrs. Lowey. I am afraid to hear the answer. Rosa, we have
been sitting here next to each other for 20 years. Yes?
Ms. Taylor. We have shared systems that manage our
inpatient and Part A claims. We have shared system that manages
our Part B physician and outpatient claims. And we have shared
system that manages our DME, durable equipment, such as
wheelchairs, claims. And it is very difficult to get these old
systems to be able to talk to each other.
So there is a piece of it there. It is to be able to have
real-time access to claims data. We have to pay within 14 days
of a claim being submitted to Medicare. And so, being able to
be in that front while we are trying to adjudicate the claim,
check it against all the edits, make sure it is coded
correctly, do all those things, it is very difficult to, at
that point, have interventions to look at the claim and do some
real human kinds of reviews on it.
So it would help us to have some real-time data. So it was
not only to just expand some of the fraud and abuse stuff that
would be related to provider screenings, but also some real
systems initiatives that we need.
Mrs. Lowey. Mr. Chairman, I think that is something we have
to look at again because this issue has been discussed as long
as I have been here on this committee, which is quite a while.
And we are all trying to look and see how we root out fraud and
abuse. We all understand that we have to do something about the
deficit.
And to have equipment in place that is antiquated or not
sufficient just doesn't make any sense. So if you can provide
additional information to us, maybe this year, we will resolve
it.
Thank you.
Ms. Taylor. I would be happy to.
[The information follows:]

Ms. Taylor: In FY 2012, the Administration has requested historic
levels of funding to support CMS' program integrity work and our HHS
and DOJ law enforcement partners' criminal, civil and administrative
enforcement activities. The Administration is seeking $581 million in
HCFAC discretionary funds, a $270 million increase in discretionary
funds compared to FY 2011, which have shown a strong return-on-
investment (ROI) and successful recoveries to the Trust Funds. CMS'
Actuaries have determined that the multi-year discretionary HCFAC
investment, starting with $581 million in FY 2012, is estimated to save
$4.6 billion over five years and $10.3 billion over ten years.
The increase in funds for FY 2012 will be split among CMS and its
law enforcement partners and be used to continue and expand program
integrity efforts. It supports ongoing efforts by the Administration to
reduce the Medicare FFS error rate, rate expansion of HEAT Strike Force
and civil pharmaceutical fraud and medical device enforcement
activities, and will also be used to deploy new and innovative efforts
such as:
(1) State-of-the-art data analytics and national pre-payment edits
to prevent potentially wasteful, abusive, or fraudulent payments before
they occur;
(2) The build-out of the Compromised Beneficiary and Provider
Numbers database;
(3) Further expansion of the Integrated Data Repository;
(4) Enhancements to the Do Not Pay list;
(5) Development of HEAT complaint maps to help target priorities
and identify geographic ``hot spots.''

RECOVERY AUDIT PROGRAM

Mr. Rehberg. In the fiscal year 2012 budget, it is
anticipated a recovery of $2 billion, which is about 3 percent
of the overpayments. Is that a reasonable number?
Ms. Taylor. I think you are referring to the recovery audit
program?
Mr. Rehberg. Yes.
Ms. Taylor. And I know that we made up some portions of
that. I think that is a Government-wide number. I think, as I
mentioned, we already have collected over $250,000,000 to date
on recovery audit. And in the first year of a program that
large, we anticipate that it will scale up and that we will
start to see trends go higher.
I can't speak for the whole Government, but I think CMS
believes we will be able to have significant savings----
Mr. Rehberg. Well, I think it is anticipated your area is
going to increase to $900 billion of expenditures by 2018. And
if you have a 10.5 percent problem, it is astronomical to even
think about it. So I just worry that $2 billion, or 3 percent,
is unreasonable.
Mr. Skelly. At least the Department of Education, the way
we are approaching it is trying to prevent the overpayments,
not that we are not going after the recoveries. And in Pell
grants, we would have a pretty low recovery rate. It takes some
time to get the money back.
But by preventing that $340 million in overpayments from
occurring, we think we are contributing to the reduction of the
deficit.
Ms. Gilbert. One of the tools that our States now have, as
I mentioned in my testimony, is the Treasury Offset Program. As
a result of the President's executive order, Treasury made some
changes in how they permit the States to actually collect debts
directly with them. And so, that we now have that tool
available and will expect our collections to begin to go up as
a result.
Ms. Colvin. We have similar tools to the Treasury offset,
and we do most of that on collections through reductions in
benefits if monies are owed. So we do try to recover, and our
recovery rate has been consistently improving.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Ms. DeLauro.

IMPACT OF H.R. 1

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much.
Let me just direct a quick question to you, Gay. H.R. 1
would cut funding for the administration's program to reduce
overpayments in a variety of programs, including UI. It would
cut ten million dollars from the partnership fund for reducing
fraud and abuse?
Ms. Gilbert. The $10,000,000 from the partnership fund, are
you talking about OMB's partnership fund?
Ms. DeLauro. OMB. OMB's partnership fund, I am sorry.
Ms. Gilbert. Right. They have a $37,000,000 pot and we are
getting some tiny piece of that. But that would, if we have new
strategies that they can help us with, yes, that would prevent
us from having additional tools.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. Is there something that the
administration, as I understand it, has put into practice
called the ``unified do not pay list.''? That is that people
who have been listed as being barred, who are under
investigation, or deceased, is that right?
I don't know what the other criteria are. Maybe it would be
useful to know that and where that stands, if somebody could
get that back? I mentioned the deceased part of it because we
have had an enormous problem in agriculture with improper
payments in that arena where we have seen that year after year,
people who are deceased are continuing to get subsidies.
So it would be interesting, more than interesting. I would
like to know what we have out there and what the criteria are
and how that is moving along so that we know that we are
barring people who don't need to have these payments any
longer.
Ms. Taylor, let me ask you this question. The Affordable
Care Act, can you describe briefly for us the provisions of the
act that strengthens the authorities of CMS to reduce fraud and
abuse?
Ms. Taylor. Well, you are really getting out of my area of
expertise. But I can tell you that the bulk of it is exactly
the point of being able to prevent and detect up front. And
there is a lot of screening capabilities in there for provider
enrollment, and that is one tool the agency is looking forward
to having. So----
Ms. DeLauro. Ms. Gilbert, the company, is it TALX?
Ms. Gilbert. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. They handle more than 30 percent of the
Nation's requests for jobless benefits. They have come to
dominate the industry.
Without admitting fault, they paid a $12,000 fine in
Connecticut, in a Connecticut case, agreed to tell clients in
writing that it would not file basis appeals. And what they
were trying to do, as I understood it, is really work to deal
with not allowing for people's benefits, genuine benefits that
they were entitled to.
What is the department doing in that regard to address
fraud that allows some people to keep the unemployed from
collecting their benefits? And I don't know if you can share
with us, the committee, the cases that were successfully
challenged, the number that was successfully challenged by
their employer.
Ms. Gilbert. First of all, let me say that employers or
their third-party administrators sort of game the system to
prevent individuals from receiving benefits is of concern to
the department. We have heard that concern from States, and I
know that Connecticut has been particularly aggressive in their
own State law in trying to control third-party administrators
and being sure that they are doing things properly.
We have had conversations with TALX and expressed that
concern as well, and their response to us is that they are
taking steps to train their staff better to avoid this kind of
activity. I will say that our Integrity Act speaks to this
issue and----
Mr. Rehberg. If you would like to submit----
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. If you could get us that
information, it would be great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey, last question.
Mrs. Lowey. Yes, and I will ask it very quickly. Last year,
Congress passed the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery
Act. Maybe we can end this hearing on a high note.
How much money does your department estimate it will save
in implementing the law? And you could respond very quickly.
Ms. Gilbert. I don't believe we have actually done that
estimate. We would be glad to go back and do that and provide
that to you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.057

Mrs. Lowey. Okay.
Ms. Taylor. I am not sure we have done that either, but we
do know that recovery auditing is a huge saver for us.
Ms. Colvin. Well, we have certainly seen a direct
correlation between our program integrity initiatives and the
accuracy rate. And we have found that when we have adequately
sustained funding that we do, in fact, reduce our inaccurate or
improper payments.
As I mentioned before, for every $1 that you invest in us
for CDRs, you get $10 back in taxpayer money. For every $1 that
you invest in redets, you get $7 back. And with the AFI, if we
are able to fully implement that, as we plan to do by 2013, you
would be getting back $20 for every $1 that you invest.
So I would say that if you would give us the adequate and
sustained funding, significant dollars will come back, billions
of dollars to the taxpayers.
Mrs. Lowey. Mr. Skelly.
Mr. Skelly. And at Education, I would hope we get the
adequate resources also, and we don't have an estimate for the
Improper Payment Act by itself. But consistent with that is our
Pell grant proposal, where we think we would prevent $340
million in improper payments.
Mrs. Lowey. Maybe we can get some of this money back and
use it wisely.
Mr. Rehberg. That would be nice.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Once again, thank you for being here and all
the work you do.
This meeting is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.073

Wednesday, April 6, 2011.

NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD

WITNESSES

WILMA LIEBMAN, CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
LAFE SOLOMON, ACTING GENERAL COUNSEL, NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
Mr. Rehberg. Good morning and welcome. It is nice to have
you here.
I want to welcome the National Labor Relations Board to our
hearing today. We hold pretty closely to the time, and we will
get many rounds in as we possibly can, and we will end promptly
at noon, respecting your time.
And we will begin by an opening statement by our ranking
member, Ms. DeLauro. Rosa.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome our speakers and guests this morning and
thank you for joining us to testify.
Seventy-six years ago, the National Labor Relations Board,
the subject of our hearing today, was established by an act of
this Congress when the National Labor Relations Act, or the
Wagner Act, became law. By granting workers the freedom to form
or join labor organizations and designate representatives, the
goal of the NLRA was to, quote, liberate the common man, end
quote. As its Senate author, Robert Wagner, put it so
eloquently, to empower employees to represent themselves in the
workplace. This, of course, is one of the fundamental
democratic principles at work.
The NLRB's charter and structure was amended to meet
Republican concerns in 1947 by the Taft-Hartley legislation.
Today, the NLRB is simply doing its job as outlined in
these two acts of Congress. Specifically, it works to find fair
remedies for employees and employers in workplace disputes and
prosecute violations whenever they may have occurred.
So, quite frankly, I find it peculiar from a budgetary
perspective as to why we are having this hearing today. Of all
the budgets to look into, I am not sure why we are taking this
time to scrutinize an agency with a total budget of
$283,000,000. This is especially so given the broad
jurisdiction of this subcommittee, which includes bigger
budgets, such as the $32,000,000,000 allotted to the National
Institutes of Health, the $11,000,000,000 to the Centers for
Disease Control and the $12,500,000,000 to the Social Security
Administration. So this does not seem a balanced and credible
approach to the oversight this subcommittee is charged with.
Perhaps today's hearing only makes sense when put in the
context of recent events in Wisconsin, Ohio, and Indiana.
Perhaps this hearing is only understandable as another front in
the current ideological assault we are seeing the majority wage
against workers' rights all across the country. Apparently, the
majority has decided they want to try to stir up an anti-union
wind here in Washington as well.
In fact, there is nothing radical about the mission of the
NLRB or the way it goes about doing its job. The Board's
function is to defend rights that we should consider
fundamental: the right to form or join a union, the right to be
represented by that union in dealings with an employer, and the
right to be free from retaliation from doing so. The Board also
enforces laws that protect employers and third parties against
certain practices by unions considered to be unfair or harmful.
What is radical is the anti-union measure that this
majority has tried to enact as part of, in my view, their
reckless and misguided budget. By cutting the NLRB funding by
$50,000,000, the majority's appropriations proposal in H.R. 1
would force the Board to cut back all agency operations. That
includes investigating charges of unfair labor practices
brought by workers or by management, holding secret ballot
workplace elections, and settling or adjudicating election
related disputes. In addition, the Board could be forced to
furlough its staff for up to 3 months.
Obviously, these rollbacks and furloughs would undermine
workers' rights throughout the country. In fact, that is
exactly the point. Just as Republican Governors are attempting
to roll back workers' rights in Wisconsin and Ohio under the
guise of deficit cutting, the majority is not pushing a cut
here to the NLRB for budgetary purposes. It seems to me a hard
argument to make that this action is motivated by fiscal
reasons. As in the Wisconsin and Ohio budgets, the severe cuts
to the NLRB are not a serious attempt to restore jobs, restore
economic growth, or address budget deficits. Rather, these cuts
are an attempt to accelerate a race to the bottom; and they
will further harm middle-class families who are already dealing
with a tough economy.
I thank the chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Liebman.
Ms. Liebman. Thank you.
Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member DeLauro, and members of
the subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you this
morning with Lafe Solomon, our agency's Acting General Counsel.
Thank you for your invitation.
Before discussing our budget, I would like to take a moment
to talk about the importance of this agency in historical
perspective.
Our current labor law is fundamentally a product of the
Great Depression, when millions were out of work. Labor
conflict was widespread, with violence common. In the summer of
1935, responding to this crisis, Congress passed the National
Labor Relations Act.
It is worth remembering why Congress did what it did. To
quote Section 1 of the new law: ``The inequality of bargaining
power between employees and employers substantially burdens and
affects the flow of commerce and tends to aggravate recurrent
business depressions by depressing wage rates and the
purchasing power of wage earners.''
In other words, the National Labor Relations Act was seen
as a means of restoring the Nation to economic prosperity. The
new law articulated basic rights, the right of workers, free
from intimidation, to act together to improve their terms and
conditions of employment and the right to bargain collectively
with their employer.
The Act established a permanent independent agency to
conduct elections in workplaces and to remedy unfair labor
practices. Over the next decades, millions of workers achieved
a middle-class way of life through collective bargaining and
agreements that provided fair wages and benefits in major
industries of the economy.
Labor law continues to trigger passionate debate, as we
have seen in Statehouses and at the Federal level in recent
months. Although I might wish it were less rancorous, I welcome
the controversy. Its intensity is a sign that labor law still
matters deeply in this country.
Labor law matters because democracy in the workplace is
still basic to a democratic society and because collective
bargaining is still basic to a fair economy. It allows labor
and business to reach their own solutions in response to
changing economic conditions.
The sharp debate over this law, which has not been
significantly amended since 1947, has sometimes had a big
impact on the Board's functioning. Contentious debates in the
Senate over confirmation of a President's nominees have
resulted in long-standing vacancies, often leaving the Board at
less than full strength. Indeed, for 27 months, ending in
April, 2010, the Board was reduced to just two members, member
Peter Schaumber and myself.
Despite our significant political differences, we worked
hard to resolve as many cases as we could and eventually issued
nearly 600 unanimous decisions. The Supreme Court undid some of
that work with its June, 2010, decision in New Process Steel v.
NLRB, finding that the Board needed at least three members to
issue decisions.
The Board has now been reconstituted for the last year. We
have issued new decisions in 97 cases that were returned to us
as a result of the Court's decision. Only seven such cases
remain pending. We have also tackled many formerly deadlocked
cases that had languished for years.
The Acting General Counsel will talk more specifically
about our budget request and his side of the agency which
employs the bulk of our employees.
On the Board side, we have significantly streamlined our
operations as the number of cases brought to the Board for
decision has declined. Our staff has gone from 153 full-time
equivalents in 2001 to 113.2 FTEs in 2011.
Also, the number of Administrative Law Judges who hear
unfair labor practice cases around the country has dropped from
60 to 40 during the same period. We have also moved to a model
that allows our ALJs to work from home, thereby reducing
infrastructure costs and creating a more mobile adjudication
system.
We have initiated technology reforms, such as our new
electronic agency-wide case processing system called NextGen.
The investment in that technology will pay rich dividends and
result in significant savings for the taxpayers in the long
run.
Meanwhile, in fiscal year 2010, case intake crept up after
years of decline. This agency clearly still has an important
role to play in the Nation's economy, and we need adequate
resources to carry out our statutory responsibilities.
Mr. Chairman, the 2012 budget request before you will allow
our agency to keep up with the rising costs of rent and
compensation in the short term and allow the agency to continue
its trend toward a more efficient workforce in the long term. I
look forward to working with you and this committee to ensure
that the National Labor Relations Board and the National Labor
Relations Act continue to endure and play an important role in
the Nation's economic recovery.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.078

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Solomon.
Mr. Solomon. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, it is an honor and a privilege to appear before
you today as the Acting General Counsel of the National Labor
Relations Board. Indeed, for a kid who grew up in Helena,
Arkansas, and has now worked for the NLRB for nearly 39 years,
honor and privilege feels like an understatement.
My 9 months as Acting General Counsel have been both
challenging and rewarding. Like the General Counsels before me,
I have emphasized the need for the regional offices to seek
effective remedies for the most serious unfair labor practices.
I am proud that in its first 4 months my initiative to seek
quick injunctive relief for employees unlawfully discharged
during an organizational campaign has resulted in 42 offers of
reinstatement and over $350,000 in back pay, with the average
case taking just 61 days to process. I am also proud that we
successfully ran the largest mail ballot election in our
history last October, a unit of approximately 43,000 employees.
But whatever successes I have had are due mainly to the
dedicated and talented career employees that we have at every
grade level throughout the agency. They believe passionately in
the mission of the agency and the Act that we administer and
work tirelessly to enforce the rights and obligations of
employees, unions, and employers under the Act.
The agency is all about people. In recent years, 25 to
30,000 charges and petitions have been filed annually in our
offices around the United States. Each case is assigned to one
of our 1,170 employees in our 51 field offices, and we have
been remarkably successful year after year in resolving these
cases quickly and efficiently.
Some statistics from fiscal year 10 illustrate this point:
86 percent of all representation cases were resolved within 100
days; 73 percent of all unfair labor practices were resolved
within 120 days; approximately 85 percent of meritorious unfair
labor practices are closed in compliance within one year. The
regional offices recovered over $86,000,000 on behalf of
employees, and over 2,200 employees were offered reinstatement.
The Board's ability to resolve so many controversies in a
relatively brief period significantly contributes to the
maintenance of industrial peace, thereby saving expense to
respondents, charging parties, and to the taxpayers. Yet these
impressive results are completely dependent on our ability to
maintain adequate staffing levels. Without adequate
appropriations to maintain sufficient agency personnel to
handle these cases, delays and backlogs will inevitably
increase and the benefit of quick resolution to cases will
evaporate. In short, budget shortfalls have a direct impact on
staffing resources, case handling, and agency performance.
The $287,700,000 requested in the President's budget will
fund our essential staffing and case handling needs necessary
to fulfill the agency's mission and goals. Most of our proposed
fiscal year 2012 budget, about 80 percent, is dedicated to
personnel costs; about 10 percent is required for rent and
security; and the remaining percentage is allocated among all
other operating costs and activities. The $4,300,000 increase
we seek for fiscal year 2012 is less than a 2 percent increase
over our current funding level of $283,400,000 and is needed to
keep pace with increased personnel costs associated with a
stable, long-tenured workforce and increases in rent and travel
costs.
We are also in the process of studying how, using our
present and future technological advances, the agency would
work in a more efficient and cost-effective manner. To this
end, Chairman Liebman and I have created an agency-wide work
group, including representatives from our regional offices, our
headquarters, and our employee unions. We have instructed this
group to do a comprehensive assessment of the agency's
structure, processes, and footprint and to make recommendations
to us by the end of this fiscal year of options for us to
consider.
I am proud to be associated with the traditions that have
made the headquarters and field operations of the Office of
General Counsel such a fine example of effective public
service. We look forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman,
with this committee, and with Congress on this very important
mission.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.083

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
In relation to the reason for the hearing, some of us don't
feel that a $290,000,000 budget is chump change. It is not a
rounding error in the Federal Government. I hope I never get to
the level of cynicism that each and every agency should not be
looked at with a fine tooth comb. If we had the time, we would
be looking at every agency possible, but we just don't have
that time.
So I don't want you to think there is some nefarious reason
for you sitting here, other than the fact I asked the staff
which agencies have not had oversight within the most recent
memory. I asked the Senate, I asked the members of my
subcommittee, and they all agreed that this was one of the
areas that we just had some questions, and we wanted to take a
look at the budget, and we worry about the caseload and your
ability to pay for it based upon the budget we are presenting.
Last December, the Board published a rather substantive
notice of proposed rulemaking requiring over 6,000,000 private
employers to post a government notice about union rights in the
workplace. If an employer were to fail to post this notice, it
would be construed as unfair labor practice, thereby exposing
themselves to penalties or other sanctions.
I understand the Labor Relations Act, which hasn't been
changed in a while, provides the Board with authority to make,
amend, and rescind such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of the NLRA. However, the
NLRA does not require the posting of employee rights. Under
what authority can the Board require these notices to be posted
and assign a penalty for failing to do so?
Ms. Liebman. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that
question.
Let me start by saying that the Board does have authority
in its statute to issue rules and regulations, as you
mentioned, section 6. The Supreme Court has affirmed that the
Board has the authority to do its business either through
adjudication or through rulemaking.
The Board has historically chosen not to do much in the way
of rulemaking. The petition that you mentioned was actually
pursuant to a petition filed with us in 1993 by Professor
Charles Morris, a law professor. Lest anyone say we act
precipitously, that has been pending since 1993. We put it out
for proposed rulemaking, and one of the specific questions that
we asked for comment on was our authority to issue this
rulemaking----
Mr. Rehberg. Including penalties?
Ms. Liebman. Yes.
Mr. Rehberg. So you have the statutory authority to
establish a penalty for not having----
Ms. Liebman. We have put out for comment that precise
question.
I should say that in the notice of proposed rulemaking it
is quite clear that this is not intended to be a "gotcha" for
employers. The clear intent was and the stated intent in the
proposed notice is that if this is brought to an employer's
attention----
Mr. Rehberg. I am not understanding. You put out for a
question of the rulemaking as to whether you have the legal
authority to apply a penalty or not?
Ms. Liebman. Yes. Yeah. We--every----
Mr. Rehberg. Why wouldn't you know that from your legal
counsel going into it, whether you have the legal authority to
apply a penalty?
Ms. Liebman. We clearly believe we have the authority. We
believe this rulemaking is soundly within section 6 of our law,
which says that we have the authority to issue regulations to
effectuate the purposes of this Act. What we do is adjudicate
unfair labor practices, and we believe that the failure to post
a notice of this sort, once it was brought to the employer's
attention--we are only looking to impose a penalty for willful
violations.
Mr. Rehberg. Do you then intend or have you asked within
the proposed rule Beck rights? Is it going to be an equal
application to an employee's Beck rights?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, that is another question which we posed.
We are not proposing to require a posting of Beck rights
because, in fact, the law already requires that unions provide
Beck rights anytime they initially seek to represent a unit of
employees, to seek to execute a union security agreement. So
that full notice of Beck rights is already provided in our law.
It would only apply in certain States, and it would only apply
in cases where the workforce was unionized, which, as you know,
is a small percentage of workplaces today.
Mr. Rehberg. Do you have any of these that you intend to
have the rulemaking authority? I don't know how many you have
going on. First of all, maybe you can answer that. How many
other rulemaking authority proposals do you have out at this
time?
Ms. Liebman. We have one out at this time.
Mr. Rehberg. Just this one?
Ms. Liebman. Yes.
Mr. Rehberg. Do you intend to publish it before the end of
the fiscal year?
Ms. Liebman. We are in the process right now of reviewing
almost 7,000 comments that were filed with us. So it is hard to
predict exactly what the time frame would be. We are engaging
in a staff review of these comments, and then everything will
have to be brought back, and we would only be publishing a
final rule if we had a majority vote to do so.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Just a quick point of clarification, and then
I will move to other questions.
Employers have to post notices regarding the minimum wage
under the Fair Labor Standards Act and impose penalties and
other pieces of legislation. Can you----
Ms. Liebman. That is correct. I think virtually every piece
of Federal workplace legislation requires a posting of a notice
of rights, worker rights, under those statutes, except for the
National Labor Relations Act.
Ms. DeLauro. Just for that measure. Thank you. Thank you
very much for the clarification.
Ms. Liebman, H.R. 1, the majority's 2011 appropriations
package that passed the House in February, cut the NLRB's
budget by $50,000,000, or 18 percent. Because the cuts were
made halfway through the fiscal year, their effect would
effectively be doubled, to more than 36 percent in terms of a
reduction. What would be the effect of this reduction on the
NLRB's ability to carry out its responsibilities? Would you
have to furlough employees? How many? What other steps would
you have to take?
Ms. Liebman. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the
question.
We believe that this would be a very, very dramatic cut
that would have a very detrimental effect on our agency's
ability to do its work. As the Acting General Counsel said, our
budget is 80 percent compensation and benefit costs. All we do
is conduct elections and adjudicate unfair labor practice
cases. That is all we do. That is what the statute says we have
to do. So we don't have any programs that we can cut.
So if we are forced to accept a drastic budget cut, we
believe the only thing we could do is to furlough employees. If
there were another way to do it, we, of course, would be open
to considering it. But we have not been able to come up with
another way to do it. Our budget director was following this
very carefully and advised us that if the proposed cut went
into effect we would have to furlough every person in the
agency for 55 days, which would essentially be half the time
between now and the end of the fiscal year.
Ms. DeLauro. Just a follow-up on that. You outlined the two
main functions, arranging and conducting elections to determine
whether workers wish to be represented by a union and
investigating and adjudicating complaints of unfair labor
practices by either employers or unions. Both of the functions
are initiated when some private party asks the NLRB to take
action; is that correct?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, that is correct. We do not initiate our
own cases.
Ms. DeLauro. So the Board doesn't initiate investigations
or call elections on its own.
Ms. Liebman. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. So workers ask for an election to be
held, to determine whether a union should be certified, or
decertified, as their bargaining agent or someone--worker,
union, employer--files a complaint charging that an unfair
labor practice has been committed. Since all you do is respond
to requests for action by citizens, if the budget is cut as
dramatically as it is intended to be and with the consequences
that you have talked about, the inevitable result in your view
is that--is this correct--the citizens seeking action will have
to wait longer, get less effective responses--often in cases
where action is sought to protect basic rights for workplace
democracy?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, that is correct. By definition, if we
were forced to furlough our workforce for half the time, all of
our work would be curtailed. Things would slow down.
Workplace disputes don't go away just because our employees
are furloughed. So the workplace disputes would continue to
fester.
We have a proud record of resolving these disputes very
quickly. That clearly would be affected. Our ability to do that
would be affected very detrimentally. And even as is, we
occasionally will get complaints from some of your constituents
that a case is dragging on too long. I know you get these
complaints.
Ms. DeLauro. Let me ask you one further follow-up. The
recourse available to the worker who believes he or she has
been fired for engaging in union activity, to give one example
of the kind of violations that NLRB is responsible for
investigating and adjudicating, would they be able to get their
own lawyer, bring the case to court themselves? I believe the
answer is no, that under the NLRA there is no private right to
bring legal action to protect those rights.
Ms. Liebman. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. The only remedy, as I understand it, is by
bringing the complaint to the NLRB.
Ms. Liebman. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. So if the NLRB doesn't have the funding to act
on these complaints in a timely manner, then, in effect, there
is no effective remedy for violations of the law that protects
workers' rights and protects management against improper
actions by unions, for that matter. Am I correct?
Ms. Liebman. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Thank you. Thank you for the testimony.
The budget justification mentions the agency requesting an
increase of $4,300,000. What is that going to go to?
Mr. Solomon. The $4,300,000 is to cover the compensation
increases and the rent and security increases. So we basically
would be where we are today.
Mr. Flake. So it is just to stay afloat, the same kind of
workload.
The budget justification also mentions the effort to create
an Office of Public Affairs and to create a Facebook page,
Twitter page, new brochures, increasing public outreach,
attending--it mentions that agency representatives participate
in more than 500 events annually. Among other things, I think
the display in the Mall of America in Minneapolis or the Plaza
Las Americas mall in Puerto Rico. How much of the agency's
budget is spent on travel to these kind of events, travel or
participation?
Ms. Liebman. I don't have the exact number, but our budget
director is sitting behind me, and I think she probably can get
you an exact number.
I will tell you, though, that these expenditures are quite
minimal. Our Office of Public Affairs was constituted as an
Office of Public Affairs in September, 2009. It replaced the
prior Division of Information. I believe actually we have three
people in the Office of Public Affairs. Previously, 5 years
ago, for example, there were six people. So we have actually
shrunk the Office of Public Affairs.
In terms of a Facebook page, a Twitter feed, or whatever
you call it, that I think is what virtually every organization
is doing today, including, I am sure, Members of Congress and
congressional committees, to communicate with the public.
Mr. Solomon. And if I could add, Congressman, the outreach
program in the regional offices was established by my
predecessor who put a very big emphasis on outreach. And
regional directors are actually--part of their evaluation is
the outreach program that their region conducts. And the reason
that most of these activities are not costly is because they
are conducted by the people in the regional offices that go to
these various outreach activities.
Mr. Flake. Can you walk me through a typical complaint and
how it is handled?
A complaint comes in to you. What is the first contact? At
what point is the employer brought in? And just go through a
typical complaint, if there is a typical complaint.
Mr. Solomon. If the charge would be either against a union
or an employer, but they would both be handled the same way.
They are docketed in the regional office where they are filed
and then the first contact would be that the region sends to
the employer or the union, the charged party, the charge
itself.
Then the region would assign an investigator to that case.
The investigator would start with the charging party, take the
affidavit from the charging party, take the affidavit from the
charging party's witnesses, and then would do the same for the
charged party and go take their affidavits, collect their
documents. And then the regional director will have a meeting
to decide whether the case is meritorious or not meritorious.
Two-thirds of our cases historically--two-thirds of the
charges are dismissed or found to be not meritorious, and then
the regional director would contact the charging party and ask
them to withdraw or else the regional director would dismiss
the charge. If the case is found by the regional director to be
meritorious, then the charged party would be contacted, and
they would attempt settlement negotiations with the parties.
Mr. Flake. When you are talking about the 60-day average or
a certain percentage are remedied in 60 days, is that referring
to those that are found meritorious or including those that are
dismissed?
Mr. Solomon. The 61 days I referred to were cases in which
the regional director found that employees were in fact
discharged during a union organizational campaign for union
activities and the regional director issued a complaint or at
least told the charged party that they wanted to issue the
complaint. And these cases were, in fact, settled prior to a
hearing.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
First, let me thank you for being here, for your testimony.
And let me just say I personally believe in the process of
collective bargaining and the rights and protections that are
afforded to workers, and I appreciate and fully support the
work of the NLRB.
Quite frankly, labor unions, worker rights, and collective
bargaining really has provided a path for many people of color
to achieve middle-class status, which unfortunately now is, due
to the recession, is eroding.
Last November, four States--I think it was Arizona, South
Carolina, South Dakota, and Utah--adopted amendments to their
constitutions that would eliminate an employer's right to
voluntarily recognize a union when a majority of employees
signed the authorization cards.
Now, I know that legislation has been introduced in the
House--I think it is H.R. 1047, the State Right to Vote Act--
which supports the rights of States to enact such laws. Other
legislation that has been introduced really would eliminate all
voluntary organizations. Have you had a chance to look at that
legislation and how it would affect the NLRB and how it would
really affect workers throughout the country, especially in
these States?
Ms. Liebman. I am going to make sure I understand your
question, Congresswoman. You are asking about the legislation
in the States or in the House?
Ms. Lee. H.R. 1047, which is the State Right to Vote Act.
Have you had a chance to look at that?
Ms. Liebman. Is that the Secret Ballot Protection Act? Is
that what that is called?
Ms. Lee. Yeah.
Ms. Liebman. Congresswoman, there is a long tradition among
Board members, which is not to comment on pending legislation.
So I would ask that you all would respect that tradition. And
in point of fact I really haven't had a chance to study it.
Ms. Lee. Have you had a chance to look at the States? Can
you comment on what has happened in the States in terms of the
amendments that would eliminate the employers' rights to
recognize the voluntary----
Mr. Solomon. Yes, Congresswoman. The special litigation
branch, which is under my supervision, did an analysis of the
amendments in the four States that were passed; and they
advised me that these amendments directly conflicted with the
National Labor Relations Act and with Federal law. And I agreed
with their recommendation, and I asked the Board to authorize
me to contact the attorneys general in the four States to
advise them of our position that these amendments were
preempted by the National Labor Relations Act.
I wrote a letter to the four attorneys general. They
responded, and we felt that they recognized that voluntary
recognition was allowed under Federal law. So I wrote them a
further letter that I thought that there were possibilities to
enter into some sort of stipulation that these laws were
preempted. The negotiations were not successful, and we are now
studying what next step to take.
Ms. Lee. Has this ever happened before? It sounds like
there is a stalemate.
Mr. Solomon. No----
Ms. Lee. There is no standard kind of process that could be
followed now that that impasse is there?
Mr. Solomon. The Supreme Court has long recognized that the
National Labor Relations Act has the authority to seek a
court's order that State laws are preempted by the National
Labor Relations Act and by the Federal scheme. My predecessors
have taken very similar action to what I have done.
At the recent hearing before the House Education and
Workforce Committee, former General Counsel Arthur Rosenfeld
agreed that he wrote a similar letter to the State of North
Dakota that their law that they had passed was preempted. And
we recently intervened on behalf of the employer's side for a
case that went to the Supreme Court, Chamber v. Lockyer, which
we argued that the law was preempted, and the Supreme Court
agreed.
Mr. Rehberg. Lest you think the chairman does not support
job training, Kevin was in here over the weekend practicing
with the clock. So far, he has only made one mistake.
Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you.
Madam Chairman, good morning. How are you?
From 2001 to 2010, the NLRB's budget has increased almost
every year, but the number of NLRB employees has decreased
during that amount of time. We are told in the NLRB's fiscal
year 2010 budget justification that 80 percent of the agency's
budget is dedicated to personnel costs. So that means that
during that period of time that I just described each
employee's salary would have gone up about $50,000. Can we
justify that?
Ms. Liebman. Well, thank you, Congressman.
I am not sure that the starting premise is accurate, that
the budget has gone up every year. I believe that in some of
those years there was a fairly flat appropriation or maybe even
a slight cut.
I think during most of that time, there was a parity
between the number of employees and the case decline. In fact,
in 2010, we had a slight increase in our case intake. Our staff
has gone down. But compensation and benefit costs are clearly
outside of our control as are our rent increases. Certainly it
is not accurate to say that everyone's compensation is
increased by $50,000.
We do however have a very senior workforce, long-tenured,
people who have worked for the agency for many years, like our
Acting General Counsel. We also have an agency that is heavily
professional employees, 40 percent lawyers, who, by definition,
are more highly paid.
Mr. Alexander. Well, I am just looking at numbers from the
Appropriations Committee. Let us go to 2001, 216,000,000; 226,
237, 242, 249, 251, 262, 283. It seems to me like that is going
up.
Mr. Solomon, would you give us a couple of examples of
unfair labor practice?
Mr. Solomon. Certainly, Congressman.
Seventy percent of our charges that are filed--and, as
Congresswoman DeLauro said, we don't initiate any charges.
Seventy percent are charged against employers, and a large
percentage of those are that employees are discharged or
otherwise disciplined for union activities. We also have
charges filed by employees against unions, that they are not
being fairly represented by the union. We have charges--
jurisdictional disputes between two unions, both claiming the
work from an employer. We have secondary boycott charges. They
run the gamut.
Mr. Alexander. So you are saying that not all of the unfair
practices are employers taking advantage of employees?
Mr. Solomon. Correct. Correct.
And could I go back to the question you asked the chairman
about the budget?
In the years between 2006 and 2008, we were at fairly flat
budget increases that really didn't keep up with the
inflationary compensation costs and rent and security. And we
made many cuts to--we deferred employee training, we deferred
IT investments, and the increases that you pointed out that we
got in 2009 and 2010 really were to come back to these very
important things for us to do.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you. And I would like to remind the
chairman that I have 26 seconds left. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Very good.
Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Good morning and welcome.
As I understand it, the NLRB recently proposed rulemaking
that would require employers to notify employees of their
rights under the National Labor Relations Act by simply posting
a notice. And I understand there is a general consensus that
employees lack information about their rights under the NRLA.
How would the proposed rules address this information gap and
if you could elaborate on maybe what some of the objections are
to it?
Ms. Liebman. The proposed notice posting is intended to
address what we have reason to believe is a lack of awareness,
by probably the vast majority of workers in the workplace
today, that they have rights under the statute. I think it is a
secret to some extent but a misperception that this law only
applies in unionized workplaces. Actually, this law applies
across the private sector to union and nonunion workplaces. I
think the number is something like 6 million workplaces in the
private sector.
And we have reason to believe that particularly with the
decline of organized labor, with an increasing immigrant
workforce, and with a lot of young people coming into the
workforce today who have had no exposure to this law or to
labor unions, that there is a general lack of knowledge. So
this proposed rulemaking is intended to address that lack of
awareness by workers and also by their employers.
We have reason to believe that a lot of businesses,
particularly small businesses, particularly owned perhaps by
younger people who also haven't had that exposure to this law
and to labor unions and to what the law is about--so that is
really what it is intended to do. It is intended to advise
workers and their employers of these workplace rights, just as
there is similar notices in workplaces about other workplace
laws, minimum wage, et cetera, OSHA.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. That just requires placing the notice?
Ms. Liebman. That is correct.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. There has been some concern voiced about
how the Board is making decisions, whether or not they are
within the discretion of the Board. Have the NLRB's recent
decisions been consistent with prior precedents and within
Federal law?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, Congresswoman, I think they have
definitely been within prior law. Let me just give you a little
thumbnail sketch of what this Board has done in the last year.
First of all, we have been reconstituted as a proper
quorum, in accordance with the Supreme Court's decision, for
exactly one year. During this year, we have issued 394
decisions. Of those, approximately 100 were decisions issued as
a result of the Supreme Court's decision overturning the two-
member decisions. So about 100 of these cases came back to us,
and new decisions have been issued. I believe every one of
those decisions has been a unanimous decision. In fact, the
vast majority of our decisions are unanimous decisions. So that
is number one.
We have also dealt with some very old cases that had
languished as a result of this 27-month two-member Board. My
colleague, Member Schaumber, and I put aside about 60, 70 cases
that remained deadlocked when we went to a two-member Board at
the end of 2007. Those were difficult cases, precedent-setting,
novel issues. We put those aside; and the new Board, once
constituted, has begun to tackle some of those cases.
Member Schaumber and I, I mentioned earlier, were
successful in reaching agreement nearly 600 times over the 27
months, but he and I put aside maybe 60, 70 other cases where
we couldn't reach agreement. So, again, the new Board has had
to tackle those. Almost by definition, what we have been
dealing with have been difficult issues, novel issues, issues
that require delicate line drawing. I believe that all of those
decisions have been well within the letter of this law, clearly
within the letter of this law, the intent of this law, and
within Supreme Court doctrines.
I thought my time was up.
There has been----
Mr. Rehberg. It is.
Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. That is what happens when you hesitate.
Mrs. Lummis. Following on this same line of questioning as
the previous colleague about the notice of the proposed rule, I
understand your interest in wanting to inform employees of
their rights to unionize, but I don't understand why this
proposed rule is not balanced. Why does it not inform employees
of the consequences of unionization, such as the loss of the
ability to bargain directly with management? Why does it not
inform them of their right to withhold portions of their union
dues or fees that are used for political purposes that they
don't espouse? My concern is that the notice is about the
rights to unionize and not the consequences of unionization. It
is not a balanced rule. Could you comment on that, please?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, thank you.
First of all, we put out the notice for public comment. We
have received nearly 7,000 comments which we are in the process
of reviewing. We expressly asked for comments on a whole range
of subjects, including the contents of the notice. So I am
assuming we are going to have comments on that. We have staff
reviewing all of that right now.
We started out in this proposed notice using the notice
that has been now adopted by the Department of Labor for
Federal contractors. So our starting premise was the notice
that they proposed, got comments on and I believe have now
adopted.
Mrs. Lummis. So that is the one that is basically informing
people of the rights to unionize but not the rights they are
giving up if they choose not to unionize?
Ms. Liebman. I don't have the notice language in front of
me, but what I know it expressly said is that you have the
rights to engage in activity to unionize and to improve your
terms and conditions of employment. It sets out all the rights,
and then it expressly said, or the right to refrain from any of
those activities. So that is what section 7 of our Act, the
free choice provision says. You have the right to do all of
these things, and you have a right to refrain. That, in my
view, is a balanced notice.
Mrs. Lummis. But it doesn't talk about the consequences,
the loss of the right to bargain directly with the employer.
Ms. Liebman. It probably does not spell that out. It
doesn't spell out every nuance of Federal labor law and what it
means to bargain collectively or----
Mr. Kingston. Would the gentlewoman yield?
Mrs. Lummis. Yes, I will.
Mr. Kingston. I think the question is, is it proposed in a
balanced way or does it just have that one-line disclaimer at
the end of a long list of this is what you can do, tilting it
in favor of joining the union?
Ms. Liebman. Well, I think that the notice pretty closely
mirrors the language of the statute, the way the rights are set
out in the statute. It makes clear what your rights are--what
an employee's rights are with respect to an employer and to a
union, if you happen to have one; and it sets out the right to
refrain from any of these things, which is exactly what the
statute says. I think it is fairly close to the language of the
statute.
Mrs. Lummis. Will the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Kingston. Yes.
Mrs. Lummis. Thanks.
I also have a question about a case, especially health
care, a case where apparently a union seeking to organize
nurses apart from other employees in a non-acute health care
facility and that that case may be an avenue to expand the
concept of micro unions and micro bargaining to all occupations
and industries. So my question is, what is the reasoning behind
considering an expansion of the standard beyond non-acute
health facility workers?
Ms. Liebman. I believe, Congresswoman, that what we have
done in that case----
First of all, it is not nurses. It is nursing assistants. I
think it is certified nursing assistants. And what we have done
is to ask for a briefing on the experience--since for about the
last 20 years, under a decision called Park Manor, which was a
decision of the Board through adjudication dealing with
bargaining units in non-acute care health care facilities. It
followed really the first and essentially only substantive
rulemaking that the Board has done in its history, in the late
1980s, where it decided what the appropriate bargaining units
would be in acute care hospitals.
That was done by informal rulemaking, by the way, and was
challenged. It was challenged on the grounds that the Board
should have done it through adjudication. The rulemaking was
upheld by the Supreme Court unanimously saying that the Board
is free to do rulemaking or adjudication.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Introducing a new member to the committee, Mr. Kingston.
Welcome. It is nice to finally meet you in person.
Mr. Kingston. Good to see you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Chair, I wanted to get back on that notice. Is your
intention to give employees all the information, correct?
Ms. Liebman. Well----
Mr. Kingston. In an unbiased way? Is that your intention?
Ms. Liebman. Our intention is to raise awareness, as I
said, of workers and their employers----
Mr. Kingston. But not to give it to them in an unbiased,
balanced way? That is really my only question. Is it your
intention to give it to them in a fair and balanced way?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Kingston. Then you would be in support of a bill or
report language that reinforces that position in the House,
correct?
Ms. Liebman. I'm sorry?
Mr. Kingston. You would be in support of bill language or
report language that reinforces that position, that the intent
is to give information to employees in a fair and balanced way?
Ms. Liebman. Yes our intent is to give the information in a
fair and unbiased way. Of course.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you. And I hate to cut you off, but I
know this chairman is notorious for being a timekeeper and so I
just wanted to kind of move it quickly. Not that you ever
would, but some witnesses do tend to run the clock on answers.
And I think Mr. Solomon, the lawyer, I would be more suspicious
of him than you.
Mr. Solomon. The chairman is a lawyer, also.
Mr. Kingston. Well, then I am suspicious all the way
around.
So ``quick snap'', Mark Pearce has said he wants to
implement quick snap. Is it your intention to do that?
Ms. Liebman. Quick snap meaning----
Mr. Kingston. Quick snap, faster elections to unionize--as
I understand it, the average election is 38 days. This would
reduce it to a 5- to 10-day period of time.
Ms. Liebman. I think the median time for our elections
presently is 38 days. We are giving active consideration to
another rulemaking which would look at our procedures for
conducting secret ballot elections. Our secret ballot elections
are conducted pursuant to procedures that the Board has devised
over the years. Periodically over our 75 years, the Board has
looked at them and revised them. We are examining them to see
if the procedures still work, if there are procedures that are
unnecessary, if there are procedures that detract from the
effective conduct of these elections.
Mr. Kingston. Well, Mr. Pearce comes at it with a bias, a
very pro-union background. So when he advocates quick-snap
elections, he wants more companies to unionize. And in your
filter for the NLRB, I just want to make sure that, while he
has the right to advocate that position, that the position of
the Board would not necessarily be to tilt things in the
direction of unionizing.
Ms. Liebman. Congressman, first, let me say that Mark
Pearce--my colleague, Mark Pearce, formerly represented unions,
but I believe he understands his responsibility as a Board
member to fairly enforce this Act. Let me say that----
Mr. Kingston. We will work with him on that.
Ms. Liebman. The second thing is that each Board member has
a vote. The Board presently has four members, and anything that
we do will require at least a majority vote.
And, thirdly, let me say that I don't think what any of us
are trying to do is to increase union membership. What we are
trying to do is fairly enforce the provisions of this Act,
which do give workers the right to choose unionization if they
want or to refrain from choosing unionization. That is all we
are looking for, are fair procedures.
Mr. Kingston. Would it be safe to say that the NLRB would
not be following the National Mediation Board on their recent
decision to say the majority of workers present would be able
to determine if a company unionizes or not?
Ms. Liebman. Mr. Chairman, I will let my colleague answer
that one.
Mr. Kingston. And you would admit that that is certainly
not--that is an advocacy position of the National Mediation
Board?
Ms. Liebman. Congressman, what the National Mediation Board
switched to is what the NLRB has done for its entire history.
That is the way our votes are conducted.
Mr. Kingston. So you could be unionized with the members
present?
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Mr. Kingston. You can do that?
Mr. Solomon. The majority of those present voting.
Mr. Kingston. So the same procedures to de-unionize would
be the same procedures to unionize?
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Mr. Kingston. Because I think there has been some concern
about that.
Ms. Liebman. Our procedures and the way we conduct our
elections are the same--to authorize or decertify.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you. Coming in under 5 minutes. Very
good.
Mr. Rehberg. Well trained.
We are going to start round two, and I want to thank the
committee for watching the time and allowing us an opportunity
to have as many rounds as we possibly can.
My question is, can the Board ever reject an election and
call for a second ballot?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, and it does routinely do that pursuant to
objections filed by one party or the other that some misconduct
has gone on or the Board has failed to conduct a fair election.
Objections hearings would be held and sometimes, occasionally,
that results in a new election.
Mr. Rehberg. I want to get back to something that Mrs.
Lummis was talking about with the unit determination and that
is more of an appropriations question, and that is, if--and I
don't expect an answer as to how you are going to rule and
all--but what is that going to do for your annual budget or
your FTE level if the determination is made to break up into
additional categories or units, classifications? Have you
addressed that issue? Is there an analysis out there to make a
determination the effect it will have? Because, obviously, it
is going to be a lot more controversial in the future. There
are going to be probably clearly a lot more cases. So the
question becomes, what kind of consideration has been made
within your Board for FTE and your budget purposes?
Ms. Liebman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You are going back to the Specialty Health Care case. So
far, the Board has not made any decision. All we have done is
asked for briefing on a range of questions. That briefing time
is not even concluded yet. I think we have extended it at the
request of some Members of Congress and the Senate until----
Mr. Rehberg. Can you give me an estimate of when a decision
will be made, just for purposes of addressing it in the
Appropriations Committee? We are going to deal with the
problem.
Ms. Liebman. Yes. As I said, all we have done so far is ask
questions. No determination has been made about what our
decision is going to be. It is hard for me to predict what the
timing would be. I would obviously like to decide all cases
pending before us sooner rather than later, but I have learned
wisely over the years never to make too many predictions about
when a case is going to issue. That takes on a life of its own.
Let me say, though, about that particular case--I don't
want to go into the merits of it because it is a pending case.
But it concerns the question, as the congresswoman said, about
whether certified nursing assistants are entitled to have a
bargaining unit on their own. That we may have asked for
questions that go beyond that classification is really just to
consider that issue in context.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Would you provide the committee with the
data that shows that it is a problem in the first place? You
know, there has to be a reason that the Board is even
considering the issue, and so we would like to know, you know,
what went into the decision-making process, within your own
mind, that the unit size is a problem that needs to be
addressed by NLRB.
Ms. Liebman. Again, this is a matter currently under
deliberations.
Mr. Rehberg. No, I am not arguing about this particular
case. I am arguing about the necessity--what drove you to make
a determination that unit size is a problem? There has to be--
you know, we don't pass a law unless there is a reason to pass
a law. You are not considering this unless you consider a unit
size to be an issue. So I would like you to provide to the
committee either the study, the analysis, or the data that
drove you to this decision.
Mr. Solomon. Mr. Chairman, if I may, just to clarify, I
asked for an analysis of what is our present experience on unit
size; and I will be happy--I don't have it with me, and I don't
actually remember the number. But the number presently, the
number is quite small for our average unit size. We don't pick
the units. People petition us. And, you know, the Act allows us
to conduct an election in any appropriate unit, an appropriate
unit, and the average unit size presently is, I am pretty sure,
under 30.
Mr. Rehberg. I just recognize this as having a major impact
on your budget, the potential for a major impact both FTE and
annual budget, and so we need to have some proof that there was
a reason or there is a reason for a changing of the unit size
determination.
Mr. Solomon. I guess what I am trying to say, and maybe I
didn't say it articulately. I am not sure--I mean, the Board
will do what the Board will do, and the General Counsel will
react to it, but I do not believe that even if the Board
changed--whatever they decide in special health care, I do not
believe will actually impact either our FTE in any adverse way.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Ms. Liebman. If I could just add, the number I think our
Acting General Counsel is struggling to come up with is our
median bargaining unit size today--median, that means, you
know, in the middle--is 25. So that means more than half will
go over that size and more than half are under that size. The
minimum size would be two people, because we wouldn't conduct
an election if there were fewer than two.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a point of clarification, you were petitioned to look
at that, the size. You have a petition from a nurse's
assistant--you don't decide to say, okay, I think that you
ought to be doing this. It is like, you know, asking a judge
what was it that made him take the case. Isn't that the----
Mr. Rehberg. If the gentlewoman would yield, though, the
General Counsel----
Ms. DeLauro. Only if I can have the extra time.
Mr. Rehberg. Fair enough. Shut it off--not shut her off.
Shut it off.
The General Counsel just said that he asked, which is a
little different than the initial petition. He asked for
initial----
Ms. DeLauro. I think----
Mr. Solomon. No, I just asked for an analysis of what our
average unit size was right now.
Ms. DeLauro. Right, but I am just saying, in terms of
looking at that effort, it would have to come from a petition.
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. Another point is, this has to do with the
posting of the notice of employees' rights under the law. As I
understand it--correct me if I am wrong--it is just that you
can exercise your right or you can refrain from doing that. You
don't talk about the benefits of joining a union or what it
takes away. I mean, there isn't a value. It is just, in
essence, you have got the right to move forward to do it or to
refrain from doing it, as you pointed out. You don't attach the
benefits or the consequences, is that correct, in your
notifications?
Ms. Liebman. It is fully correct. It is purely
informational. It is not advocacy.
Ms. DeLauro. I think that is an important point to be made.
Because it looked as if there was some view that this was
advocacy rather than information.
Ms. Liebman. Absolutely not.
Ms. DeLauro. So thank you for the clarification.
Mr. Solomon, it has been asked here already about four
States that passed constitutional amendments which restrict
freedom of employers and employees to enter into voluntary
recognition agreements as a means to establish a union, even
though it has been allowed under Federal law for 75 years. I
want to enter into the record the letter from Arthur Rosenfeld,
the Bush administration's NLRB General Counsel, where he
testified that these constitutional amendments were on their
face preempted under NLRA law; and Mr. Chairman, can I enter
this?
Mr. Rehberg. You may, without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.086

Ms. DeLauro. And I might add with regard to that, Mr.
Rosenfeld's view here is one that worked against the unions in
North Dakota at the time; is that correct?
Mr. Solomon. That is correct, Congresswoman.
Ms. DeLauro. So Federal preemption of State law is
something which has strong historical precedent, regardless of
which party is in power.
Mr. Solomon. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. Can you describe recent litigation that has
involved preemption of State labor laws? Have courts generally
sustained the NLRB's views in litigation--without talking about
pending matters?
Mr. Solomon. Well, the most recent was the Supreme Court
case Chamber of Commerce v. Brown, which was in 2008; and we
intervened on the side of the Chamber of Commerce. It was pro-
union State law at issue there, and we said that it was, in
fact, preempted, and the Supreme Court agreed.
Mr. DeLauro. The Supreme Court upheld your----
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. So, again, precedent. There is plenty of
precedent, regardless of----
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro [continuing]. The politics of whose party is in
charge.
Mr. Solomon. That is correct. Many of my predecessors have
sent the same letters that I sent.
Ms. DeLauro. Which also, by the way--I will get to that
later.
Let me ask, Mr. Solomon. Some have taken issue with your
efforts to make use of so-called 10(j) injunctions to assist
people who have been fired or penalized for union activity.
First, am I correct that any such injunction requires approval
from a Federal judge?
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. Your role then is to ask the court to act, and
it is the court that makes the decision?
Mr. Solomon. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. Second, can you tell us the circumstances in
which your office is likely to pursue a 10(j) injunction and
why is its remedy important to protecting democracy in the
workplace?
And let me just add one piece to that. What has been your
success rate as Acting General Counsel with these injunctions?
Have the courts usually agreed with you and your staff and
issued the requested injunction? So why is the remedy
important, what are the circumstances, and how have the courts
acted?
Mr. Solomon. The 10(j) has been in the statute since 1947.
It has been used by many, many of my previous general counsels.
My predecessor told the regional offices to pay particular
attention to, first, contract negotiations and where there were
unfair labor practices to go in and seek a 10(j) injunction.
10(j) injunctive relief is very important, because it puts
the status quo back into place while the unfair labor practice
is being litigated. In my--am I over?
Mr. Rehberg. No, go ahead.
Mr. Solomon. Just to give you some statistics for the win
rate when you got to that, since I have been General Counsel,
there have been 32 10(j)s that the Board has authorized. I can
only recommend them to the Board. The Board has the final
decision. Of those, we have won five in district court, 12 have
settled, and 15 are pending.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. You know, I have to relate, as an animal
science and biology major, when I went to law school, I took
labor law. And my professor said, well, I am delighted you want
to take this class, but you are a rancher. When are you ever
going to use that? And now, after this, I can call him and say,
I used it. I used it. And it was fascinating. He was a great
teacher, and it was a fascinating class, but finally, finally,
a use for all that.
Question about--back to the specialty health care case.
Here is the question that people have been asking me. The
concern out there is that the specific question asked by the
petitioners related to nursing assistants, and yet it appears
that a broader application of the case may apply the concept of
micro-unions and micro-bargaining to all occupations and
industries. So my question is, are you considering expanding
the standard beyond the non-acute health care facility workers
that are involved in the petition, the subject matter of the
case?
Ms. Liebman. Congresswoman, I understand your concern, and
I understand that this issue has received a fair amount of
press. I have to say that one thing that is perplexing to me is
that merely asking for amicus briefing on a set of questions
has created so much controversy and concern. Because, at this
point, all we are trying to do is get information and
understand the issue in the broader context.
The case--and, again, I am reluctant to say too much
because it is a pending case. The Board has not deliberated. In
fact, the briefing period is not yet over. The case--you are
absolutely correct--concerns the question of certified nursing
assistants. This was a case where the union sought a unit of
certified nursing assistants. The regional director found that
that unit was appropriate, if I am not mistaken--I think I have
it right. The nursing home, the employer, sought review with us
on that issue, the appropriateness of that issue, claiming that
the bargaining unit that the regional director found to be
appropriate was too narrow under existing law.
Mrs. Lummis. So do you have a choice--I am going to try and
ask you questions without getting to the heart of the specific
case. Do you have a choice about whether to confine your
decision to the specific facts in the case or apply it more
broadly across classifications in businesses?
Ms. Liebman. I am not sure that I would characterize it as
a choice that way. In the course of an adjudication, we will
decide the case before us. As is often the case in
adjudication, your decision may have an impact, establish
essentially a substantive rule of law that will then be applied
in subsequent cases.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay, well let me ask it this way then. Are
you willing to assure this committee that you will not, through
adjudication, supersede or render superfluous any portion of
the National Labor Relations Act, particularly section 9(c)(a),
relating to the determination of appropriate bargaining units.
Ms. Liebman. I think I can assure you, certainly on behalf
of this Board member--I wouldn't dare to speak for my
colleagues--that my decision will be fully consistent with the
letter and intent and precedent under the statute.
Mrs. Lummis. Thanks. I appreciate that very much.
Now there is still a lot of concern about using this case
as back door rulemaking. Do you agree generally that rulemaking
ensures transparency and the opportunity for more people to
participate in offering opinions about broad changes in policy,
as opposed to adjudication?
Ms. Liebman. Well, certainly that is one of the arguments
that has been made for why the Board should use more
rulemaking. It does involve allow more public participation and
transparency, yes.
The Board has traditionally not done rulemaking. As I
mentioned, the only real occasion where the Board has embarked
on substantive rulemaking was back in the late 1980s when it
did the rulemaking on appropriate bargaining units in acute
health care facilities. Once it adopted that rule, it then
decided the case on adjudication called Park Manor, which dealt
with the standard to be applied in non-acute care; and it is
that case which is really at issue here.
When the Board decided that case--I forget what year it
was--1991, approximately--it said that this is an industry
which is in flux, clearly changing, and what we should do is
monitor the experience under this decision, under the Park
Manor decision; and I think that is exactly what our request
for amicus briefing in Specialty Health Care is following up
on, a specific invitation to look at the experience under the
Park Manor doctrine in an evolving industry.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have one final question, Chairwoman Liebman. At a
time of economic uncertainty and persistent high unemployment,
it is more important than ever that the NLRB is provided with
adequate resources to do their job effectively. Yet H.R. 1
would cut funding for the NLRB by $50,000,000, and we have
already heard that this would require all of the NLRB's
employees to be furloughed for 55 workdays, or nearly 3 months
between now and the end of September. What impact would these
furloughs have on the NLRB's mission to reduce interruptions in
commerce caused by conflicts between employers and employees
and what impact would it have on our recovering economy?
Ms. Liebman. Thank you, Congresswoman.
First of all, thank you for your support of our adequate
funding. We mentioned this a little bit earlier. If we were
forced to furlough all of our employees essentially for half
time for the remainder of the year, by definition all of our
operations would have to be curtailed.
We do two things. We conduct elections in workplaces. So
our ability to do that in a prompt, efficient way would be
slowed down. We also adjudicate unfair labor practices. We
investigate the charges that are filed with us. We settle the
vast majority of them. We have go to trial in some; and all of
that, of course, would be slowed down if everyone was working
half time.
That would mean that not only would workplace disputes
fester longer, but, for example, employers might have to have
illegal strikes or illegal picketing go on at their workplaces
for longer periods of time. Workers might be illegally locked
out. So our ability to carry out our mission, to do the two
things that Congress has instructed us to do, would I think by
definition be curtailed.
Of our funds, 80 percent goes to paying for our workforce
of approximately 1,670 employees. We recognize certainly the
economic times, but we think that our ability--we have no
programs to cut, other than to furlough our employees to meet
such a drastic budget cut; and in a difficult economy we think
that our reducing the efficiency of our resolving disputes
could contribute to destabilize relations and make things worse
in the workplace.
Mr. Solomon. And if I may just add a few specifics.
We have estimated that our backlog would grow
exponentially. Every decision point in a case would be delayed
by about 3 months. And, as I mentioned, our overarching goals
for the agency is to resolve our representation cases in 120
days, resolve unfair labor practice cases--representation cases
in 100 days, unfair labor practice cases in 120 days, and we
have done a remarkable job of that, but any cut of this size
would definitely impact significantly on any of those.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Kingston.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Let me ask you, in terms of the case about Facebook and
employees saying disparaging things about their employers on
Facebook, what is the NLRB's position on that? I think you have
a case on it, right?
Mr. Solomon. I issued complaint. The complaint settled, but
our position was that the employee engaged in a conversation on
her Facebook page with other employees about her supervisor and
that that is covered under the Act, protected concerted
activity; and we issued a complaint that her discharge for that
conversation and that protected activity was unlawful under the
Act.
Mr. Kingston. Do you see a trend there or something that we
should examine in terms of where the balance is on free speech
and where the line should be?
Mr. Solomon. Well, certainly.
Mr. Kingston. Is that something you can kind of see from
both sides--you know, a small amount okay?
Mr. Solomon. Certainly social media is going to increase
exponentially, even in ways that you and I can't envision
probably.
Mr. Kingston. Yes.
Mr. Solomon. We have a case before us that involves
Twitter. We have the other Facebook cases. I think there is
consternation among the employer community of writing policies
that cover social media, what is allowed and what is not
allowed. You know, we can, again, only deal with cases that
come to us; and we will decide--I will, my staff will decide
whether we should, you know, issue complaints.
Mr. Kingston. Was that the case--did they own their own
computer when they were doing that?
Mr. Solomon. Yes.
Mr. Kingston. It would be different if the employer owned
the computer, I suppose.
Mr. Solomon. It could very well make a difference--again,
whether the employer's policy is tailored to various ways.
Because, I mean, people can at work talk about working
conditions and engage in protected concerted activity.
Mr. Kingston. I want to just share something with you for
the good of the order here.
I was in Mexico about 2 weeks ago, and we were in Mexico
City talking to them about a myriad of subjects but including
the immigration to America for jobs. And you may know
remittance to Mexico from Mexicans working in America is 21 to
24 billion dollar a year, a huge amount of money.
And I was asking one of the--why aren't there more jobs
down here? And he said, well, I have been with my current job 3
months. If I quit today, I quit, I get 5 months' salary. If my
employer fires me and I win the dispute over it, he will have
to pay me 5 years' salary. He says, as a result of that, that
is why there aren't any jobs, because we have made it so hard
to fire people in Mexico.
And, you know, that is just one of those things that--just
throwing that out. I don't necessarily want you to comment on
it, but I have 5 minutes.
But what I do want you to comment on in terms of coming
from an open-shop State and believing in the workers' right to
choose, do you think that there is an inherent conflict between
public employees--and I know you don't regulate public
employees--but public employees' collective bargaining, so to
speak, and donating to people who set their salary? It appears
to me that there is a conflict there, which is one of the
things that these open or closed shops States are going through
right now; and I just--I know it is not in your jurisdiction
but just your philosophical thoughts.
Ms. Liebman. Well, because it is not in our jurisdiction
and because we have enough difficult issues to deal with under
our statute, I would be reluctant to delve into that.
Mr. Kingston. I can see not only are you a lawyer but you
are a good one.
Ms. Liebman. I do want to go back to your Facebook inquiry
for just a moment.
Last week, I was in Minneapolis addressing a group of
management lawyers. It was a reception held at a management law
firm, and they invited some of their community. And one of the
lawyers said to me, you know, we were really sorry when that
Facebook case settled, because we were really looking to see
what the NLRB policy was going to be. Because we need to know,
as we consider drafting social media policies, whether it is
consistent with the Title VII of the equal employment laws and
the NLRA.
It reminded me of a conversation I had had about 10 years
ago with a very prominent management attorney. And at that time
he said the most important thing from the business perspective
is for the NLRB to decide what the rules are with respect to
use of e-mail in the workplace. So that is what has happened.
We have gone from e-mail now to Facebook.
So, you know, it is not just workers and unions that were
looking to us to set the rules of the games but employers,
also. They want to know how to structure workplace policies. So
it is--you know, even if they don't have a case before us, they
want to see what we do----
Mr. Kingston. It is an interesting area.
Mr. Rehberg. I was going to turn it over to you, Ms.
DeLauro, but I am next.
I appreciate your comments about advocacy versus
information, but I am also aware of a Google ad, if I could
quote from it: Labor organization info. Find info on how to
start a union. Get the process and more on our site
www.nlrb.gov.
If I were to click on to that ad, what would I get?
Ms. Liebman. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know, actually. I
have never seen the ad. But, to my surprise, I learned--I think
it was on March 4th--that there were some Google ads that when
you clicked on certain words, I guess on Google, that these ads
would come up. It was something I knew nothing about.
Within a few hours, we pulled the ads down. I asked our
Inspector General to look into this. He has done that. I am
happy to make his report available to you.
We also, subsequent to that, got an oversight request from
the House Education and Workforce Committee on the subject. We
have turned over the report to them.
In a nutshell, what our Inspector General found was that in
2007, as the then Chairman Battista was looking to improve the
agency's technology and Web presence and all, that there were
some discussion at the staff level about how to increase
traffic to our Web site; and one of our IT specialists
apparently, we have learned, applied for a Google grant and
drafted the text of a couple Google ads. And we didn't pay for
them. He got this Google grant, I guess.
Mr. Rehberg. And, again, I will go back to the advocacy
versus information. One of the things I am continually--and,
Mr. Kingston, I often say that I have over 6,000 friends on
Facebook and turns out they are not all friends. But you can
call themselves fans and friends, but they are not necessarily.
Mr. Kingston. You have got 50 to 60 friends.
Mr. Rehberg. I do. I can name them.
But, again, and you both being attorneys--and I married
mine. So I am pretty smart, too. Words do matter. When you talk
about advocacy versus information, again, on the posting of the
new six million business fliers, if there isn't a Beck's rights
provision within that, then it is an advocacy piece, any way
you look at it. Because the Google ad should have said, if you
are interested in union information or nonunion information,
then it probably would have been okay. Because all you are
doing is to try to increase business, and I am okay with that.
But if you ultimately come out with a ruling or a decision
based upon all the information you are receiving to post a
notice that only talks about one side, you are an advocate, any
way you want to look at it.
Ms. Liebman. Well, obviously, we haven't made a final
decision based on our review of all this----
Mr. Rehberg. No, but our reaction will be interesting if it
comes out with an interpretation that one side needs to be
notified and the other side is left out of that notification. I
just want to say that we are watching.
Ms. Liebman. We understand. We understand.
Mr. Solomon. Mr. Chairman, may I just say that my
understanding was--I also never went to the Google ads--but if
you clicked on the Google ad, all you would have gotten was the
NLRB Web page. So it is not like----
Mr. Rehberg. Yeah, but you are driving a certain kind of
person to a site, as opposed to an information either/or, A or
B.
Mr. Solomon. But the Web site would have told you, you
know, where our regional offices are, what our procedures are.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, you are a good lawyer but not a very
good advertiser then. Because advertisements are to try and
drive a certain customer or clientele into a business; and if
you want to run it like a business, you are bringing a certain
kind of clientele in by a one-sided click ad.
Mr. Solomon. I understand what you are saying. But just the
intent behind the ad, as I understand it from what the
Inspector General found, was to increase hits on our Web page.
And so it was just to bring traffic to our Web page.
Mr. Rehberg. Would you mind then for a period of 2 days
putting up a little ad that suggests, if you want to reject the
union within your workplace, please click this ad? And then,
you know, it would be the same.
Mr. Solomon. I would also point that the ad that you read
only ran, from the Inspector General's report, point 7 percent
of the time. The one----
Mr. Rehberg. I am just asking for equal time.
Mr. Solomon [continuing]. Running 99.3 percent of the time
was a much more even-sided----
Mr. Rehberg. I am just suggesting, if you don't think it
was an advocacy ad, why don't we--whatever percent--run the
same ad?
Ms. Liebman. We removed both ads as soon as we learned
about them, and we didn't think they were appropriate to
continue, anymore than what you are proposing would be
appropriate. So we stopped them as soon as I learned about it.
I knew nothing about it before that.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. I think that is the point. They are not there
anymore. Did you know about it? Someone did it. You saw it. IG
report. Bang. Done. Finished. Over. All right.
So no advocacy involved, unlike what happened at Yale
University where they put together a document to distribute to
the employees when there was an organizing drive and a manual
put together of how, in fact, you challenge the fact, talk
about what all the bad consequences there are in terms of
joining a union. And, quite frankly, what has really upset me
was that basically implied that the people who are trying to
put the union together are Mafia based. Actually, there was a
ruling on that against the University in that case. But that is
advocacy and not right. It shouldn't happen in any question.
Anyway, I think the Facebook thing is very interesting,
because 51 percent of Americans are on Facebook today. That was
about 8 percent in 2008. It is a new world. Clearly, it is a
new world for me in that regard.
Mr. Kingston. It was better when it was just for kids.
Ms. DeLauro. Anyway, a couple things. I don't know about
the effect in terms of your transparency and your ability to
communicate. This has to do with if we see the $50,000,000 cut.
You talked about this weekly summary of cases making what you
do more transparent to the public. How would that initiative be
impacted by the proposed cuts?
Ms. Liebman. Well, our ability to do all of our jobs would
obviously be slowed up. We wouldn't be able to do it as
quickly, I would assume.
Ms. DeLauro. So in terms of transparency or what the cases
are about, what the rationale is, both sides, all of the
balance of what this effort is about would be transparent to
the public. In the absence of the resources, that kind of thing
goes away.
Ms. Liebman. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. Amicus brief, if I can, Chairman Liebman. Some
people have tried to suggest that the current Board is pursuing
an activist agenda, and the evidence they point to sometime is
the invitations that have been issued for amicus briefs in the
recent cases. Is requesting briefs from others not directly
involved in the proceedings indeed a sign of activism or are
there other reasons you would want to solicit broader views on
a few of the cases that are before you?
Ms. Liebman. Congresswoman, I have been quite perplexed by
the criticism leveled at our seeking amicus briefing. To me,
amicus briefing is a good practice. It is open. It is
transparent. It is engaging. It invites participation by a
broader segment of the labor management community than just the
immediate parties to the dispute. It is open in the sense that
it tells people what issues we are considering and thinking
about; and it invites comments of any nature, whether it is
legal argument, empirical evidence.
To me, it is a good process. It doesn't say anything about
the ultimate outcome of a case. Amicus briefing is all about
being informed, being open, inviting participation. To me, it
is a form of good government.
Ms. DeLauro. I might add that, in terms of third party
briefs, Cynthia Estlund, who is the Catherine Rein Professor of
Law at NYU--this is on the rulemaking issue, just the point you
made before--talks about its advantage. It allows for more
thorough consideration of a wider range of views on policy
issues with implications that extend beyond the parties to a
particular case, facilitates more efficient adjudication of
cases raising recurring issues, tends to promote policy
stability because rules tend to last longer than precedents
adopted through adjudication.
So these are about the--rulemaking in amicus briefs in
terms of soliciting a broader range of ideas, et cetera.
Let me just ask--I think I have a second here, in which
case I don't know if I can----
Mr. Rehberg. Go ahead.
Ms. DeLauro. We have got some time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Chairman, no further questions, but I
might just comment to my subcommittee chairman over in the AG
Committee that when you have got lawyers in front of you and
lawyers to the left of you and lawyer spouses to the right of
you, it is a little bit like that Jimmy Buffet song ``Fins''.
You know, fins to the left, fins to the right, and you are the
only bait in town.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Kingston.
Ms. DeLauro. No lawyer here or spouse.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Chairman, I have some questions I want to
submit to the record regarding the St. George warehouse case
and the Groversnor Resort case, which I understand the counsel
has asked for stiffer penalties for unfair labor practices. And
if you want to say anything about it, I have a series of
questions I don't think I can cover in 5 minutes, but I wanted
to----
Mr. Rehberg. And, as always, we will keep the record open
for the purposes of submitting questions for the record and ask
that you in a timely fashion respond.
Ms. Liebman. Be happy to.
Mr. Kingston. Another question I have, how does the Board
select which cases appear before you? Because I know that there
are more cases than you can deal with. How do you decide?
Ms. Liebman. Well, I am not sure I understand the question.
We do not have a certiorari procedure except for our pre-
election representation case matters where a party would seek
review and we grant review only if we think there is a serious
issue presented. Otherwise, we have to decide every case that
is presented to us. If a party files exceptions to our
decision, whether it is the general counsel responding, an
employer or union, they have a right to file those exceptions,
and we have an obligation----
Mr. Kingston. So you have to do every one then.
Ms. Liebman. We have to do every one. We can pick the
order, but we have to decide every one.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. And then let me just get back on this
Google case. How much money was spent by that employee to get
the ad? You say it was a Google grant?
Ms. Liebman. No money. It was a Google grant.
He misunderstood. He applied for this grant. Apparently,
you have to represent whether you are a 501(c) organization. He
told the Inspector General that he thought that the government
doesn't make a profit so it comes within that. So he made a
mistake.
Mr. Kingston. Who was the employee and was he fired?
Ms. Liebman. He was not fired. He is a junior-level IT
specialist, and he was--we use the word--the parlance--
``counseled''. He was----
Mr. Kingston. But he was acting on his own?
Ms. Liebman. He was acting on his own.
Mr. Kingston. Was his supervisor fired then if he was kind
of an innocent junior----
Ms. Liebman. I believe that----
Mr. Solomon. We have counseled both the employee and the
supervisor, and we have also put in place a system of checks
and balances that it could never happen again, that no employee
outside of the contracting office, the acquisitions office has
authority to sign anything on behalf of the National Labor
Relations Board; and we will make sure that this never happens
again.
Mr. Kingston. It seems, you know, we all have sort of a
general policy that the only ones who can talk to the press,
for example, would be the Member or the press person, and
certainly the military has those rules. And it would appear
that it would take a high degree of audacity or lack of
supervision for somebody just to go out on his own and put in
an ad like that and there not to be some very serious
repercussions.
Mr. Solomon. As I said earlier, the intent was simply to
get more traffic to our Web site, and----
Mr. Kingston. Why would that employee--is that his job, to
get traffic to your Web site? He is an IT guy. Why would he----
Mr. Solomon. In hindsight, no. But he thought it was a good
thing. He helped design the Web site, and he thought it was a
good thing to do. I mean, the chairman and I----
Mr. Kingston. He could do all this and no one knew it? He
was just designing Web sites and going out----
Mr. Solomon. It was a fluke. The supervisor thought that,
even under the grant, that it only lasted 3 months. And so the
supervisor never checked, and it just kept going. And the
chairman and I knew nothing about it, and the moment we did, it
stopped.
Mr. Kingston. All right.
Mr. Rehberg. We will start another round, and thank you
all.
Can you estimate for me how many times you have an election
off site or remote by absentee ballot? And what I want to get
at is the e-card check opportunity or potentiality and the
rulemaking that is going along with allowing the opportunity
for voting on the Internet. So I will give you a heads-up as to
where I am heading with this, but I would like to know
currently what percentage of votes occur off site or in remote
locations.
Mr. Solomon. I will have to get you that statistic, but it
is a very small percentage of our elections that are handled
presently by mail ballot. Our presumption is that they are by
manual ballot and the manual balloting occurs on the employers
premises only. The only times it doesn't is if the employer
refuses to allow us on the premises, and then we arrange a
remote site.
Mr. Rehberg. One of the things that we hold near and dear
to ourselves is we do not allow remote voting in Congress for
one reason or another. We want people to be here. I would never
come to Washington if I didn't have to. I would stay in
Montana. And so you can understand the potential for abuse when
you have off-site, remote voting, especially over the Internet.
What kind of comments are you getting on the e-card rule?
Ms. Liebman. We have not done a rulemaking on----
Mr. Rehberg. But you are gathering information, so there is
a difference between----
Ms. Liebman. Some months ago, we put out a request for
information through the acquisition or procurement process just
to find out what firms are out there, what businesses are out
there that provide electronic voting services for either on-
site or remote electronic voting. The National Mediation Board
I believe was using this pretty consistently for their
elections.
We know that electronic voting is conducted or is permitted
in several States. So it is an evolving technology, and we put
out this request for information just to find out what firms
are doing it, how they do it, what safeguards there are, and--
--
Mr. Rehberg. Do you think it would be a necessity for a
statutory change to allow the opportunity for e-voting or do
you think you have the statutory authority to go through a
rulemaking procedure and create a rule that, in effect,
circumvents the will of Congress so far on the card check
concept?
Ms. Liebman. Well, let me just say that all we have done so
far is seek the information through the acquisition procurement
process.
Mr. Rehberg. Right.
Ms. Liebman. Should we ever decide that we wanted to
propose electronic voting of some sort, we would certainly do
it through a public rulemaking process with opportunity for
notice and comment.
Mr. Rehberg. So you think you have the statutory authority
to create e-card check.
Ms. Liebman. What the statute provides is that the Board
shall certify a union, if it wins after a secret ballot
election. And, of course, at the time the statute was written,
no one had electronic voting in mind.
So the question I think would be whether electronic voting
would be within that statutory language. We got these comments
from a variety of firms that do this. We got some comments--
really sort of unsolicited comments--on the merits of it. That
wasn't what we were asking at the time. We had those comments.
I can tell you that the Board has taken no further action
on this issue. We have not engaged in further--
Mr. Rehberg. Would there be a judicial review of a
regulation if the rulemaking authority occurred?
Ms. Liebman. Sure, there is judicial review of any
rulemaking permitted, just as there is judicial review of our
unfair labor practice decisions. A little different standard,
but there is judicial review available.
Mr. Rehberg. There is judicial review in all rulemaking
within the NLRB? I was under the assumption or understanding
that not necessarily.
Ms. Liebman. Well, I guess my lawyer will correct me if I
am wrong, but we have done this--as I said, we have done
substantive rulemaking essentially once, and it was subject to
challenge, as I mentioned, in 1991. It was unanimously upheld.
We just haven't done it in between, but my understanding is
that, under the Administrative Procedure Act, that judicial
review is available if an agency does rulemaking. That has
happened with a lot of other agencies.
I stand corrected if I am wrong on that.
Mr. Solomon. You are right.
Mr. Rehberg. All right. Then I stand corrected. I am going
to go back and look at my documentation and my data and see,
and then I will correspond with you one way or the other. Thank
you.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just ask a follow-up question, Ms. Liebman. Is the
NLRB planning to effectuate the Employee Free Choice Act by
rulemaking?
Ms. Liebman. No, Congresswoman, we are not able to do that.
Ms. DeLauro. Would those changes to labor law, in your
view, require a statutory change?
Ms. Liebman. The changes that were proposed in the Employee
Free Choice Act, in my view, would require Congress to
effectuate; and we certainly respect what we are able to do and
what we are not able to do. We have no intent to usurp the role
of Congress.
Ms. DeLauro. I thank you. Because I want that to be part of
the record. Thank you.
Let me also mention to you, there is always a lot of
discussion that we hear about the NLRB. It is partisan place, a
polarized place, conflict between the Republican and Democratic
Members, between the supporters of management and the
supporters of labor. I wonder how much that view reflects
reality.
In your statement, Chairman Liebman, you mentioned the 2-
year period when there were only two Board members, yourself
and a Republican Board member; and I believe you said that the
two of you reached agreement on some 600 cases.
Ms. Liebman. Correct.
Ms. DeLauro. What lessons do you draw from that experience?
Does it tell us that there really is pretty broad agreement
about much of the fundamental day-to-day work of the Board?
Ms. Liebman. Yes, thank you for your question.
I completely agree with the point you just made. For the
vast bulk of what this agency does on a day-to-day basis, there
is broad agreement. No one disagrees with the basic principles
of law which are stabilized and have been stabilized for
decades. A very small percentage of the cases actually come to
the Board itself for adjudication. The vast majority, as you
heard, are settled before that. And of the cases that come to
the Board for decision, well more than half of those decisions
are unanimous. It is probably maybe 2 percent of those cases
that create any noise, and they are generally cases of topical
interests, novel issues, some ways new. So there are people who
have strong interests in the outcome of those decisions.
Just to answer the question a slightly different way, the
Board is supposed to have five members at any one time--three
members of the President's party, two of the opposition. The
composition of the Board are terms of 5 years. They expire on a
rotating basis. So at any one time there are going to be
different views on the Board.
I did spend 27 months alone with Member Schaumber; and we,
to the surprise of many, were able to reach agreement nearly
600 times. I think that tells you in part how stable the vast
bulk of the doctrines and the precedent and the law are under
this statute.
Let me also mention that I have been on the Board now for
13 and a half years. I am the third-longest-serving member of
the Board in its history. I have served with 16 different
individuals, both Democrats and Republicans. I think I have
enjoyed good relations with all of them, both Democrat and
Republicans. We sometimes have differences about how to
approach the law, but that is just part of this law. That is
part of the legal system. That is part of what goes into this
rule of law under this very important statute.
Ms. DeLauro. Isn't it also true that some would say that
because there were two people, three people, et cetera, that
the decisions are--you know, skewed. We can't really call into
question the decisions, but there hasn't been over the years a
full complement--can you just comment on that--a full
complement of members. Would that there would have been,
because, obviously, it is the way to go. But just give us a
comment on that, if you will.
Ms. Liebman. I don't remember this--we actually looked this
up recently, but I think there has been a full complement of
members--meaning all five--probably less than two-thirds of the
time. In my 13-and-a-half years, I have served on every single
configuration--five member, four member, three member, two
member, and even 6 weeks by myself. So that is unfortunate,
that the appointment process has become so difficult.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Kingston.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Chair, one of the things, though, that is just the
reality right now in our budget situation, and I think your
testimony scanned both of them, and what you just said to Ms.
DeLauro is right out of your testimony. I think it has been
very good. You still have a 2-percent increase, which isn't
much, and Lord knows if we, Republicans and Democrats alike,
had been holding Federal spending to a----
Now, how is my light red, Mr. Chairman? Who is keeping
track over there?
Mr. Rehberg. Final round.
Mr. Kingston. I have a question. What I still don't
understand, though, is I think, even if this committee
advocated for you for the 2 percent, I think it is going to
have a difficult time getting it passed in this budget
environment. So my question would be--and I am not the chair,
don't hold the majority of votes, but let's just say we came
back to you and said, we have got to do a 5-percent cut. What
would happen to you?
Mr. Solomon. You mind if I take this?
Mr. Kingston. Well, actually, it is your testimony, not Ms.
Liebman's anyhow, so yeah.
Mr. Solomon. In a nutshell, we would have to cut our FTEs.
We presently are at 1671. As it has been said, 90 percent of
our budget is fixed. It is compensation and rent and security,
and so FTEs would have to be cut. We would have to cut
training. We would have to cut investments in IT, which are
critical to our future and----
Mr. Kingston. But let me ask this. There is an assumption
in this town that all employees are working their tails off.
Let's say there is an assumption in this building, there is
even a pretense that everybody is actually killing themselves.
I actually know of somebody whose son worked for the
Department of Labor, very bright college kid, got a summer job
there, was paid $11 an hour and never given any work, and after
2 weeks quit because he said, you know, it is wrong for me to
go in every day and read a novel.
I talked to people at the Pentagon; and you know if you
stand in the parking lot at 3 o'clock in the day, you are
taking your life in your hands.
Lots of people within these departments will say, yes,
there is a critical core in every agency and every
administration that works their tails off 20 to 30 percent and
then there is a whole bunch of folks who just really don't.
They stretch, you know, a 2- to 3-hour workday into 8 hours and
probably----
Ms. DeLauro. I think probably the same is true of the
Congress, Jack.
Mr. Kingston. Certainly not in any office from Connecticut
or Georgia. Maybe Montana. I don't know.
But I mean, you know, really as managers and stewards of
public dollars in an environment where of every dollar we spend
40 cents is borrowed, we need to look at payroll, because that
is where the money is.
Mr. Solomon. I understand that, Congressman, and it is hard
for me to come up with an answer other than trust me. But, you
know, we are lean and mean. We have cut our FTE through the
years to what we feel is absolutely essential for us to serve
the public, to serve the taxpayers, to help the economy in
resolving these workplace disputes; and, as has been said
several times before, we have no programs to cut. All we can
cut are people. And, you know, a 5-percent cut would mean 40,
50 or even more cut in our FTE; and it is going to directly
detrimentally affect how we do our business and how we serve
the public.
Mr. Kingston. I know it is difficult. In our own office, we
have three less employees this year. Each one of those three
employees was very productive, but as the Appropriations
Committee took a 9-percent cut, then individual offices took 5
percent. So if you were a Member of Congress on the
Appropriations Committee you had a deeper cut than other
offices. And I understand it, but then I think, you know what,
this is what the environment is.
Mr. Solomon. And, Congressman, as I said in my opening
statement, we have put together a task force to really study
whether we are going to an electronic case filing system, which
means that employees will be able to access their files
anywhere, anytime. So we will look at our footprint around the
country and our business processes, and I think there will be
economies of scale in that, but it still takes people to handle
these cases.
Mr. Kingston. Yeah. It is very tough, and I understand. So
thanks.
Mr. Rehberg. Which brings me to I guess a question about
the regional offices. Are you looking, as part of your study,
at the opportunity to consolidate the regional offices and use
the new----
Mr. Solomon. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. I won't take my full 5 minutes. I will turn it
over to Rosa in just a second here.
Mr. Rehberg. I knew I had read it somewhere.
I was reading a paper on specialty health care, and maybe
you could respond to this. Because this is a representation
case--which, obviously, I don't know what a representation case
is--there will be no opportunity for direct judicial review and
the Board could begin implementing the decision immediately in
other cases. So that----
Ms. Liebman. If I could just clarify that. What happens in
the judicial review process is that the representation case
decision--that is where we decide that we are going to hold an
election in XYZ unit. That is not immediately appealable. If
the union wins the election, the employer can then get judicial
review by refusing to bargain. We then issue an unfair labor
practice complaint charging the employer with a refusal to
bargain, and then it goes to court.
Mr. Rehberg. The question then becomes, do you then move
beyond just that particular case waiting for judicial review or
a lack thereof and you begin applying the same unit
determination broadly?
Ms. Liebman. Well, as with all of our decisions, once they
are in place, we would follow it. If another similar fact
pattern came up and if the same legal principle was at issue,
yes. I mean, we tend to follow our decisions in like cases. But
there is judicial review available through that mechanism.
Mr. Rehberg. But my fear is again the budgetary aspect of
representation case then being broadly interpreted among many
other entities, creating additional units and then ultimately
it costing us more in our annual budget that we look at in the
FTEs.
Ms. Liebman. I really don't foresee any major change in our
budget needs as a result of the Specialty Health Care decision.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro, you will be the last.
No, you have gotten your chance.
Ms. DeLauro. Sorry, Jack.
Mr. Kingston. My first time on the committee.
Ms. DeLauro. I would like to place into the record a letter
from Fred Feinstein, who was the former General Counsel of the
NLRB from 1994 through 1999, and his point that he is concerned
about the $50 million in cuts. The principal effect of
underfunding the agency would be to increase the time it takes
to resolve issues, disputes before the agency, et cetera.
So for the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.088

Ms. DeLauro. And then I would just ask our two witnesses
here, in your statements both of you talked about the
importance of the National Labor Relations Act, the work of the
Board. Yet I wonder if some people have the idea that your work
is no longer relevant. Could you help us to understand why the
law and the work of your agency is still very much relevant--
how important it is and how much it matters to the lives of
working people, which goes back to what it was about when it
was established in 1935?
Mr. Solomon. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I would just give you a little sense of the 9 months that I
have been Acting General Counsel. I had a case come before me
in which we felt that the employee was fired for union activity
and, in reading the facts of the case, the employee was not, in
fact, paid minimum wage. In fact, he received no wages, except
tips; and a benefit that he received--and I put benefit in
quotes--was that he could live in the employer's bathroom. And
this is 2011, and I feel that he needs our help.
On the other end of the scale, we have the NFL owners who
have filed a charge in our Manhattan office that, if we find
merit to it, we would force the players association back to the
bargaining table; and there are those that would love for us to
do that in the hopes that we would save the football season.
And, in the meantime, we have the things like Facebook and
Twitter that are coming up.
And so, in short, there is 7 percent of the workforce that
is unionized, but there is 93 percent that is not unionized.
The Act applies to them equally, to the ones that are
unionized. And these people need us. On both sides.
Ms. DeLauro. Ms. Liebman.
Ms. Liebman. Thank you.
I think Mr. Solomon stated it eloquently. But let me also
add that it may be hard for us in this room to remember 1935,
but for any student of history I don't think anyone could doubt
the value that this statute has had in our society and in our
legal system.
What this law sets up is a rule of law, a system of
governance for the resolution of conflict and disputes in the
workplace. There will be conflicts and disputes between labor
and business for as long as there is labor and business. We
don't create the conflict. The conflicts come to us. We try to
resolve them; and that is a very, very important social
function, I think.
For workers, it gives them a possibility of a voice in the
workplace, if they want it. For those workers who choose to
engage in collective bargaining with their employers, the
institution has served this country well. It enables the
parties to reach their own solutions without government
intervention. I think this continues to be a very important
institution in the law for our society and our economy.
Ms. DeLauro. Many thanks for your service. Many thanks for
the work of the agency in both protecting workers and
employers. I think that you both demonstrated the
evenhandedness with which this agency strives to and succeeds
at achieving. So thank you very, very much.
Mr. Kingston. If the gentlewoman will yield.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Kingston, we would like to hear from you
one more time.
Mr. Kingston. I would just like to say to our friend, the
chair, that you spent 27 months with a Republican. Rosa and I
spent 19 years together, and she can tell you how good it
really can get.
Ms. DeLauro. I will tell you.
Mr. Solomon. Can I do one thing, just to clarify? I made a
misstatement to Congressman Kingston. At a 2 percent cut, we
would have to cut our FTE by 40 or 50. But with a 5 percent
cut, we would probably be in the 100 to 120 range.
Mr. Rehberg. Meeting adjourned. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340A.100

Thursday, April 7, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR JOB TRAINING PROGRAMS

WITNESSES

ANDREW SHERRILL, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION, WORKFORCE, AND INCOME SECURITY,
U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
DOUGLAS J. BESHAROV, PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND SCHOOL OF PUBLIC
POLICY, AND DIRECTOR, WELFARE REFORM ACADEMY AND CENTER FOR
INTERNATIONAL POLICY EXCHANGES
MASON BISHOP, PRINCIPAL, WorkED CONSULTING AND FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
RAY UHALDE, VICE PRESIDENT, WORKFORCE/EDUCATION POLICY, JOBS FOR THE
FUTURE, AND FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
LABOR
Mr. Rehberg. Good morning, and welcome. Nice to have you
all here this morning.
And we will begin by, I believe, an opening statement by
Ranking Member DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say a thank you to our four distinguished
witnesses for taking the time to testify for us this morning.
Mr. Chairman, as we sit here today, 13.7 million of our
fellow Americans are unemployed. And at a time when jobs are
harder to find than ever and our economy is changing so
dramatically, we need efficient and effective job training
services like those provided by the Workforce Investment Act in
order to help citizens to get back on their feet.
No investment is more critical than investment in our human
capital, and job training and reemployment services are part of
the core, essential role for Government--helping responsible
people succeed from their own hard work.
And yet, Mr. Chairman, the majority's budget for this year,
H.R. 1, effectively terminates the Federal Government's role in
workforce development. This is a vital role of Government that
had the support of both parties under President Nixon and
President Reagan.
Let us be clear about what this means. Currently, the
Federal Government covers the vast majority of the cost of the
public investment in job training and placement programs. If we
terminate our investment in this area, States will not be able
to afford to make up the difference. They will have no recourse
but to shut these programs down.
Where will people go to get this vital job training and
placement assistance? The majority does not seem to have an
answer or even to be concerned about it. And so, under their
plan, we are hearing that 3,000 One-Stop career centers will
suspend enrollment in programs this summer and will likely
close their doors later this year.
Up to 30,000 disadvantaged students will lose access to
work experience and earning opportunity through summer youth
employment programs. The Job Corps will serve 10,000 fewer
participants while also shuttering centers, and the Green Jobs
Program will be eliminated. And at a time when long-term
unemployment is staggering, millions of American workers would
lose access to reemployment and job training services
completely.
In fact, the Workforce Investment Act supports job training
programs all across the country with proven results. Over the
past 2 years, WIA programs have seen a 233 percent increase in
participation from 3.4 million workers served in 2008 to just
over 8 million in 2010. And even in this tough economy, of over
half the people seeking help, 4.3 million Americans nationwide,
have found jobs with the help of these services.
Businesses also rely on training programs to fill vacant
positions with qualified and skilled workers. These cuts will
hurt them, too.
Some have suggested that our federally financed workforce
programs, as currently constructed, are not achieving adequate
results. I am interested in pursuing that discussion today
because according to the vast quantities of research that I am
aware of, the opposite is true.
We will hear today about the need to move to a voucher
program so that we can focus on training instead of core and
intensive services. But I doubt that that is what the framers
of this program had in mind.
Still, that does not mean that there is not room for
improvement. We can always do better, especially when the
livelihood of millions of Americans is at stake.
So, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for convening this hearing,
and I am looking forward to today's testimony.
Mr. Rehberg. Great. Just a brief warning. Unfortunately,
normally we do hold pretty strictly to the time. I try and
respect your time as well as ours and have us out of here by
noon. But it looks like we are going to be voting somewhere
between 11:15 a.m. and 11:30 a.m., and we will not be able to
reconvene because then we begin the debate on the CR, and we
are not allowed to have an Appropriations Committee hearing at
the same time that anything is being debated on the floor
having to do with the budget.
So it is one of those technical issues. It is a rule. So we
will do the best we can to hear your opening statements, and
then I just implore the Members during their questioning if
they don't feel compelled to fill the entire 5 minutes, that
would be a good thing, and we will get more than one round in.
Otherwise, chances are we will only get one round of
questioning in.
So why don't we begin? Mr. Sherrill.
Mr. Sherrill. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member DeLauro, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here
today to discuss the findings from our recent work on
fragmentation, overlap, and potential duplication in federally
funded employment and training programs and our prior work on
the Workforce Investment Act.
As you know, we recently issued two key reports in this
area. The first was mandated by Congress and outlined
opportunities to reduce potential duplication across a wide
range of Federal programs. The second focused more specifically
on Federal employment and training programs and built on
reports we have issued in this area since the 1990s.
Today, I will discuss what we have found regarding
fragmentation, overlap, and duplication of Federal employment
and training programs, the role that WIA activities can play in
addressing these conditions, and what additional information
would assist Congress.
For fiscal year 2009, we identified 47 federally funded
employment and training programs administered across 9 Federal
agencies. The programs reported spending approximately
$18,000,000,000 on employment and training services that year.
Seven programs accounted for about three-quarters of this
spending, including the WIA Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth
Programs.
The target populations being served by the most programs
were Native Americans, veterans, and youth. Forty-four of the
47 programs overlap with at least one other program in that
they provide at least one similar service to a similar
population. However, differences may exist in eligibility,
objectives, and service delivery.
We did more in-depth analysis of three of the largest
programs--Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, the
Employment Service, and WIA Adult Programs. We found that these
three programs maintain separate administrative structures to
provide some of the same employment and training services, such
as job search and job referral, to low-income individuals,
although there are differences between the programs.
However, data limitations make it difficult to determine
the extent to which individuals may be receiving the same
employment and training services from these programs. Federal
agency officials acknowledge that greater administrative
efficiencies could be achieved in these services but also said
that other factors, such as the proximity of services to
clients, could warrant having multiple entities provide the
same services.
Congress passed WIA partly in response to concerns about
the fragmentation and inefficiencies in Federal employment and
training programs. WIA established One-Stop centers and
mandated that many Federal employment and training programs
provide services through the centers in all local areas.
In our 2007 study, we found that a typical One-Stop center
in many States offered services for eight or nine required
programs onsite. And one State offered services for 16 required
programs onsite. While co-location does not guarantee
efficiency improvements, it affords the potential for sharing
resources, cross-training staff, and may lead to the
consolidation of administrative systems, such as information
technology.
Consolidating administrative structures and co-locating
services may increase efficiencies, but implementation could
pose challenges. We found that Florida, Texas, and Utah have
consolidated their workforce and welfare agencies, and
officials said this reduced the cost and improved the quality
of services, but they couldn't provide a dollar figure for the
cost savings.
WIA Adult and Employment Service Programs are generally co-
located in One-Stop centers, but TANF employment and training
services are co-located to a lesser extent. We recently
recommended that the Secretaries of HHS and Labor work together
to develop and disseminate information on some of these
initiatives at the State and local levels to shed light on the
extent to which they could serve as models in other places.
As part of that effort, we recommended that they examine
the incentives for States and localities to undertake that kind
of initiatives, and the agencies agreed.
Nearly all employment and training programs track multiple
outcome measures--most often entered employment, employment
retention, and wage gain or change. However, little is known
about the effectiveness of employment and training programs. We
found that only 5 of the 47 had conducted any impact studies
since 2004. Labor has been slow to comply with the requirement
to conduct a multisite control group evaluation of the WIA-
funded programs, and they currently have it underway. But it
expects that it won't be completed until 2015.
Up to now, Labor has completed two nonexperimental, less
comprehensive studies of the WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker
Programs, which found that, on average, programs had positive
impacts in the States examined.
The recently enacted GPRA Modernization Act of 2010
provides some opportunities for Congress to have additional
oversight in this area because the act requires more
crosscutting goals and programs and more congressional input.
In conclusion, sustained attention and oversight by
Congress will be critical in addressing these issues of
fragmentation, overlap, and potential duplication. And our work
highlights two areas where congressional oversight could
facilitate progress--enhancing program evaluations and
performance information and fostering State and local
innovation.
That concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.022

Mr. Rehberg. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Besharov.
Mr. Besharov. Mr. Chairman, Members of the committee, thank
you very much for having me here.
I am a professor at the University of Maryland. And so, my
claim to expertise in this regard is that we held a conference
on WIA about 2 years ago and published many of the papers being
discussed now. I have published the papers by Carolyn Heinrich
and Kevin Hollenbeck that are being studied by the committee,
but also papers on the other side that have said we need to do
a better job on the research. So that is true as well.
In any event, I would like to shift this discussion just a
little bit. Too often, the question asked is do we need WIA? Do
we defund it? Do we reduce the funding?
We are in the middle of the deepest downturn for employment
that we have had since we began keeping records. More than 10
percent of the American workforce is either unemployed, has
given up looking, or is working part-time when they want to
work full-time.
And yet, there are 2.8 million jobs available today.
Business is saying that the unemployed aren't qualified for
those jobs. It is looking for skills other than the skills of
the unemployed workers today to fill those jobs, or they are
going abroad with those jobs.
So I come to this problem by asking how do we fix our
Nation's job training system, given this deep need? Spells of
unemployment are now longer than they have been since we have
been keeping records, since 1948, almost twice as long.
We have millions of people who don't have the skills for
the future. We are going to talk a little bit about whether
WIA's results are sufficient or not, and we may get into that
in detail with some of the questions. For now, I am just going
to say that my reading of the research, including the papers
that I have published, tells me that WIA doesn't do nearly
enough.
I am just going to read--because there is going to be, I
think, a little bit of discussion about this--Carolyn
Heinrich's actual assessment of her work and others. She says,
``The Adult Program clearly satisfies the benefit-cost standard
if the earnings impacts continue for 2 or 3 years.'' And this
is what she said, ``Which seems plausible.'' Not for sure.
Plausible.
But she, like almost every researcher who has looked at
this issue, thinks that the Dislocated Worker Program is not
cost effective either for the Government or the trainees. In
fact, Kevin Hollenbeck from the Upjohn Institute on Workforce
Policy concludes that the average displaced worker who goes
through the program loses 10 to 17 percent of his earnings over
a period of time.
So this doesn't mean defund the entire program. What this
means is we have a giant problem ahead of us. Let me take this
opportunity to review what I think are the important things for
this committee to consider. Many of them are parallel to what
Mr. Sherrill said. I know Ray Uhalde's work. I think it is
parallel to some of the things he stands for as well.
First of all, we really do have too many job training
programs. This is the time to cut back the number, combine
them. In the next years, we will add some back. And 10 years
from now, we will come back and we will cut them back again.
But there has to be a little bit of haircutting going on, some
combining of these 47 programs.
More importantly, I would say, as in Germany, as in the UK,
we have to better connect our unemployment system with our job
training program, something the Obama administration started to
do and then didn't take it rest of the way. We have to realize
that Pell grants and student loans are part of our national job
training program, clarify what they do and how they work with
WIA agencies.
These are big issues, and they involve many more billions
of dollars than WIA itself.
We should require cost sharing from trainees to make the
systems more accountable. I would also say that it is time to
make the States help pay for this program. They should have
some skin in this game. My experience is when someone helps pay
for a program, it gets a little better.
And finally, I want to say, as someone who tries to use the
data that comes from the Department of Labor--Andy said it the
fancy way--no one believes the data that comes from the
Department of Labor. How else can I put it?
There has been a decade and a half of reports from GAO that
say please improve the data. And this has gone through a
Republican administration, and a Democratic administration. If
this committee does nothing but give added impetus to an
improvement of the Department of Labor's recordkeeping and data
collection, it would be making a major reform.
Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.029

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Uhalde.
Mr. Uhalde. Good morning, Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member
DeLauro, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify.
The Nation is at a crossroads, facing two urgent
priorities. We have to restore fiscal discipline, reducing the
Federal deficit and shrinking our long-term debt. But at the
same time, we also must grow the economy in the face of intense
international competition, creating jobs and expanding
employment and economic opportunities for all Americans.
Most people agree economic growth and broadly shared
prosperity depend importantly on the education and skills of
America's workforce. As Congress and the administration
negotiate the full 2011 continuing resolution and then go on to
fiscal year 2012, it is essential that the urgency of deficit
reduction not override the critical investments in the
education and skills of the U.S. workforce, especially at this
fragile point in our recovery with 13.5 million people still
unemployed.
So we have to move forward on both fronts. H.R. 1 or
similar cuts would eliminate all funding for the WIA Adult,
Dislocated Worker, and Youth Programs for states and local
communities, and several vital national programs in program
year 2011, starting this July 1st, leaving about 8 million
people who used WIA last year without services or a place to
turn for help finding work.
And those who think that the unexpended carryover funds
would see the system through to next year are just misinformed.
I urge the Members of the committee to avoid the cuts to
programs such as WIA that contribute to our economic growth and
job opportunities.
And it is no secret that WIA is in need of reauthorization.
It was originally authorized in 1998, signed in August when the
unemployment rate stood at 4.5 percent. Not only do we face a
much different economy, but practice in the field has also
progressed significantly.
Both the House and Senate authorizing committees, we hope,
will emphasize proven practices and system innovations in
proposals for reauthorization that are currently under
development. To say that WIA should be reauthorized, though, is
not the same as saying that WIA programs are not effective. On
the contrary.
My reading of the evidence is pretty clear that WIA's core
and intensive services and the training for disadvantaged
adults have been shown time and again to pay off in terms of
higher employment rates and earnings. The evidence on training
effectiveness for dislocated workers is mixed, but strong
results have been shown in studies examining community college
training for dislocated workers, particularly if training is
provided for 1 year or more for technical occupations including
healthcare.
This focus on long-term, high-demand training is precisely
what the workforce system used with the Recovery Act funds that
were received and which we expect WIA reauthorization to push
forward on.
When WIA was enacted in 1998, Congress was responding to an
earlier GAO report identifying 163 Federal programs. WIA
consolidated 50 of them into what is now the Nation's primary
workforce delivery system. WIA further streamlined service
delivery by integrating access to at least 13 of these
federally funded programs at the street level in the One-Stop
career centers.
Today, GAO has identified 47 different programs. In
reality, 76 percent of all funding and 91 percent of all
participants identified by the GAO are served through the
programs under the Workforce Investment Act.
While improved system alignment, more co-location at One-
Stops, and some consolidation where appropriate would likely
improve quality and efficiency, significant savings shouldn't
be expected. Most of these programs, including those under WIA,
have received funding reductions in real dollar terms over many
years and are significantly underfunded relative to their
mission and need, especially given the 234 percent increase in
demand for services the last 2 years. Congress should use the
GAO findings as a guide to obtain increased system alignment
and administrative savings, but not as a rationale for
significant cuts in program services.
To enhance the effectiveness of training, especially for
dislocated workers, and address many of the concerns raised by
the evaluations, at least three strategies should be adopted.
First, sector-based and on-the-job training should become
common practice nationwide to boost earnings, as in the
Jacobson and P/PV-Aspen studies. Second, reduce the substantial
foregone earnings dislocated workers experience while they are
in training by accelerating their completion time to credential
attainment and reemployment. This can be done. And third,
expand the use of technologies and career navigation strategies
to better match workers with either jobs or training.
Finally, the Congress has to reauthorize the Workforce
Investment Act.
Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.035

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop, welcome.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Chairman Rehberg, Members of the committee, thank you very
much. And I appreciate the opportunity of being able to come
before you and talk about how we improve economic opportunities
for families through appropriate job training.
I come to you today as somebody who has both been involved
at a large community college at the local level in Utah;
somebody who has been involved in workforce and welfare reform
at the local level, as was cited in the GAO report, in Utah;
and somebody who oversaw national public policy.
And it seems to me that the real question before you today
is one, what is our national policy goal with regard to these
programs? Secondly, is the current system as designed adequate
to meet that national policy goal? And third, if not, what kind
of reforms do we need to implement in order to make it so?
To me, the national policy goal is very clear. Both
President Obama and Vice President Biden in the last few months
have discussed this, as well as the Gates Foundation, other
foundations, and many other individuals. And that is we need to
be able to provide better opportunities for individuals to
enter postsecondary education and training in this country.
The data is staggering when it comes to those who do not
have this access. If you have a high school education or less,
you face lower earnings, higher unemployment, and all of the
BLS and other data show that the fastest-growing jobs and the
jobs that are going to be in demand over the next 10 years are
going to require postsecondary education and training.
Therefore, it seems to me that as we have this discussion,
we need to take a real hard look when it comes to job training
programs, are we actually training individuals?
The evidence to me is pretty overwhelming that the current
system as designed is not meeting this national public policy
goal. In fact, the workforce investment system, when it was
created in 1998, really had two overarching objectives, and we
have heard some of this today already.
One was to consolidate funding streams. There were many
more than there are today. And secondly, the idea was to create
One-Stop career centers where, at the local level, a variety of
programs would come together to fund that local One-Stop career
center and fund programs and services to individuals who enter
the doors of that One-Stop and access the myriad of these
programs.
The problem is we didn't go far enough. And let me just
explain what is really going on out there. We essentially, in
my opinion, have two parallel job training systems in this
country just within the Department of Labor.
The first is a State-based system called the Wagner-Peyser
Act. You hear Employment Services discussed quite a bit.
Wagner-Peyser funds the employment services. Employment
services are essentially helping somebody find a job. It is
light-touch, low-cost services.
Under a department regulation that was promulgated in the
late 1990s, these services can only be provided by State
employees, with the exception of three States where they
created a pilot program. And Colorado, Massachusetts, and
Michigan have flexibility, but nobody else does. So employment
services must be provided by State merit staff employees.
The second system we have is funded under the Workforce
Investment Act, where the monies flow to the States and then
continue and flow down to the local workforce investment
boards, the bulk of the funding streams of these three funding
streams. So, essentially, you have a locally based, locally
administered WIA system and a State-based employment service
system.
Now, the WIA system, as we have heard, authorizes three
levels of services--core, intensive, and training. The irony
is, especially with the fact that Wagner-Peyser is mandated to
be provided by State employees, is that the core services
provided by WIA by local employees are exactly the same as the
State-based employment services.
So all of the core, in particular, that you hear about are
the same as the employment services provided by the State
employees, and this has major ramifications. And I discuss this
in my testimony. I don't have a lot of time to do so today.
Under current TAA grants that are out for competition that
community colleges are applying for, it has created all kinds
of confusion because TAA, under department regulation recently
promulgated in the last year, must also be provided by only
State employees.
So what are we going to do about it? I suggest in my
written statement three overarching reform efforts. The first
is we need to radically revamp programs in order to make funds
more available for participants to enter into postsecondary
education and job training.
We did an individual training account experiment a few
years ago, and it showed that when given maximum choice,
individuals will take the training funds and will enter
appropriate training. It doesn't drive up costs, and the
employment outcomes were exactly the same as those who are
getting training through the current system.
Secondly, I do believe we need to consolidate major funding
streams. The reality is we call them--WIA a job training
program. It should not be called a job training program.
If we are lucky, right now, we are training maybe 250,000
people per year exiting out of those programs, if we are lucky.
It is training very few individuals. These millions of people
you hear getting services are primarily getting very light-
touch core services coming into the One-Stops.
Finally, I think that--well, let me also mention that we
also have a proliferation of job training programs throughout
the Federal Government right now. Department of Energy,
National Science Foundation, HHS, DOL, Department of Education,
they are all putting out postsecondary education training
grants, all over the country.
We have probably paid for things like energy efficiency
training and curriculum about 10 times over.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Bishop, I am going to go ahead.
Mr. Bishop. Yes, sorry. Yes, thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.040

Mr. Rehberg. I ask the first question, and I am going to
grant you my time to continue.
Mr. Bishop. Okay. So I can wrap up.
Mr. Rehberg. And then if you could, maybe at the same time
answer, I was going to ask you about money going to One-Stop--
--
Mr. Bishop. Yes.
Mr. Rehberg [continuing]. Versus vouchers, and I don't
think the budget has changed much since you have left. So why
don't you go ahead and finish your statement.
Mr. Bishop. Okay.
Mr. Rehberg. And then use the rest of my time to answer my
question.
Mr. Bishop. Okay. Thank you, Chairman.
And I apologize. There is a lot to get in in a short amount
of time.
Because the last thing I think we really need to ask
ourselves, if the national policy goal is to help individuals
enter postsecondary education and training, the question is,
and it gets to the One-Stop infrastructure. I have now seen in
the last 3 years, at least in one location or one State, in
Utah, that I really believe we ought to take a hard look at
whether community colleges and other education and training
institutions could also provide the One-Stop functionality.
The reality is--and I have seen this through grant
applications and other things we have done--is that community
colleges, as they get education and training grants, are trying
to figure out what is the role of the One-Stop system, the WIA
system in this?
And that role really, at its best, is to help with intake
of workers into these training programs, and then on the back
end, they help--maybe help those people get employment. But the
reality is the community colleges are also working with the
same employers the WIA system is working with. We are all
hitting up the same employers to help with curriculum and sit
on workforce investment boards and the like.
And so, to me, the reason we are not training very many
people through the WIA system is because we have this duality.
Most of the costs of the programs of WIA and Wagner-Peyser are
going to core services and to fund the infrastructure costs of
the system, building leases, personnel costs, and those kinds
of things. There is very little money left over for training.
Mr. Rehberg. And how much do you think that is?
Mr. Bishop. Well, I can tell you, if you look at the four
programs, taken together, in the $4,000,000,000 to
$5,000,000,000 in funding, and we are maybe training 250,000
people. That tells you that the bulk of that money is going to
infrastructure.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Mr. Bishop. And one of the things that can be looked at in
regulation is the definition of administrative and program
costs. I would recommend that as well because a lot of things
that could be administrative costs are actually tagged as
program costs in the program.
I don't have a dollar figure, Mr. Chairman. But it is
pretty dramatic.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. I am going to ask Mr. Besharov then a
question, and that is, in your view, have the local workforce
boards been effective in curbing unemployment, or has it been--
how would you react to--I think I know your answer. So then how
would you react to his suggestion of maybe consolidating the
functions back at the local level?
Mr. Besharov. Well, I think there has to be a major
consolidation. The question is how best to do it to create a
mission-driven--oh, my goodness, we can use cliches here--but a
mission-driven program, whether that means consolidating and
creating one program at the local level or loosening the rules
about One-Stops. My understanding is, for example, that most
States now discourage private providers from even bidding on
those programs.
Everywhere one looks, this seems to be a program, and I am
going to go beyond WIA to job training in general, a program
captured by the trainers, not the trainees. And so, I would be
extremely supportive of exploring how to undo that, whether it
is with a strengthened voucher or whether it is with a
streamlined program at the local level.
Mr. Rehberg. Could it be done with a flexible grant to the
States rather than picking winners and losers as far as a
community college or something? Could we just identify the 50
States and divide it up and give them one flexible grant?
Mr. Besharov. If you did that, I hope you ask the States to
participate in the spending. I would hate to have the States
have this money without any responsibility themselves for
this----
Mr. Rehberg. I wrote ``skin in the game'' down.
Mr. Besharov. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. So I got that message.
Mr. Besharov. It is a technical term. We talk about that at
the university all the time.
Mr. Rehberg. Yes.
Mr. Besharov. The other thing I would add, just to make
that point just a little further, we have an unemployment
insurance system that is in crisis. The States are broke, and
that is going to come back to haunt, I think, this Congress
before the next election.
And more money is going to have to go into the State
unemployment system. That will be a further time to think about
the connection between the unemployment programs and the job
training programs.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Sherrill, in about 30 seconds, do you have
anything to add?
Mr. Sherrill. I agree. I mean, looking for opportunities
for consolidation, getting input from folks on the front lines,
State and local views here. With regard to the vouchers, we
have prior experience with what was called ``career advancement
accounts,'' where three States plus some of the auto industry
areas had some pilots and demos. So I think it would be a good
idea. I don't believe that the evaluations have been publicly
issued on those to see how that could inform the discussion.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Ms. DeLauro?
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Just a couple of comments. First I have some additional
information on the subject of job training that I would like to
have put into the record.
Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.053

Ms. DeLauro. And I would also like to submit for the record
a letter from 900 businesses, expressing their support for the
current workforce system.
Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.098

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
With regard to administrative costs, an exhaustive study
conducted by Demetra Nightingale of the Urban Institute
concludes that the only way to save by consolidating job
training programs is by cutting services. Administrative costs
are so low that most of the costs in these programs are in
services.
So there is conflicting information about with regard to
administrative costs, and that report is entitled
``Administrative Cost Savings Resulting from Federal Program
Consolidation.''
I was intrigued by Mr. Bishop's comments about the
recommendation to evaluate whether community colleges, and
especially proprietary universities, can serve as One-Stop
centers. Right now, as I understand it, there are 195 One-Stops
in community colleges and that the opportunity is open to
proprietary colleges as well.
I might add with regard to the proprietary colleges, that
the U.S. Department of Education data shows higher default
rates for students who attend for-profit schools compared with
those attending public or nonprofit schools. Staggering number
of students are leaving for-profit schools, presumably many
without completing a degree or a certificate.
To boost enrollment, some for-profit schools recruit large
numbers of new students each year. Students at for-profit
colleges make up less than 10 percent of people receiving
higher education, but up to 44 percent of those defaulting on
Federal student loans.
Nearly 25 percent of all Pell grant dollars, almost double
the percentage from a decade before, go to for-profits. In
2008-2009, the three largest recipients of Federal financial
aid in the country were for-profit colleges, and on average,
they received three-quarters of their revenues from Federal
grants and loans.
Further, as I looked at the background information, your
own background information, Mr. Bishop, it appears that Phoenix
University, with which you have a relationship, that is your
employer, in essence, would benefit from the policies that you
are advocating here today.
And with regard to Pell grants, I might also add, I will
just say this. I heard your comment about Pell grants, that you
are a strong proponent of Pell grants. But there are people on
this committee who believe that Pell grants are a form of
welfare. I don't happen to view it that way. I think that they
are an opportunity to get an education.
But again, Mr. Bishop, given the data on Pell grants, where
is the evidence that the proprietary schools would make better
use of taxpayer dollars with training vouchers? I don't make up
the data about proprietary schools. Perhaps your own
association with a proprietary school could lend some
information of how that is working in the face of what the data
is with regard to those schools?
Mr. Bishop. Okay. Well, first of all, let me make clear for
the record that I am here representing myself. I started
employment with the University of Phoenix on February 14th of
2011, and none of my comments reflect their position. So let me
just say that for the record.
Ms. DeLauro. Well, but, in fact, you do have an
relationship with a for-profit school.
Mr. Bishop. Yes, right.
Ms. DeLauro. You are affiliated with a proprietary college?
Mr. Bishop. Sure, I am. Yes, I am. Proudly so.
Ms. DeLauro. Good.
Mr. Bishop. And I would say, secondly, that nothing in my
statement makes any value judgments or determination on whether
community colleges, nonprofit providers, or proprietary schools
would do better, do worse, or get any sort of amount of any of
this money.
What I suggest is, is that under the current structure of
the system, very, very few people are getting training. We have
lots of discussion. The current administration is very
supportive of trying to help individuals get postsecondary
education credentials, and this program is doing so at a very
minimal rate.
Ms. DeLauro. I want to make a----
Mr. Bishop. That is what I suggest.
Ms. DeLauro. I would like to make one other point with
regard to your comments, which is about merit staffing.
Mr. Bishop. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. And you emphasized that.
Mr. Bishop. I did.
Ms. DeLauro. Merit staffing is essentially the choice
between federal dollars supporting public employees versus
contractors. I happen to sit on the Agriculture Appropriations
Committee and used to chair that committee just about a year
ago. And the issue we dealt with was in the states of Texas and
Indiana, which contracted out their services on the food stamp
programs. Those cases became the two biggest failures that we
have had in administering the food stamp program. We spent
millions of taxpayer dollars to start that system, and now we
have to pull back.
Both states had to stop using contractors versus what were
called merit staff.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Chairman?
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is--Mr.
Chairman, my time is completed. The gentleman's time is
completed.
Mr. Bishop. May I just----
Mr. Rehberg. As a matter of courtesy, I would suggest to
the ranking member that she not misquote the chairman of this
committee. I have never said that Pell grants are a form of
welfare. And I will correct the record, and I will continue to
correct the record.
As a matter of comity, I would suggest we not enter down
that path or the minority Members are not going to enjoy this
subcommittee as well as they have enjoyed it up to this point.
Mr. Bishop, I give you the opportunity to respond.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
My comments on State merit staffing have nothing to do with
public versus private contracting. What they have to do with is
the delivery of services because under Wagner-Peyser, a local
county employee, public employee; a local city public employee;
or any other public employee who is not a State employee can't
provide Wagner-Peyser services.
So it has nothing to do with public versus private. It has
to do with only State employees providing services that other
public employees are providing through the WIA system.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Sherrill, it is doctor, isn't it? It doesn't say there.
But in your testimony, you have said that little is known about
the effectiveness of employment and training programs because
only 5 of the 47 programs reported that they had conducted any
impact study since 2004. Is that correct?
Mr. Sherrill. That is correct.
Mr. Alexander. You also say that the impact studies to
measure the success of job training programs may not be cost
effective for smaller programs. Does it make any sense at all
for Congress to continue funding programs if we don't know
whether they are working or not?
Mr. Sherrill. Well, I think this is an important issue for
you to consider as we look at opportunities for consolidation,
et cetera, because this has been a recurring theme in our work
on the Workforce Investment Act over the years. Not enough is
known about what works, what doesn't work in terms of the
research.
We have looked at the Department of Labor's research agenda
recently. We found that more accountability is needed in terms
of processes for tracking the studies, for issuing studies in a
timely way so that they can inform public policy, in terms of
getting expert input on their research agenda. So we really
think that there are more opportunities on the research front.
Mr. Alexander. The individuals that are running or working
at the One-Stop centers, what qualifications do they have to be
there? Are they professionals? Are they trained to do what they
do? Who oversees that and makes sure that they are properly
trained?
Mr. Sherrill. Well, we haven't looked specifically at the
training qualifications. Local areas have a lot of flexibility
in terms of how they set up their programs, the extent to which
they contract out for service providers, community colleges, et
cetera, and in terms of the kind of people that they use in-
house to do the programs.
The local workforce investment boards are supposed to have
a key role in overseeing the process and having employers have
an employer-driven focus there.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Note the time left,
please.
Mr. Rehberg. Duly noted.
Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. Let me thank all of you for being here, and
this is such an important issue. For so many of our
constituents who historically have been shut out of the
workplace for whatever reasons, job training is essential as a
pathway out of poverty.
In my district, and Mr. Uhalde, let me ask you about Job
Corps. In my district, well, we have a Job Corps center in
Treasure Island that serves young people in my district, and it
trains about 800 students, employs about 245 staff. One of
their emphases is on the healthcare occupations and
professions. They train students as certified nursing
assistants, licensed practical nurses, other healthcare
occupations.
Wanted to ask you about funding cuts in terms of the impact
on Job Corps' ability to train really the next generation of
healthcare workers, EKG technicians, medical assistants, dental
assistants. Because we know that the healthcare industry is a
growth industry, and so I am concerned that some of the cuts
could really stifle and stop the training for jobs that are
going to be good-paying jobs of the future.
Secondly, let me just ask you as it relates to private
sector employers, some believe that job training and readiness
programs administered by the Department of Labor really provide
virtually no benefit to private sector employees. So I would
like to ask you in terms of what your take is on how job
training and employment readiness programs have benefitted or
not benefitted private employers?
Mr. Uhalde. Thank you.
With regard to Job Corps, of course, there is the proposed
cuts in H.R. 1 that would eliminate $300,000,000 from Job
Corps' budget, and I believe there is a rescission of
$600,000,000 from the program. Those obviously will reduce the
number of students or corps members that Job Corps is able to
serve from about 70,000 to something less.
Job Corps is the one national program that we have that has
been evaluated rigorously for youth that has been able to
demonstrate a statistically significant improvement of about 12
percent in earnings up to 3 or 4 years for all the students.
And for the older students, even more. It is a program that
infuses both academic and occupational training and
instruction. It is for very difficult to serve dropout youth,
and that and a couple other programs around the country are
about the only ones that are really effective.
So we should tread carefully. Job Corps is making a lot of
improvements. They are moving more to high school diplomas
rather than GEDs, more industry-recognized credentials. So I
think that is important.
With regard to business, WIA provides a lot of services for
business. The services include rapid response services. When
businesses have mass layoffs, plant closings, States move in
and actually start engaging workers in training and placement
before they even leave the job sometimes.
Secondly is layoff aversion services for businesses. Third
is economic development partnering to help grow economies and
attract businesses. GAO in 2005 did a survey of WIA, found that
about half of employers are aware of the One-Stop system. About
three-quarters of large employers use some of the core services
for the One-Stops.
Smaller employers, about one-quarter to one-half of them
use it. And the primary use is to fill job vacancies, and about
three-quarters of employers report they are satisfied.
So it has a terribly important role, and the last thing I
would say is that it is important to get to know the needs of
business in those industry sectors so that you can translate
business needs into curriculum and training capacities in
colleges or proprietary schools. And that conversation has to
be constant, and workforce boards do that.
Ms. Lee. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Who is next? Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Oh, that would be me. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for holding the hearing today.
And thank you all for being here.
Everyone on this panel and I think everyone in Congress
knows the importance of job training. I read a report not too
many years ago that the average high school graduate is going
to have to be completely retrained for a new job, not just
upgraded skills, but a new job seven times in their lifetime.
The days of being able to graduate from high school, go to
work in the factory, and retire 50 years later are gone. In
fact, one of the most fascinating things I saw on TV a few
years ago was they asked a bunch of fifth graders what they
wanted to be when they grew up, and there was the typical
answers of fifth graders. You know, I want to be a policeman or
a fireman or whatever, or a cowboy. No, nobody said
congressman. [Laughter.]
One student answered, though, that I thought was kind of
interesting. He said, ``I don't know. I don't think it has been
invented yet.'' And that is the reality.
So we are all interested in job training. I was very
interested in the aspect of community colleges because that is
kind of where I have been focused, and I wrote it down before
you said it that community colleges are going to be more and
more important as lifelong education, not just continuing
education. But lifelong education becomes more and more
important in the future.
Let me ask you just a general question. If there was one or
two things you could do, and I will ask each of you to answer
it as briefly as you can, one or two things that you could do
to improve the job training of this country. Not necessarily
this program, but the job training in general, what would you
do?
I will start with you.
Mr. Sherrill. I think I hit the theme already in terms of
just getting better information about what works and what
doesn't and getting more of local innovation, State innovation
at that level, too, is important to look for cost efficiencies
and effectiveness.
Mr. Besharov. A number of the other witnesses have talked
about the fact that there has been research and experiments
about giving the trainees greater control of what training they
get, and that research, I think, is accepted by most analysts.
The trainees can be trusted to do as good a job as the public
employees.
And the second point I would make, since you asked for two,
I was listening to this argument about community colleges and
so forth. It is a much broader problem than that. In the UK,
the Labor government started a consolidation of job training,
unemployment, and disability programs and privatized the
provision not just of the training, but of the One-Stops.
Privatized it to the amount of 1,600,000,000 pounds a year, and
they thought it was perfectly fine to let all sorts of
qualified bidders propose to provide job training programs.
I think we ought to open up the doors to more models, and
the only way we are going to do that is to break the yoke of
this being a one kind of program nationwide.
Mr. Uhalde. Mr. Simpson, I won't repeat some of the things
that have been said. Let me say a couple things.
To draw from the evidence that has been presented on
evaluations, there are two things that make the cost of the
expenditures on training effective. One is to have a high rate
of return after one leaves the program, and the other,
particularly for dislocated workers, is to reduce the foregone
earnings that dislocated workers experience when they are in
training.
That is where I would disagree with Doug. I don't think
trainees ought to have cost sharing. They share the cost. They
give up earnings when they invest their time in training. So to
improve the outcomes, we need to have closer connections with
business and industry to have these sectoral and other
approaches that make for a steeper rise in the earnings of
individuals when they leave the programs.
And then, secondly--and this applies not only for WIA, but
for community colleges and all training programs for dislocated
workers--is we have got to recognize the time-sensitive nature
of their time. They want to get back to work.
So eliminating this semester process for community colleges
and other proprietary schools and being able to get workers
into training quickly, compressing it so they do training 5
days a week, not Tuesdays and Thursdays for an hour and a half
each day; articulate the sequence of the courses so that the
end of one course's exam qualifies you for the next course, not
some remediation.
So there are things to accelerate completion.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Bishop, since we went down the line and
you got left out, I will grant you 30 seconds to respond as
well.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
I will just say very quickly again if the goal of job
training that is funded by the Federal Government is to help
people get skills and credentials, then I think there are two
overarching things that must happen. One is we have got to stop
the proliferation of funding and appropriating millions and
billions of dollars to programs all across the Federal
Government for job training, especially in agencies and
departments that have no business being involved in job
training, and figure out how do we have a much more targeted
approach.
And secondly, I would do every single thing I could to
figure out the best ways to get funds in the hands of people to
pay tuition, fees, and those other costs. The greatest barrier
to individuals in this country right now getting access to
postsecondary education and job training is financial.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. The January 2011 GAO report notes that,
and I quote, ``Even when programs overlap, the services they
provide and the populations they serve may differ in meaningful
ways.''
Mr. Uhalde, have you found this observation of our
workforce development system to be true? And in your
experience, have you found that the program overlap documented
by the GAO leads to duplicated services across programs?
Mr. Uhalde. I think the GAO has well documented the overlap
of programs, the proliferation--I can't even say the word. But
all these programs, particularly the programs beyond the
Workforce Investment Act that are in a variety of these other
departments and agencies. But that is a lot different than
saying that any individual is getting benefits from multiple
training programs.
Most of these programs are not funded to match their
mission or their need. The Adult Program in WIA is a universal
access program. So it is going to overlap every one of the
other 46 programs. But it is not actually duplicating services.
Now the administrative efficiencies we talked about, I
think, are pretty substantial in trying to make sure that they
are coordinated and aligned, that they are pulling in the same
directions. The common performance standards that the last
administration tried to do across programs is terrific. I
failed a decade ago trying to do the same thing, and it is
important because you can't have people looking at different
goals and expect their programs to line up and be
complementary.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. And one of the reasons also is don't job
training programs, aren't they tailored to meet unique needs of
the American workforce, such as veterans, disabled workers,
low-income youth, and migrants?
Mr. Uhalde. Absolutely. You wouldn't expect general
services programs to be able to serve people with severe
disabilities, for example, in many cases. Much of the
proliferation of programs is, in fact, Native American programs
because every time we legislate a program, we have to do it for
the Indian Nation.
We have veterans programs that replicate these programs,
and I don't think this Congress is going to be eliminating
veterans employment and training services across the board. And
there are special needs that migrant seasonal farm workers, for
example, have that you need to have a program.
What we do, though, is we need to bring them within the
workforce investment system, as we do with farm workers, Native
American programs. I would advocate bringing TANF full bore
inside the One-Stop system, food stamps, employment and
training, the SNAP program. Not to eliminate these programs,
but to make sure that we use the administrative efficiencies of
workforce boards and the One-Stop and be able to align the
services so that they are complementary and not at competing
ends.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. I was very pleased that Secretary Solis
recognized the importance of rigorous evaluation and created
the Chief Evaluation Office in 2009 to increase the
department's capacity to conduct high-quality, rigorous
evaluations.
Mr. Sherrill, have you noticed any improvement since 2009
in random assignment evaluations by ETA, and how does that
compare to the years between 2001 and 2008?
Mr. Sherrill. Well, we have done, as I mentioned earlier,
reports that have focused on ETA, Department of Labor's
research program, and identified opportunities for further
improvements in that area. And we have a report that will be
issued in just a few weeks, later this month, that goes into
further detail on the steps that ETA has taken to improve its
research program and the extent to which its research
priorities reflect key national employment and training issues.
So please stay tuned for that further update on progress
there.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. And does the GAO have any reaction
to the $10,000,000 rescission from ETA's evaluation funds for
the current program year included in H.R. 1? For example, do
these cuts have the potential to delay any further the
evaluation improvements that Secretary Solis has funded and
that the GAO has recommended since 2004?
Mr. Sherrill. Well, in general, we think it is important to
have sufficient money to do the research that is needed in
these areas. We haven't looked specifically at the effects of
that.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.
Mr. Simpson. He's not here.
Mr. Rehberg. Is gone. All right. [Laughter.]
Well, Mr. Kingston, you are next.
Mr. Kingston. No, I think Mrs. Lummis is next.
Mr. Rehberg. Then Mrs. Lummis.
Mr. Kingston. One of the disadvantages of the way you keep
time and call on people is that you are fair, and it is a real
pain in the neck for those of us who come late. [Laughter.]
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to acknowledge, Dr. Besharov, I think I remember
you from the Budget Committee, a Budget Committee hearing about
a year ago, and I used to be on the Budget Committee. It is
nice to see you again.
And you had some thoughtful, innovative ideas then. I see
you do again. So I want to pursue that line of questioning, and
I would ask others to chime in as you feel motivated.
You recommend allowing trainees more say in how they are
trained and means testing the benefit on a sliding scale. And
you know means testing makes some people squeamish, but it is
an intriguing idea. And I say that because I come from the
State of Wyoming, which has been identified as one of the two
best-run States in the Nation, and we do a lot of
experimentation, and we can, quite frankly, because we are more
nimble than other States.
We have the smallest population in the Nation. And we do a
lot of joint legislative-executive projects that allow the
legislators and the executive branch to work together to try to
reform things. So could you talk a little more about how you
see that working? Especially the means testing component
because I think you apply a different connotation to that term
than sometimes we do here on Capitol Hill.
Mr. Besharov. It was my way of saying that--Thank you, by
the way, for the very kind words. And I think there were a
number of people here.
Ms. DeLauro. That were on the Budget Committee.
Mr. Besharov. Yes, yes. This is an indirect answer. Ray
talked about the fact that much of this training is on the
schedule of the trainer, not the trainee. And I have seen this
time and again.
Often the training provided under WIA, for example, is
provided during surplus hours, whether it is a community
college or some other job training program. And it is Tuesdays
for 9 months, when it could be Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, if
not Thursday and Friday. I don't want to get carried away about
this. I teach in a university. We don't want to go there.
[Laughter.]
But our students, this is a graduate school where I teach,
our students pay to sit in the room. And they get angry at us
when we cancel classes. Undergraduate students don't get angry
because their parents are paying.
Mrs. Lummis. Right. Yes.
Mr. Besharov. They have an investment in the training they
are getting, and they are taking that training because they
expect to get a better job when they graduate. That is why they
pay us to talk to them.
Something like that, without getting carried away, I think
should at least be tried--Ray just scratched the surface. I
know only a little bit about the details of the programs around
the country. But I see it wherever I look; job training
programs that are provided because they have the equipment to
do something that is no longer relevant, and the trainees don't
have a choice because it is that or nothing.
I think the trainees need to be part of the team that says
we want better training, and part of the way to do that is to
give them--those who can afford it. Now I am not talking about
people who are on welfare and so forth, but those who can
afford it to help pay for it because then I think, like the
students in my school, they will insist on a better training
experience.
I wouldn't jump into this. I would try it, though, and see
if it worked.
Mrs. Lummis. Well, thank you.
And my next question is about this proliferation of job
training programs that has been alluded to. I think 47 job
training programs across the $18,000,000,000 Federal job
training spectrum. And of course, they all develop their own
little constituencies and advocacy groups, and so consolidating
will be a challenge.
Again, referring to my own State, when we have done it,
program consolidations and trying to rationalize, State
government, we did it through these special committees, where
you had some legislators and some executive branch people and
then some people from the private sector or nonprofit community
who could contribute their thoughts as well, such as our
panelists today.
Can you, any of the panelists, in fact, any of the Members
of Congress who are here, too, offer ideas about how that can
be done successfully?
Mr. Rehberg. Your time is up. [Laughter.]
Mrs. Lummis. I was just getting rolling, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. I might point out that my staff tells me that
I was, in fact, correct. Mr. Kingston was next.
But if you want to suggest to a woman from Wyoming, a
rancher, that ladies first. Good luck. She is tough.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kingston. He is a southern gentleman.
Mr. Rehberg. Yes. You are up. Go.
Mr. Kingston. She is also on a subcommittee I might need
her vote on. [Laughter.]
And she may go over to Ms. DeLauro on some issues. So I
have to keep her happy.
But actually, where she left off, I would like to ask that
question for the record under the assumption that you would not
be able to answer it spontaneously right now. But for the next
several months, there will be continuous talk about the 47
Federal jobs training programs.
So what I would like to ask you is could you each submit if
you were the one to consolidate it, how would you consolidate
those? Would you consolidate them down to 1 or to 10, 15, or
would you expand them to 60? And if you could do that, I think
it would be enormously helpful to all of us, wherever you are
on the spectrum.
So I would like to ask that for the record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.100

Mr. Kingston. And then I want to know, Mr. Bishop, you
talked about 250,000 people who come out of the system, and I
want to get a clarification. Are you saying 250,000 actually
graduate into the workforce and have a job, as opposed to
millions who take the courses? What was that 250,000?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Kingston.
It is, right now, if you look at the ``millions of
participants'' that are getting services through the workforce
investment system, roughly 250,000 of them annually are
participating in job training services. I reference in my
written testimony that according to the last time period that
is listed on the Employment and Training Administration's Web
site, under the WIA Adult Program, only 130,000 people out of
about 1.2 million participated in actual training services.
Mr. Kingston. Well, what do the rest of them do?
Mr. Bishop. They are involved in the core services and
intensive services. It is light touch, low cost. Workers come
into the One-Stop center. They may look on the--get some
assistance with reemployment, get a referral to a job, and off
they go.
Mr. Kingston. Can you give us, probably for the record, a
breakdown of the 1.2 million? And I could see they don't need
all of it, but you are saying they do get what they want out of
it, and they move on. And do they move on to the workplace?
Mr. Bishop. Well, again, the Employment and Training
Administration's Web site and other reports have been cited,
look at the employment earnings and job retention outcomes of
various participants out of these programs.
Mr. Kingston. What I think would be of interest to this
committee is where do we get the most bang for our buck----
Mr. Bishop. Right.
Mr. Kingston [continuing]. In terms of investing it? And
then the next question is in the three States--Colorado,
Michigan, and Massachusetts--on the employment service
programs, do you have their results versus the other States?
Mr. Bishop. I do not personally know. I am not sure. Maybe
Mr. Uhalde knows if a study was done on that. He was involved
in that regulatory framework.
Mr. Kingston. How long has the pilot been going on?
Mr. Bishop. Since the late '90s, wasn't it?
Mr. Uhalde. Since the late '90s, and there is a study.
Department of Labor can----
Mr. Kingston. How does it look? How does it look?
Mr. Uhalde. My recollection is there was certainly no
difference between the three States that have pilots----
Mr. Kingston. No lessons learned? No distinction
whatsoever?
Mr. Uhalde. You know, it has been a long time. But DOL
would be glad to get that study and make it available for the
record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.111

Mr. Kingston. Yes, when we do a pilot program, it would
appear that we want to find out if there is a different way, a
better way, or a worse way, and it would appear that there
would be--that information would be readily accessible or
something that is----
Mr. Uhalde. Yes, sir. It has been a decade since I was
involved in that.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. I have a number of questions that I
will have on the second round or submit for the record. But I
don't think with the time allotted, I can start a new one. But
that is what the questions were.
Let me see, one other program. I do want to say, Mr.
Uhalde, Job Corps is privately administered in a lot of places.
Correct?
Mr. Uhalde. Yes. Each center is contracted out, and except
for a few run by Civilian Conservation Corps as I recall, type
programs or Interior and Ag.
Mr. Kingston. And those contractors, some of them do a
better job than others, we would assume?
Mr. Uhalde. That is correct. Sure, and they recompete them,
and they score them and rank them. And then some get thrown
out, and they get new contractors.
Mr. Kingston. And I think that is something that we want to
know about more because I think it would be of interest to both
parties and all philosophies that this is a situation where you
do have private contractors doing a Federal program, and you
are grading those contractors on their effectiveness.
Mr. Uhalde. Absolutely.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Dr. Besharov, you referred to the Heinrich study, and I was
going to ask you a question about that. Can you tell us a
little bit about how it was conducted and expand a little bit
more on the findings of the Dislocated Worker Program?
Mr. Besharov. Let's see, do we have about 5 hours?
Mr. Rehberg. Yes.
Mr. Besharov. So the key issue is the difference between a
randomized experiment and a statistical manipulation of data.
That is not meant to be a negative word. In particular, the
Heinrich study is called a propensity score matching study.
In a randomized experiment, we randomly assign people to a
treatment group and a control group. And the reason we do it
randomly is there are various characteristics of people that we
can't observe. They are called unobserved characteristics.
So it is not enough to say that someone is a male in
California with 3 years of experience doing this or that. There
are other things we don't observe about people, such as
motivation, and that is why we do a randomized experiment.
When a randomized experiment is not available, there are
other statistical techniques that are attempted. One is called
propensity score matching. We look at the people who are in a
program, and we try to scale how likely they were to be in a
program by whether they have 3 years of education, whether they
were men, whether they were 42, whatever it is. And then we
look statistically for people like that in the two groups and
match them.
I have already described something that involves a lot of
computer work back and forth, and it is extremely difficult, if
not impossible, to judge the quality of this work unless one
redoes it because it is a black box.
Carolyn Heinrich is one of the best researchers in the
country. I am proud, as I said, to have published this paper.
So I like it. A lot of people like it. But it is based on this
kind of research, which is, in the end, very difficult to judge
its validity. We all feel better if it is a randomized
experiment.
The Department of Labor feels better if it is randomized
experiments. Carolyn Heinrich would feel better if it was a
randomized experiment. We all feel that way.
So she did this study----
Mr. Rehberg. I am going to ask you to wrap up real quick
because I want to ask Mr. Bishop if he was there at the time.
Mr. Besharov. She did this study, and she found, like so
many other people, that the Dislocated Worker Program--and I
want to say this just yet again--was found not to be cost
effective even for the people in it, let alone the taxpayers.
And she found that the Adult Program could be cost effective,
probably.
The important thing here is let's at least do something
about the Dislocated Worker Program. Let's not defend the whole
darned thing.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Mr. Bishop, were you there at the time
of the study, or had you left already?
Mr. Bishop. What year?
Mr. Rehberg. 2008, and we are just finding out about it. We
are a little surprised about that.
Mr. Bishop. I left in 2007.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Are you familiar with the study?
Mr. Bishop. I am.
Mr. Rehberg. Could you respond to----
Mr. Bishop. Well, again, Mr. Besharov is exactly right. The
challenge we have is that on a lot of our evaluations, we don't
know if the service delivery, the service that the individual
got actually made an impact. And let me give you one example.
We talk about core services and the results of those core
services. An individual could come into a One-Stop center, get
registered in the program, meet with a career counselor, be
registered as somebody getting core and intensive services,
leave that One-Stop, go out and search for a job on his or her
own, get a job on his or her own, and get credit under the WIA
system that the WIA system helped that person get employment
because they used the unemployment insurance wage record that
that person now has as the cross-match against the WIA
participant record.
So the problem and I think what Mr. Besharov is pointing
out is without random assignment, we really don't know if that
intervention made a difference or not because there are so many
variables involved in that individual's job search. Not
speaking for him, but----
Mr. Uhalde. Could I----
Mr. Rehberg. You bet. Absolutely.
Mr. Uhalde [continuing]. Augment that? But we do know for
core and intensive services through six randomized experiments
in Texas and Washington, South Carolina, New Jersey, Minnesota,
that core and intensive services for dislocated workers where
either they are early UI claimants or getting ready to exhaust
that it speeded up the reemployment of those individuals back
to jobs, didn't harm their wage, and reduced unemployment
insurance benefits and increased the tax revenue to the public
so that these more than pay off the Government.
So 40 percent says GAO of WIA services are spent for
training. My colleague says that is not enough. We should do
more. But 60 percent are core and intensive services that are
unequivocally cost effective and get people jobs quickly.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
My time has expired. But if you have 30 seconds, do you
want to answer that or not? Probably not. Stay out of it if you
can. [Laughter.]
Mr. Rehberg. All right. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. I thank you.
I want to thank Mr. Uhalde for that comment because that is
what I wanted to press. Sixty percent is spent on core and
intensive WIA services, job search assistance and career
counseling. In addition to which with the individual training
accounts, as I understand it, you have to provide about 5 hours
of counseling before moving on to this effort, and it is that
counseling and those efforts that make this--well, you are
shaking your head no, Mr. Besharov. But it is in the data that
the 5 hours are required.
Anyway, let me move on. I don't see a lot of money flowing
these days. We are talking about $50 a person for core and
intensive training, and they have used the service. They go
there. Anybody who has gone to a One-Stop watches what these
folks are doing, and it is about $4,000 per person for
training.
I want to see where there is the impetus and where there is
the will and the openness to try to look at what we are going
to do in spending $4,000 per person in this economy, in this
budget year, when what we have seen with H.R. 1 is removing all
of the funding essentially for Federal job training programs.
I would like to again submit for the record the comment, I
have an op-ed from Carolyn Heinrich here, who says, in fact,
that the dislocated workers, as you pointed out, Mr. Besharov,
as accurate, but what continues to receive less emphasis are
the positive program effects for typically more disadvantaged
WIA Adult Program participants. So I think her op-ed in terms
of her commentary on her own research, if we can put that into
the record?
Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.112

Ms. DeLauro. On just an aside point, I will say this. Mr.
Chairman, don't take issue with the minority. I think the
people that you need to take issue with are the Huffington Post
and their recent article. And I just forward that to you
personally, and you ought to correct the record with them if
that isn't exactly what you said with regards to Pell grant.
Mr. Rehberg. If I might? And I won't take up your time.
Ms. DeLauro. This is my time. It is my time.
Mr. Rehberg. I won't take up your time.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. You said somebody suggested that Pell grants
were a form of welfare, and you will not find those words in
that at all. ``A form of welfare.''
Ms. DeLauro. It says ``are becoming the welfare of the 21st
century.'' I just want you to take issue with the Huffington
Post, not with the minority.
Mr. Rehberg. I take issue with your mischaracterization of
my quote.
Ms. DeLauro. Well, it is not. You have got to take issue
with the Huffington Post. It equates it with food stamps, with
low-income energy assistance, Section 8 housing. This is not
the purpose of this hearing, but we did talk about----
Mr. Rehberg. You brought it up.
Ms. DeLauro. I did. Because we talk about Pell grants. And
we talk about how useful Pell Grants are in terms of training
and getting an education but when we are looking at H.R. 1, it
would cut back $845 to the Pell grant program that would affect
9 million students.
Mr. Rehberg. So you are not willing to withdraw your
misstatement or mischaracterization----
Ms. DeLauro. I don't have a misstatement, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. The words ``a form of welfare'' were never
spoken.
Ms. DeLauro. I would simply direct you again to the
Huffington Post.
I want to talk about studies, Mr. Uhalde. Some of the
evidence presented today uses a quote from Barnow and Smith--
and this is Mr. Besharov's testimony--2008, to sum up evidence
on job training programs.
It looks as if the quote doesn't specifically apply to WIA
or its predecessor program, the JTPA program, J-T-P-A. Earlier
in the report, Barnow and Smith note the positive impacts of
JTPA. It was studied carefully and was found to have positive
overall results. Another specific study relating to WIA is the
impact study. It, too, finds generally positive results.
We need to find better ways to train dislocated workers.
Believe me, we have to do something about TAA, which has never
worked for dislocated workers. But generally, there is positive
results on training efforts.
And we looked at the literature. There is a study that was
done for the World Bank by two eminent economists and former
chief economist at the Labor Department, and the study is
``What We Know About the Impacts of American Employment and
Training Programs on Employment, Earnings, and Educational
Outcomes.''
Its summary, and I am quoting this--this is not my words.
``It is one of the best of the large body of quantitative
literature on the effectiveness of American training and
employment services in improving labor market outcomes,
complementary of U.S. training programs for disadvantaged
adults and job search assistance.''
What is concerning to me is the notion that we should be
stepping away from the WIA program and from providing a
significant Federal commitment in this policy area during
difficult economic times. With the weight of the evidence,
should we be stepping away from the WIA program and what it is
doing in an effective way in terms of job training in these
times?
Mr. Uhalde. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Well, clearly, in my statement, I say, no, we shouldn't be
stepping away. I think the weight of the evidence--I think the
weight of the evidence for adults is positive and generally
positive. Doug can barely get those words out, but it is. It is
positive.
Mr. Besharov. I can't use the button. That is all.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Uhalde. And that is one where you can go back to the
randomized experiment in JTPA for disadvantaged adults, and
JTPA is clearly positive and returns $1.50 for every $1
invested by the taxpayer for training and employment services
for disadvantaged adults.
The problem we have is making dislocated worker training
more effective. I have suggested a couple things. I would also
endorse a couple things that we have done, trying to better
link unemployment insurance with training for dislocated
workers that is making sure that workers can get training while
they are on unemployment insurance, which the Obama
administration tried to do.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Uhalde. And Pell grants, trying to make them useful for
adults because they are designed for 18- to 24-year-olds.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Alexander? Then Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Oh, is it my turn?
Mr. Rehberg. No, but I am going to go to you next.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. What about Ms. Lee? Don't we have----
Mr. Rehberg. Well, he passed. Mr. Alexander passed.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I would like to pick up that line of questioning that
I had to drop earlier because I was too verbose, and it has to
do with consolidating these programs. How do you recommend that
we consolidate?
And an additional comment on Indian programs because I used
to also be on the Natural Resources Committee, and I note that
Indians have to go through the BIA and the agency of substance
for everything. So they have an additional hoop for everything,
and that seems completely ridiculous for the Indian nations as
well.
So could you, anybody, jump in and comment, how do you
recommend we go about this?
Mr. Uhalde. I won't suggest programs. I will suggest that
there have been attempts. Back in '98, we tried to consolidate
more than we did under Workforce Investment Act. Fundamental
problem is the committee jurisdictions in the Congress.
We have proliferation of programs across agencies. They
proliferate across these committee jurisdictions, and it is
very difficult for the HELP Committee in the Senate to reach
over to the Finance Committee and do something about welfare
reform and TANF, for example.
So it is somewhat easier in the House, and the issue may be
that one way these things have been dealt with in the past is
to have a committee, a special committee set up in the Congress
that draws from the various committees to address an issue like
this.
Mrs. Lummis. And then I would ask some of our veteran
Members of Congress, have any of you ever participated in one
such committee before?
Do they happen? Do they work? Does anybody----
Wow, nobody has.
Mr. Besharov. Well, I think the healthcare bill moved
through the House that way.
Mr. Kingston. Yes, healthcare did that.
Ms. DeLauro. We have committees of the whole on the floor.
We did that with regard to healthcare. We dealt through
healthcare, we dealt with that kind of----
Mrs. Lummis. Oh, but you know, you didn't have committees
where what is being suggested here is where the various
committees of jurisdiction over job training programs that are
peppered throughout Government getting together and saying we
think this one works better than this one or consolidating----
Ms. DeLauro. Well, sure. You have got a recent proposed
transfer, I think, of the elderly community service program. It
is moving from Labor to HHS.
Mrs. Lummis. And how did that come about?
Ms. DeLauro. I am going to just assume that there were
conversations--yes, well, I am just told this, that the
administration has task forces like that. I can give you some
examples with regard to food safety. You and I should talk
about this because I have been wanting to consolidate the 15
agencies into one single food safety agency. We now have 15
today that deal with food safety. So there is always an
opportunity to consolidate.
But you are looking at a number of places, particularly
with this budget proposal that has come out in various areas,
which looks at consolidating a number of programs. And the
agency task force on food safety, it is Ag, it is HHS, and
there is maybe one or others who are discussing this.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay. Well, I will talk to you about the Ag
programs. How could we replicate that on job training programs?
Any thoughts?
Mr. Besharov. Here is why we are having this argument about
the effectiveness of WIA. In 1994, when the Republicans last
took over, we had a proliferation of childcare programs. And
one of the first things they did was to collapse and coordinate
them.
Now I think everyone agrees that the coordination and the
consolidation was good. There is an argument about how much
money was put in and so forth. Here, the reason I think there
is an argument about WIA is the question: What does the future
of job training look like?
If you are satisfied with WIA, you consolidate by putting
everything in WIA. If you are not satisfied with WIA, and with
all due respect, I am not satisfied. It doesn't matter whether
it is a little effective or not, it is not enough effective.
And I would, like Mr. Uhalde, look at food stamp training. I
would look at the coordination with Pell grants and student
loans because that helps drive this.
And I would look at the unemployment program, and I would
think about wrapping that up in a program to meet the skills
mismatch in this country.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Lee, before we begin, I am told by staff that
subcommittees do it the way I suggested. If somebody passes, it
goes to the next on this side. That is how I will run this
committee. I apologize if there was some confusion. It was not
intended as a slight, and that will be the rule from here on
out.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much.
Let me ask Mr. Uhalde again, I just want to ask a little
bit more about the budget cut implications for YouthBuild, the
reintegration of ex-offenders, dislocated workers. In many
communities, populations of people really and our constituents
need job training. Of course, ex-offenders so that they have
the skills so they can move forward and get a job and not go
back to prison.
Our young people need the types of job training and skills.
Some will or some may or may not go to college. Many now are
helping with their families, paying the rent, buying food. And
what just overall are the implications of these cuts?
And also what is the status of our summer youth job
program? We tried last year to bump up to about $3,500,000 for
summer youth jobs. We never were able to get that done. And
what is going to happen this summer?
Mr. Uhalde. Thank you, Ms. Lee.
With regard to YouthBuild and the reentry and ex-offender
programs, the budget would zero out YouthBuild. It proposed a
significant reduction in the ex-offenders.
These are particularly unfortunate because we are finding
for ex-offender programs that, in fact, not only are they
becoming effective in getting employment for ex-offenders, but
because of that, it reduces recidivism. So you can look at
these as public safety programs, crime reduction programs, by
helping workers be able to get jobs who are ex-offenders.
YouthBuild has not had a random assignment evaluation, but
something that is suggestive of their youthful offender program
that also shows promise. And now the department has launched a
random assignment experiment, and hopefully, it will confirm
those results and others.
Summer jobs--Recovery Act provided $1,200,000,000 to the
department in February, and the department launched or the
workforce system at the local level launched 350,000 summer
jobs in a remarkable achievement. They recruited all the
employers for that.
There is not a request, as far as I know, from the
administration for continued funding for summer employment. But
we need to look at it. We are at nearly 10 percent
unemployment. It is depression-era unemployment for young
people in this country. The employment rates are disastrous for
young people.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lee, if you would yield back some of your
time, we could get the last two Members before we have to go
vote.
Ms. Lee. Sure.
Mr. Rehberg. Because we can't come back. It is up to you.
Ms. Lee. Okay. That is fine.
I will just ask you later why the administration didn't
request funding for summer youth jobs.
Mr. Rehberg. And the record will remain open.
Mr. Kingston.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I wanted to say for the record and those who
have been listening to the discussion about the chairman's
comments on a radio program, which was reported by the
Huffington Post. I have got the transcript, and I am going to
quote for the record. I believe these are your words.
``I am not suggesting that college students are welfare
recipients. I am just saying that the program itself is
expending so quickly, it is moving beyond the Federal
Government's ability to pay. And the reason, as I understand
it, is that the Pell grants are going from $19,000,000 to
$43,000,000 in a Department of Education budget that is only
$48,000,000.''
So, to me, I want to associate myself with your remarks
because I think they are critical and that we are spending
$11,000 in Pell grants per student if, right now, it is
nationwide there are 9 million students on there. And they can
be in school as long as 9 years with no requirement that they
get a degree and that there is discretionary money in the
program after they have paid for tuition, books,
transportation, supplies, and room and board.
So I think it is something that, given an increase of
anything that goes from $19,000,000 to $43,000,000, we do have
to look at. So I just wanted to clarify that, as I understand
it.
Also I wanted to ask for the record, I am concerned, are
you guys--I know earned income tax credit does not come under
your department, but do you coordinate with earned income tax
credit? Because if the Hollenbeck study shows that the average
wage for people getting out of WIA is $16,000 a year and kind
of the public assistance package, if you will, is about $20,000
a year, then for many people who go through job training, there
is no incentive. You have to have that earned income tax
credit.
But do you guys talk to each other? Is there a
coordination?
Mr. Rehberg. If you could answer very quickly, I want to--
--
Mr. Kingston. Then you know what? Let me ask you for the
record, the other thing I want to mention also is I understand,
I saw a statistic yesterday that really shocked me that from
2008 to 2010, 1.1 million jobs went to migrant workers, 35
percent who were illegal aliens. But 1.1 million jobs went to
migrant workers.
And as we look at a 10 percent unemployment rate and an
inner-city unemployment rate and a youth unemployment rate
which are maybe twice to three times that number, certainly
that has got to be something that is of concern, too, as we
look at the job situation----
Mr. Rehberg. Could we get that for the record?
Mr. Kingston [continuing]. And I would like to have your
comments. And also, Mr. Chairman, if we ask a question for the
record, we will have an answer before the markup. Correct?
Mr. Rehberg. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard, you are the last. Yes?
Ms. Roybal-Allard. I would like to yield 30 seconds to the
ranking member.
Ms. DeLauro. I think the Chairman needs to really take
issue with Huffington Post because in the way they have
characterized his remarks. Look, I have been often
mischaracterized in a whole variety of publications, on the
radio or elsewhere. But in this radio interview, it says he
compared Pell grants to welfare.
Mr. Rehberg. And I do take issue with her. But I did not
want to bring Huffington Post in as any kind of a----
Ms. DeLauro. Well, but I mean, it is a publication that is
a reputable publication. Maybe some don't regard it that way.
And I have taken my 30 seconds.
Ms. Roybal-Allard, your question?
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Mr. Uhalde, Mr. Bishop's testimony
suggests that revamping the job training system in a way that
targets less funding to staff-assisted and counseling services
and more to helping participants pay for the costs of
postsecondary education and training would be a good way to go.
As I understand it, among the unemployed 25 and older, 2.1
million have a bachelor's degree or more; 2.7 million have
attended some college, including those who have completed an
occupational or vocational program; 3.5 million have only a
high school degree; and 1.6 million do not have a high school
degree.
Given the different educational level of the participants,
are there benefits to having both training and counseling
services provided by WIA, and how do you think reducing
counseling services, what kind of an impact will that have on
the ability to support and train job seekers and get them into
the workforce?
Mr. Uhalde. You know, the One-Stop career centers see a
range of people. I think Mason is correct in saying that we
shouldn't call WIA a job training program because it is both an
employment and training program.
And that means that it has to do a diagnostic, an
assessment of everybody that comes in, and try and help those
people decide what services are best for them. WIA doesn't
rubberstamp everybody and tell them what kind of service they
need. WIA offers a menu, and people decide.
The counseling, as all of these six experimental studies
have shown, is enormously valuable for those people that it is
appropriate for. That is, counseling, job referrals, job
placement, and those things.
If we want to beef up training, which I don't think anybody
would object, it shouldn't come at the expense of those
services. It should come in addition, and that means getting
money from somewhere else. And since Congress won't appropriate
new monies, we should probably look where it is best to bring
other resources in.
Mr. Rehberg. I apologize for us having to leave. We will
begin debating the CR afterwards. So, again, we can't.
The record will remain open for additional questions, and
we would expect timely answers to those questions, as stated,
before the markup of the subcommittee.
Thank you very much.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.123

Wednesday, April 13, 2011.

EXAMINING FRAGMENTATION AND OVERLAP OF FEDERAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS

WITNESS

GEORGE A. SCOTT, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION, WORKFORCE, AND INCOME SECURITY
ISSUES, UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Rehberg. Welcome. It is a pleasure to have you before
our committee. As I suggested, we are only scheduled to go
until noon. I doubt if it is going to take that long. Since you
are the only witness, I am not going to turn the clock on on
your opening statement, but I am going to turn it on for Ms.
DeLauro now. No, not really.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Scott.
As I said last month at our hearing on Medicare payments, I
think everyone in this room agrees that our government should
be as efficient as possible, and the hard work of the
Government Accountability Office helps us to make that happen.
Time and again, GAO research has helped us to fulfill our
oversight responsibilities to see that the American taxpayers'
dollars are being spent as wisely as possible. So I want to say
a thank you to the office for compiling this report, and
especially to you, Mr. Scott, Director of Education, Workforce,
and Income Security at the GAO. I am again delighted that you
are here today.
The report before us today looks to pinpoint overlapping
responsibility and possible duplication in our Federal
education and job-training efforts. We are specifically looking
at education today and the programs that are designed to
improve teacher quality. In drawing our attention to where
repetition and fragmentation exists, this report is beneficial.
I agree with the concept that overlapping and duplicative
mandates can degrade the quality of the Federal Government's
response. For example, I know from my own work on food safety,
that responsibility for keeping our food supply safe and
uncontaminated is spread across 15 different departments and
agencies. This is 14 agencies too many, and it is one of the
main reasons why I have called for a single food agency,
because duplication in this regard increases costs and
increases redtape.
All of that being said, it would seem to me that the real
question before us today is whether overlapping and duplication
are one and the same thing. We need to delve deeper into the
GAO findings, better understand what each of these terms mean
and how GAO uses them. As the report states, quote, ``Some
overlap can occur unintentionally, but it is not necessarily
wasteful.'' In other words, while some of the teacher-quality
programs may overlap in intent, they may not necessarily do so
in execution. As such, we need to examine what exactly these
education programs are intended to do and whether or not they
are effective at reaching their goals. With such a great
emphasis placed on teacher quality today and education reform
efforts, it is imperative that we get this right. I hope this
is something we can work towards today.
Also, as the report states, the administration has already
begun the process of consolidating overlapping programs. For
example, both the President's 2012 budget and his
reauthorization proposal of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act argue for condensing and consolidating many of
these programs. I presume these decisions are being made after
careful study. And although not the purview of this
subcommittee, I hope we will take advantage of the Secretary
and his staff's expertise on these matters before making any
decisions. I would also hope in discussing these potential
consolidations of programs today that we all share the same
goal of making the Federal Government's role in education more
and not less effective.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member DeLauro, and
members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss what is known about fragmentation and overlap among
teacher quality programs. In 2009, the Federal Government spent
over $4,000,000,000 to improve teacher quality. Based on our
recent work, we identified 82 distinct programs designed to
help improve teacher quality. However, there is no
governmentwide strategy to minimize potential duplication among
these programs. We believe that the Congress can take steps to
help address this issue by considering options such as
requiring improved evaluations of programs and consolidating
existing programs.
Federal efforts to improve teacher quality have led to the
creation of a variety of programs across the government.
Specifically, we identified 82 programs administered across 10
Federal agencies designed to help improve teacher quality
either as a primary purpose or as an allowable activity. Many
of these programs share similar goals. For example, 9 of the 82
programs support improving the quality of teaching in science,
technology, engineering, and math, and these programs are
administered across 5 Federal agencies. Further, in fiscal year
2010, the majority of these programs we identified received
$50,000,000 or less in funding, and many have their own
separate administrative structures.
The increased number of programs has resulted in
fragmentation that can frustrate efforts to administer programs
in a comprehensive manner, limit the ability to determine which
programs are most effective, and ultimately increase costs. For
example, 8 different education offices administer over 60 other
Federal programs supporting teacher quality.
While all the Federal programs we identified support
teacher quality efforts, several overlap. For example, we found
that 14 of the programs administered by Education overlapped
with at least 1 other program in terms of sharing similar
objectives, serving similar target groups, or funding similar
activities.
While a mixture of teacher-quality programs can target
services to underserved populations and yield innovations, the
current programs are not structured in a way that enables
policymakers to identify the most effective practices.
According to Education officials, it is typically not cost-
effective to allocate the funds necessary to conduct rigorous
evaluations of small programs. Therefore, many of these
programs are unlikely to be evaluated. Also, it is more costly
to administer multiple separate Federal programs because each
program often has its own policies, applications, and reporting
requirements.
As this subcommittee considers spending priorities and
options to address potential duplication, approaches you can
consider include enhancing program evaluations, fostering
coordination across programs that span multiple Federal
agencies, and consolidating existing programs. Information
about the effectiveness of programs can help guide policymakers
in making tough decisions about how to prioritize the use of
resources and improve the efficiency of existing programs.
However, in 2009, we reported that while evaluations had
been conducted for many or some of the teacher quality programs
we identified, little is known about the extent to which most
of them are achieving their desired results. Recognizing the
importance of program evaluations, Education has proposed to
increase the number of its discretionary programs that use
evaluations and implement rigorous evaluations of its highest-
priority programs and initiatives.
In addition to improving program evaluation, Congress can
foster coordination for programs that cross Federal agencies.
For example, Congress can establish requirements to ensure that
Federal agencies are working together on common teacher quality
goals.
Finally, Congress may choose to combine programs serving
similar target groups into a larger program. To the extent that
overlapping programs can continue, it is important that they be
better aligned to ensure that they are complementary rather
than duplicative.
In conclusion, reducing fragmentation and overlap among
Federal teacher quality programs is clearly challenging. These
are difficult issues to address because they may require
agencies and the Congress to reexamine the structure, funding,
and performance of a number of programs or activities. In light
of these challenges, sustained attention and oversight by the
Congress will be critical.
This concludes my prepared remarks. I will be joined today
by Bryon Gordon, Assistant Director with us at GAO. He is one
of our K-thru-12 education experts. We would be pleased to
answer any questions you may have at this time. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.138

Mr. Rehberg. What areas identified in the report have the
greatest potential for immediate savings? Of course, I really
appreciate your report, and it was meaningful. We don't want to
do damage, obviously, to any of our training programs in any of
our areas of improvement for our teachers. However, as you know
and you have summarized pretty well, we have a financial crisis
looming, whether we want to admit it or not. So we are going to
have to look at immediate midterm and long-term solutions. Most
of the long-term solution is going to occur in the authorizing
committees. As far as immediate savings, are there some areas
that you can identify?
Mr. Scott. One of the challenges we faced in doing this
work, is that it is often difficult to identify particular
savings resulting from consolidating programs. However, as I
noted, the Department has put forward a proposal to start to
consolidate some of these programs--I believe 38 into
approximately 11. So, from our perspective, at least that
provides a common ground or a start of a discussion about where
we can go in terms of potentially consolidating some future
programs.
One of the challenges with identifying particular savings
is that oftentimes administrative costs related to
administering programs are not readily available in many
instances. So although there may be some efficiencies gained,
identifying particular cost savings can be challenging.
Mr. Rehberg. Of the 38 that are going into 11, your use of
the $50,000,000 or less was hard to evaluate. Are all of those
38 that are being recommended being consolidated at $50,000,000
or less?
Mr. Gordon. No, they are not. For example, they include the
Improving Teacher Quality State Grant program, which is a large
program, nearly $3,000,000,000.
Mr. Rehberg. Again, there will always be some controversy
about the private sector, but are there some savings that might
be able to be foreseen in the short term with better
coordination with the private sector?
Mr. Scott. We don't address the issue of better
coordination with the private sector in our work. One of the
things we do point out is there can be some opportunities
across various Federal agencies to improve coordination. GAO
has done some work that speaks to this idea that to the extent
you have common performance goals, common performance measures,
to the extent agencies are coordinating in terms of their
strategic planning to ensure that the programs across various
agencies better align, I think there are clearly some
opportunities to do better in that area.
Mr. Rehberg. There are only so many areas that we have the
ability to have oversight. The question always comes about the
Recovery Act dollars; the cost of applying for the grants. Have
you done much as far as these grants to make a determination
how much the grantee is having to spend to apply?
Mr. Scott. I know that is a question that frequently arises
across a number of these competitive education grants. We are
actually doing a couple of studies currently that we are hoping
to report out this summer that may help address some of those
questions. We are currently reviewing the Race to the Top
program, which is a statutory mandate, and we are also
conducting some work looking at the School Improvement Grants
for the Senate Appropriations Committee. By the end of this
year, early next year, we will have some work that might speak
to this issue of not only the costs related to applying for
these applications, but also the capacity of State and local
education agencies to apply for these grants.
Mr. Rehberg. Are you going to be looking at the rate of
return for the States on the Race to the Top, or is that
outside the purview or your evaluation?
Mr. Scott. The Race to the Top work we are currently doing
now is an early look at the Department's implementation of the
program. We have visited a number of States. We will have some
insights in terms of the State experience. But the primary
focus of this initial study is looking at the Department of
Education's early implementation of the program.
Mr. Rehberg. Beyond the 38 to 11, are you going to be
making additional recommendations?
Mr. Scott. Not at this time.
Mr. Rehberg. So if we were to request a follow-up GAO
investigation, there would be that opportunity or possibility?
Mr. Scott. We would be happy to discuss with you future
work in this area. I would point out, though, that the
consolidation proposal is by the administration. We did not
recommend any specific proposal.
Mr. Rehberg. Great.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Scott, I would like to know if you can discuss the
distinction between administrative duplication and programmatic
duplication and how such a difference is applicable to your
findings regarding the teacher quality programs. Does this
report distinguish between the two? Also, I know I would find
it useful to go through the definitional difference between the
terms ``fragmentation,'' ``duplication,'' and ``overlap.''
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro.
In terms of the framework we use to look at these programs,
when we use the term ``fragmentation,'' we are talking about
instances where programs serve the same broad area of national
need, but are administered across different offices or
agencies. So that is fragmentation. That is the first step. You
have a number of programs across a number of agencies or a
number of offices within the Department. So that is the first
step.
The second step concerns overlap, and that is an instance
where you have multiple agencies or programs that have similar
goals engage in similar activities or strategies to achieve
them or target similar target groups. So that is the second
step.
Finally, and what we discussed very broadly or generally in
our report, is that the next step is duplication, where you
actually have the same programs doing the same thing and the
benefits being received by the same folks.
As we point out very carefully in our report, we used the
phrasing ``potential duplication,'' because in the course of
our work, we did not actually find duplication of the programs.
So we are always very careful to phrase it in terms of
potential duplication.
Ms. DeLauro. So you found no duplication. Would duplication
then be indicative? Because when the chairman asked you the
question about savings and duplication, I just think of an
example where we have two efforts to put together an engine for
the Joint Strike Fighter. This is in defense. It was the same
thing. Now, that I would regard as a duplication. We are
spending money for the two pieces. So you didn't find
duplication.
Mr. Scott. Correct.
Ms. DeLauro. I heard your answer. It was difficult to gauge
savings, you said, in terms of looking at this. Were you able
to identify any cost savings to be achieved through
consolidation? Where did you find specific examples of
taxpayers' dollars being wasted that we might address through
the appropriations process?
Mr. Scott. In terms of specific waste, we did not look at
this at a program-by-program level. Our work was focused on
more generally the potential for, for example, administrative
savings and efficiencies. If you talk to the folks at the
Department of Education, they very clearly point out that to
the extent you have multiple programs even within the
Department, it does present challenges to them in administering
those programs. I think that is partly the reason why they are
putting forth this consolidation proposal, because they
recognize to the extent you have fewer programs that you have
to administer, it can also increase your effectiveness in terms
of administering the fewer programs, as well as help you better
target, for example, technical assistance to grantees.
Clearly, there are trade-offs here, but from the
perspective of the Department, and we certainly concur with
their thinking, to the extent that you can start to consolidate
some of these programs, it will better position the Department
to more effectively administer and oversee the remaining
programs.
Ms. DeLauro. Many of the teacher-quality programs, as I
understand it, cover many different areas. For example, you
have got teacher preparation, professional development and
incentives for teachers to work in high-need schools. These are
diverse programmatic goals. Can you elaborate on how
consolidating or eliminating some of these programs will still
allow for these areas to be covered? Or can you elaborate on
how we can consolidate or eliminate these programs without
compromising their ability to cover these areas?
Mr. Gordon. In terms of consolidating and making sure that
the intent of the underlying programs that are being
consolidated are kept, I do think the Department in its
proposal for consolidation goes through and makes the case for
the programs that are being consolidated how grantees that are
benefiting from them could access those same types of services
under these new programs. That is not something that we
analyzed specifically, but I do think in terms of taking a look
and making sure there is no unintended consequences of the
consolidation, that is an area that warrants looking at more
closely.
Ms. DeLauro. And is that something you are going to be
embarking on at someone's request, or do you do that?
Mr. Scott. We don't have any additional work planned on
teacher quality, but to the extent there is continuing
interest, we would be happy to discuss with you further
potential work you would like us to do.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just out of
curiosity, since much of this is really outside of our purview
as an appropriations committee, has the authorizing committee
asked you to testify before it on any of this, or have you done
any reports with the authorizing committee on this?
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
Actually, the Comptroller General was before the House
Education and the Workforce Committee last week, testifying
both on the teacher quality programs as well as the employment
and training programs. And one of my colleagues, Andy Sherrill,
was here last week testifying on those programs. So last week
the Comptroller General did testify before the House Education
and the Workforce Committee.
Mr. Simpson. I hope they take that seriously as they do the
reauthorization that is coming up. This is an example, and it
is not just the only one; there are multiple across government.
I think Ranking Member DeLauro mentioned food-quality programs
earlier. I am chairman of the Interior Appropriations
Committee, and it seems like every single agency has specific
money to do climate-change studies, but there is no overall
strategy of climate change. And I have thought of consolidating
all of the climate-change money into a line item that is
probably overseen by USGC or somebody else like that so we can
get some coordination between all the different agencies within
the government in terms of climate change; sort of the same
thing that Ms. DeLauro is thinking about with food safety. I
could go on with example of example after example of this type
of thing.
The first day I was on this subcommittee or on the
Appropriations Committee, the first hearing I went to, there
was an agency that we fund that does grants for small
businesses to help them--low-interest loans, this kind of
stuff. And I knew that there were other programs like that, and
I had never heard of this one. I asked the guy how many
programs there were that did essentially the same thing. He
said, I don't really know. Afterwards, a lady came up to me and
said, I do a conference on these types of programs, and there
are 43 different programs that do essentially the same thing.
Each one of them have a little different twist. This one is in
the agricultural area, this one has minority population focus
and stuff. I said, why couldn't you consolidate those into a
program, because it makes it confusing for the constituents out
there, when they are looking for a loan, where to go? The guy I
was talking about actually was looking for a loan to start a
small business and got it from the Department of Agriculture.
Nobody would have ever thought of going there. You say that
they are looking at consolidating--out of these 82 distinct
programs designed to improve teacher quality, consolidating 38
to 11 in this budget.
Mr. Scott. Correct.
Mr. Simpson. That is a start. But in my count, that leaves
55 that do essentially the same thing. Has anybody talked about
blowing up the system--and I only mean that in rhetorical
terms--and saying, the way this grows is every time we
reauthorize a program, we add a new program, a new provision,
and usually with some Senator's name attached to it, as a new
program. Whether it duplicates or not, it is a new program that
we start.
I would like to see somebody step back and say, okay, if we
didn't have a program for teacher quality, none existed, what
would we do to put one into place that made sense for the
American people, for education, for our Federal budget? Is
anybody doing that that you are aware of?
Mr. Scott. As I mentioned, the Department, to its credit,
has put forward a proposal to start some consolidations of a
number of programs. Additionally, one of the things the
Department has done and is committed to doing is looking to
obtain funds for additional evaluations of programs. One of the
consistent messages you will hear from us at GAO is about the
importance of conducting rigorous evaluations of various
programs and activities so that we have a better sense of what
works and what doesn't. To the extent we can conduct those
evaluations, we may get a better sense, of those programs we
might want to consider continuing. Likewise, for those that are
not achieving the desired outcomes. Clearly, that is a topic
for discussion about to what extent, if at all, do you want to
continue to fund those kinds of programs.
In addition to the Department of Education proposal to do
more rigorous evaluation, we also think it is important for
agencies across the Federal Government to think more
strategically and work more collaboratively across the various
programs. For example, we are currently doing some work looking
at STEM education. When we reported on this 6 years ago, we
found that there were over 200 STEM programs across 13 Federal
agencies, spending about close to $3,000,000,000. Once again,
to the extent that those Federal agencies can better
coordinate, at least that will start to address some of the
challenges in terms of ensuring these programs are working
effectively and not unnecessarily overlapping or duplicating
each other.
Mr. Simpson. One of the real challenges you have, and I
found it on our side of the aisle, and I am sure it is true on
the other side of the aisle, is that when someone proposes
something like this, as the President is proposing, every one
of these programs builds up its own constituency. It is
difficult to overcome that, but we have to do that.
Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you, Director Scott, for your presentation. I want
to make it very clear that whether we are Ds or Rs, all of us
agree on the need to eliminate ineffective or unnecessary
programs. We have to be good stewards of taxpayer dollars and
maximize resources. In fact, I remember this was a key
initiative of Al Gore way back when.
I am very pleased that you are focusing on this now. There
are, however, some members of the committee who may truly
believe that the Federal Government should have a more limited
role in education, and that Federal programs are duplicative of
State and local programs. Frankly, I would like to invite
anyone with that point of view, come to Yonkers. It faces a
potential 37 percent workforce reduction for next school year.
That comes on the heels of having to lay off 187 teachers and
employees before this school year began.
So I just think we want good programs, effective programs,
but more than ever our schools do need Federal assistance,
including teacher quality programs. I guess if there were a
cookie-cutter approach to teacher quality, for those of us who
have been working on this issue way back when I was a PTA
president, we would be doing it. So the large number of teacher
quality programs is testament to the essential role teachers
play in education. And we have a responsibility not to waste
money, but to give the teachers the tools that they need.
I was very interested in your mentioning 200 STEM programs
because I do think teacher quality programs should be provided
and tailored for specific fields. For instance, STEM education
is so vital to our economic future, we need to do a better job
providing assistance to teachers in science, technology, math,
the first two of which are ever-changing.
Looking at the numbers, 31 percent of public school
students in fifth through eighth grades are taught math by a
teacher with a degree or certificate in math. The physical
sciences, it is only 7 percent. And these are difficult fields
to master, but we have to focus on how do we help these
teachers in tough budgets. That is why I am a strong supporter
of helping teachers in STEM fields. In fact, when it comes to
Teachers for a Competitive Tomorrow, which helps universities
establish undergraduate programs leading to bachelor's degrees
in STEM fields with teacher certification, more than
$450,000,000 has been authorized just last year. We only
appropriated $2,000,000. So maybe we have to look at that
adjustment--$450,000,000 authorized, $2,000,000--when this is a
key area where we really need help.
Now, we know we have to reduce, get rid of as best we can,
unnecessary duplication, but I don't think it is a bad idea to
have one program for STEM teachers and another for English
teachers. So my question is, I know that a program with
duplication is the difficulty. The problem with duplication is
difficulty comparing programs. Can you tell us, of the 200 STEM
programs, which ones have been most effective? Are you looking
at eliminating some, and if so, which ones? And how are you
making that determination?
Mr. Scott. The number I cited from STEM programs is from
work we conducted and issued a report back in 2005. We are
currently doing some work for Chairman Kline, the House
Education and the Workforce Committee, where we are attempting
to look to, first of all, update the numbers in terms of the
number of STEM programs, the number of agencies, and the amount
that is being spent on those programs. We are also----
Mrs. Lowey. Do you know, by the way, of the 200 programs
about how much is spent cumulatively on them?
Mr. Scott. I believe, from the report we did in 2005, it
was about $3,000,000,000. I think most of that was spent by NIH
and the National Science Foundation. As I said, those numbers
are dated. As I mentioned, we are in the process of updating
that report.
In addition of better understanding the number of programs,
the number of agencies and dollars spent, we are also looking
at those programs in the same framework. We are going to try to
determine to what extent there is the fragmentation, overlap,
and potential duplication in those programs. Our plan is to
report out late this year, early next year, on that. We
anticipate it will be the part of the next round of overlap
duplication reports that we will be issuing next spring. So
stay tuned.
Mrs. Lowey. I look forward to it. The sooner you can get
that information out--I think you see support on both sides of
the aisle. And I truly thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your testimony. With all these programs--and
kind of leading on with what Chairman Simpson was saying--we
seldom see these consolidations occur unless there is either a
threat of withholding funds or some kind of cutback; is that
not right? Is that the case? Or, do we see these actually take
place, these consolidations, without that hammer?
Mr. Scott. As I acknowledged before, while we certainly
haven't specifically evaluated the Department of Education's
proposal in terms of at least taking a positive step forward, I
would certainly like to acknowledge the Department for doing
that. That said, that does leave a broad number of other
programs across other agencies where those agencies haven't
taken those steps thus far. And so clearly that is one place to
start at, in addition to looking at the Department's proposal.
There can be opportunities for you all to hold other
agencies accountable for their programs; for example, requiring
them to, to the extent they fall under the jurisdiction of your
committee, provide more detailed information in their budget
justifications about the programs, what is known about the
effectiveness of those programs. You might also build in some
requirements, for example, they actually do conduct some
rigorous evaluations of those programs.
So clearly for those agencies with teacher quality programs
within your jurisdiction, there are opportunities for you all
to directly hold them accountable for the activities they are
undertaking and see to what extent they are trying to
coordinate with the Department of Education and other agencies.
Mr. Flake. Your focus has been on the Department of
Education here, but have there been other GAO studies on the
other agencies, and is one agency doing more effective analysis
and monitoring and some kind of metrics of their results? Are
any other agencies, to your knowledge, doing it better than the
Department of Education?
Mr. Gordon. In terms of program evaluations? Well, in terms
of program evaluations, we looked at the Department of
Education, HUD, and HHS in a study that we did last year, and
actually the Department of Education does have some good
practices in terms of how it plans for them and carries out its
program evaluations. We can certainly provide you with some
more details on what we found in that report.
Mr. Flake. Do I infer that the others do not?
Mr. Gordon. For that study what we looked at is we looked
at agencies that we call the mature agencies in terms of
program evaluations. We didn't look at other agencies to say in
terms of what the best practices were. But we did see some
consistent practices across those agencies in terms of how they
plan for and carry out their program evaluations. For example,
with the Department of Education, one thing that they do is
they tie their planning process into their budgeting process to
make sure they have the resources to carry out their plans. So
they do have certainly some good practices at the Department of
Education.
Mr. Flake. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. One of the things that we always try and do,
there is always a clear difference of philosophy of whether the
Federal Government ought to be involved in education and to
what extent, and to what extent can we allow the flexibility at
the local level. Did your report address at all an efficiency
that could be created by larger block grants and additional
flexibility for the local level as opposed to the Federal
Government trying to manage all these independent programs?
Mr. Gordon. We didn't get into that analysis specifically.
When we did work on teacher quality programs back in 2009, we
did survey State agencies of higher ed as well as State
educational agencies. We did hear from them that they did face
some challenges in administering these programs and trying to
coordinate across these programs. So to the extent there was
any streamlining at the Federal level, that could also benefit
at the State level.
Mr. Rehberg. You always worry about--because what you are
really trying to do is put money in the hands of people that
are actually going to be able to use it rather than the
administrative costs and such. Are you looking as part of your
new evaluation, your consideration of the evaluation of the
programs, are you going to be looking at the difficulty of a
grantee moving across programs? Clearly one teacher might be
able to use additional programs. And it would help us in
knowing both for the Education Committee, the authorization
committee, for creating a streamlined process or a block grant
process, but also understanding the difficulty we are creating
for the grantees and the money that might be able to not
necessarily be saved. We don't necessarily always have to be
cutting money. We can also just take more money from the
duplication of administration or grant application and apply it
back to what we are attempting to do.
Mr. Scott. Clearly, through reauthorization there could be
some opportunities, for example, to ensure that various
definitions are more consistent across programs, and, that
might ease the burden for grantees applying. As I mentioned
before, hopefully some of the work that we are doing on the
Race to the Top and the School Improvement Grants will help
provide some additional insights into some of the challenges
that grantees face when having to compete, at least in the case
of Race to the Top and School Improvement Grants, almost
simultaneously for some of these competitive grants. So
hopefully later this year we will have more insights on that.
Mr. Rehberg. Have you moved beyond just the administration
cost aspect into the economics; the inefficiency of the
economics of some of the programs? Or is that beyond?
Mr. Scott. That is beyond the work that we have done to
date.
Mr. Rehberg. But you could do it. It is just beyond.
Mr. Scott. Depends on the scope and how we define what we
would be looking at.
Mr. Rehberg. It could become part of your protocol in your
recommendations for greater evaluation.
Mr. Scott. Clearly, as I said before, one of the things
that we will continue to say is that it is important for the
Federal agencies as part of their--not only for existing
programs, but to the extent they want to propose new programs
or initiatives, to ensure that they state very clearly and have
clear program goals or objectives; clear performance metrics so
you know whether they have achieved the desired results; and
have built in, to the extent feasible, a rigorous evaluation of
those programs so that we can routinely check in to ensure that
programs are achieving their desired results. Without those
things it is pretty hard to know at the end of the day what
works and doesn't.
So I think it is really incumbent on Federal agencies,
including the Department of Education, to continue to make
progress in conducting more rigorous evaluations of existing
programs and providing better justifications for new programs
they might want to propose.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much.
Have you formally evaluated the Department of Education's
consolidation plan?
Mr. Scott. No, we have not.
Ms. DeLauro. I'm referring to the plan that is in the 2011
and 2012 budget requests. Is it your sense that they are on the
right track, given what you have talked about in terms of
consolidation?
Mr. Scott. As I mentioned, we haven't formally looked at
it, so I want to be careful here, but from a standpoint of
having a starting point, I do want to give the Department
credit for that. At least it is a starting point.
Ms. DeLauro. You said you have looked at Education, HUD,
HHS. Have you looked at, or have you been requested to look at,
the Department of Defense regarding duplication and overlap, et
cetera? How about the Department of Homeland Security or the
Department of Agriculture? With Agriculture, you did on the
food safety piece. But, in other words, in terms of looking at
fragmentation, overlap, duplication, have you done those
agencies?
Mr. Scott. In terms of various teacher quality programs?
Ms. DeLauro. No, I am talking more broadly in terms of this
issue of, again, fragmentation, overlap, and duplication of
programs.
Mr. Scott. Yes. Actually the large report we issued across
a range of agencies and programs last month did address those
various agencies, I believe. We would be happy to make sure you
get a copy of that.
Ms. DeLauro. Fine. Thank you.
A couple of other things. You didn't find duplication among
the education programs we are discussing here today?
Mr. Scott. Correct.
Ms. DeLauro. You didn't find waste, as I understood.
Mr. Scott. As I mentioned, we were not looking specifically
for waste.
Ms. DeLauro. I understand that.
Mr. Scott. That was not within the scope of what we were
doing.
Ms. DeLauro. It is hard to calculate the savings, as you
said. And the Department is moving in terms of some
consolidation.
Now, this is a question that is on my mind. Do we have
enough trained staff, and do we provide enough in terms of
appropriations to deal with the Department's program
evaluation? Is there a level of appropriation that you would
recommend for program evaluation at the Department for fiscal
year 2012? Because your point before was in terms of the
analysis at the agencies. So is there enough trained staff now?
Should we provide additional resources to train personnel to
carry out the analysis, and should we move as quickly as we can
to see how we can impact fiscal year 2012?
Mr. Gordon. In terms of program evaluations at the
Department of Education, what we have heard from them is that a
lot of their funding for those evaluations comes out of the
authority and the funds under the individual programs, which
can be challenging for them, particularly with the smaller
programs, because it doesn't create enough funds. The
Department has currently embarked on a new process to develop a
strategic plan for program evaluations, and they said as part
of that process they will work to identify programs where they
would need additional funds or where they lack authority to use
funds for evaluations.
So to the extent that they have requested that, that would
be an area that this committee could help with.
Ms. DeLauro. I appreciate that. Oftentimes, if that kind of
request comes, there are differences in viewpoint as to whether
or not that merits an appropriation. But I am asking for a
professional view, given what you have looked at and what you
have uncovered here. Are we currently providing sufficient
appropriations to the Department for program evaluation? Do you
have any suggestions as to a level that we ought to be looking
at so that we can use our authority here to create a better
outcome, if you will, and to avoid duplication and
fragmentation or overlap?
Mr. Scott. In terms of level of appropriation for research
evaluation, I am going to leave it to the Department to speak
to sort of the adequacy of their evaluation funding.
Ms. DeLauro. Talk to me about the principle of doing that.
You are a professional operation, the GAO, and you make
recommendations. You make recommendations to us that we ought
to take a look at increasing funding for program evaluation in
order that these agencies--this agency--might be able to
perform better.
Mr. Scott. As we previously mentioned, the Department has
put forward a proposal. Given the stakes here, I think it is
appropriate for you all to consider whether the Department
should receive additional funding for research and evaluation.
That said, in an age of limited resources, I understand
that there will be trade-offs here. But given the fact that
until we know more about what works and what doesn't, it puts
us in--puts you all in a very tough policy standpoint of
understanding where to make these difficult choices.
Ms. DeLauro. Mr. Scott, I am going to take that as a yes.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Kingston, you missed the first round. We
are in round number two, and you can go next.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask you on page 8, your three recommendations,
about number 3, consolidating existing programs. How much of
that actually has to be done by Congress versus done within the
agencies themselves? It would appear to me it would just kind
of be a good government, commonsense thing, that where you
could consolidate, particularly the infrastructure, the
personnel, that it would make sense, without Congress mandating
it.
Mr. Scott. To the extent you have specifically authorized
programs, that will fall to the Congress to come back and
consolidate those programs. I think, where possible, to the
extent the various agencies can wring out some more
administrative consolidations within agencies, clearly that is
a possibility.
Mr. Kingston. I don't see, though, on page 10 where you
list the ones that statutorily have to be--and just scanning
it--and it might be in there, but if it is not in there, if you
could provide it for the record on which ones actually would
need congressional actions and which ones could be done in
house.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.143

Ms. DeLauro. Would the gentleman yield for a second?
Because I think that is so relevant, what kind of legislative
action should the Congress undertake in order to address the
challenges. Let us look at ourselves first.
I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
And the other question that I had was on recommendation
number one. And I notice that at the bottom of your page 8, you
said that the GAO reports there were 151 different Federal K-12
early childhood education programs, but half of these have not
been evaluated, including 8 of the 20 largest programs. Why is
that the case? Why would we have a program that we don't
evaluate?
Mr. Scott. The work that we reference there is from a
report we issued in 2010. That work did not speak to the issues
of overlapping, fragmentation, or duplication. That work was
simply an attempt to catalog the number of K-thru-12 and early
childhood education programs. As we point out, a number of
those programs, including some of the largest, had not been
evaluated. That said, however, some of the main programs had
also undergone some evaluations. Oftentimes it just depends on
agency priorities and available resources.
One of the things that we also point out, there are two
challenges to doing this work. One of the challenges we always
face in doing this kind of work is even defining exactly what a
program is. Depending on who you talk to you, the various
agencies, OMB, you come up with very different ideas what a
program is, and therefore you end up with very different
numbers.
The second point is the extent of evaluations, not all
programs will rise to the level that you really want to make
the significant investment to do rigorous evaluations. And
other times some programs have been longstanding, and yet the
agencies have not taken any actions to evaluate them.
So there are just a couple of things going on in terms of
why there might be some gaps in evaluations.
Mr. Kingston. Switching back to page 2 or 3, you talked
about congressional oversight would be very helpful. As a 19-
year veteran up here, I do agree with you we do need more
oversight. But I also know that there are certain dog-and-pony
shows that this town enjoys, where you bring people up, you
have a GAO report, press release, everybody pounds their chest
for a while, and then it goes away.
The reason I was late today, I came from a defense hearing.
As you know, the GAO report identified $70,000,000,000 in waste
and overruns. We are kind of getting into that a little bit.
But in the testimony that the Secretary actually said that
this--he said something, and I don't want to quote him because
I will misquote him, but he said something like, we always get
this from the GAO. And you are thinking, well, let's do
something about it.
But on the oversight, from your standpoint, what would be
the effective congressional oversight? Is it the rhetoric, is
it the action? Because sometimes I just have to question is
there actually a follow-up action? And this doesn't matter who
the administration is or who the majority in Congress is.
Mr. Scott. As we pointed out in that broader duplication
report, some of these programs, some of these challenges are
longstanding. I think it is important for the Congress to
continue, for example, to hold hearings like this to shed light
and get a better understanding of exactly what is going on.
Additionally, for programs within your jurisdiction, I think
there are a couple of things you can do. As I mentioned before,
you can require the departments to do better coordination. You
can ask the departments in terms of their budget justifications
to provide clear information in terms of what is the ultimate
outcomes of these programs, what sort of performance metrics do
they have in place, and how will we know at the end of the day
whether these programs work.
These are specific questions that you can ask of the
departments when they come up with their budget justifications.
I think after that it is continuing to follow up to ensure that
they are providing the necessary information you have
requested.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. When you mentioned that there were 82 distinct
programs on teacher quality across 10 different Federal
agencies, what are those 10 Federal agencies? I am trying to
figure out who the hell is involved in teacher quality.
Mr. Scott. We are searching for our list here. The
Department of Education, Department of Defense, Interior, EPA,
the James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation, National
Endowment for the Humanities, Department of State, Agriculture,
National Science Foundation, and NASA.
Mr. Simpson. Wow. I suspect if you look at it, most of
those are involved because of an authorization by Congress, and
that it would take legislative action to change those things.
While they might be able to coordinate different programs
within an agency, if you are going to coordinate this across
the Federal Government, it is going to take Congress'
involvement to address this. And really, should the Department
of Interior be doing teacher quality improvements versus
somebody else, or should it be done better by someone else?
What this reminds me of--not really a question--but what it
reminds me of is about 26 years ago, I started working on
school consolidation in Idaho. We have 44 counties, 119 school
districts. Everybody was really interested in that until it was
their school district. I found out what their biggest problem
was not the fact that you could save administrative costs. In
some counties we have a countywide school system; in others,
the county I live in, there are five school districts, which
means you have five administrative costs, five superintendents,
all of the staff that goes with that, and everything else. What
parents were really afraid about is the Broncos wouldn't be
able to play the Panthers. And we were never talking about
closing schools, we were talking about consolidating
administration. Today, 27 years later since I first started in
that endeavor, there are still 44 counties, and there are still
119 school districts.
I suspect we are going to have the same difficulty in
something like this in trying to reorganize it. What we need is
instead of a plan to consolidate 38 into 11 in the Department
of Education, we need an overall plan, and that would involve
more than just one authorizing committee. And somehow I think
Congress needs to take on some of these challenges. And I don't
have the answer to it, obviously, or I would be not in
Congress.
But I appreciate your testimony. It is a challenge that we
have not only in teacher quality programs, but in a variety of
programs that continue to expand, build a constituency, and
then seem to be there forever.
Mr. Rehberg. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Simpson. Yes.
Mr. Rehberg. You are absolutely right. But, unfortunately,
it is a fundamental program with an unbalanced budget and no
balanced budget requirement. The State of Montana had the same
situation. We have a lot more school districts than you have.
As a matter of economics, eventually some of those school
district did, in fact, consolidate their administrative
function. And yes, the biggest fights we had were what were you
going to change the name of the team to. It actually, while not
violent, becomes extremely emotional, on the edge of.
Mr. Simpson. We actually put in our funding formula an
incentive to consolidate. They got more money if they
consolidated. Still didn't happen. It is a gut-wrenching idea
to do that.
Mr. Rehberg. We went through the same arguments during the
1980s in Montana and a little bit in the 1990s, in
telecommunications, fiberoptics, and such; a lot of the
opportunity for consolidation there. Savings could be had, and
school districts finally came to the conclusion, but ultimately
was because the taxpayers got tired of paying for it. Here we
just don't have that same pressure because we are allowed to
run trillion-dollar deficits, and it is no big deal.
Mr. Simpson. Just to add to what you say, I think
opportunities sometime present themselves when we have budget
challenges like we have in this, in that it is going to force
us to look at more effectively delivering these programs. I
don't think anybody on this committee or anybody that I am
aware of isn't in favor of teacher quality programs and
improving teacher quality.
One of the other problems that really bothers me is that we
have focused so much on teacher improvement and teacher
quality. I have never seen a successful school, a really
successful school, that didn't have a quality principal. And we
don't focus on that, and we need to focus on it more. Thank
you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Just a comment following on this. We have had
the same fights in Arizona. I think every State has had the
same. It just points out an observation I had before is that I
don't think this is going to happen, even if the administration
is calling for it or whatever else, unless there are budget
cuts and it is forced. Frankly, that is what drives the
process, as it should. One, we are spending too much in my
view, the Federal Department of Education, without commensurate
results. And to the extent that the cuts that have been
proposed and are being proposed will force consolidation and
force some realignment and reassessment, that is a good thing,
because in my experience that is about the only thing that
actually does force it. Thanks.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro. I am going to pass.
Ms. DeLauro. On that point, because I think we did have an
earlier discussion here that you did not assess effectiveness
of the programs identified, I think that is an important issue
here. You did not assess the effectiveness of the report; is
that correct?
Mr. Scott. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. We know we have 82 programs. You laid out your
definitions of fragmentation, of overlap, of duplication. You
have said you didn't find waste. They were not looking at that.
You did not find duplication. And you said it was very hard to
define savings. However, you did say that there is a need for
an analysis of how one can look at these efforts. And clearly
effectiveness is a measure. In order to determine whether or
not a program is effective, one has to have an analysis of the
effectiveness, and in order to do that, one needs to have
resources in order to do evaluation. If we do not regard that
as an important factor, and skimp at this end, we are never
going to know whether or not what we are funding is working or
not.
So I think you can't just say that if you just cut it all,
then somehow you magically will come to a better system. It is
about an analysis. It is about training people who understand
analysis, can carry it out, so it isn't at the whim of one
person or another of some uninformed judgment. Because analysis
is a scientific process, and that will be a determinant as to
whether or not this program works or this program doesn't work,
and then we can say let us jettison what we don't think works
and let us focus and put our funds into those that do. So that
initial piece of analysis is critical, and the resources for
that piece is critical.
Let me just ask you, Mr. Scott, in the report you note two
programs have overlapped in teacher quality because they can
both be used to attract career changers: Teacher Quality
Partnership Grants and Transition to Teaching. I am interested
in these specifically because I think they provide a good
example of two separate and distinct programs in their mission
and in the work that they do.
The Teacher Quality Partnership program, as I understand
it, is designed to reform university-based teacher preparation
through rigorous clinical preparation, collaboration with arts
and sciences, preparing candidates to teach diverse learners,
and partnerships between universities and high-need local
education agencies and schools. While the program is open to
career changers, I don't think that that is the goal or the
mission of that program.
Transition to Teaching is a valuable program. It
concentrates solely on developing roots for career changers to
become teachers. It is not meant to reform teacher preparation.
Can you speak a little bit about why GAO decided to
highlight these programs in a report? How are the programs
duplicative or wasteful? Is it because both programs are open
to career changers? It would seem to me that the programs are
fundamentally different; would you agree?
Mr. Gordon. I think your example actually illustrates some
of the challenges to doing these analyses because as we point
out, many of these programs allow for multiple types of
activities. So you can have two programs that have multiple
objectives and allow for multiple activities. So they do
overlap, as you point out, in this case with career changers.
So they may not be duplicative of each other, but they may
overlap in some aspects that they have with each other. So the
analysis is very complicated to try to tease out the extent to
which they could duplicate each other.
Ms. DeLauro. But what would be useful is to understand how
effective each of these programs is. That would appear to me to
be the central question, and as far as I can tell from your
report, we are not in a position right now to answer that
question. If we truly want to find out what is working or not
working, then we need program evaluation and resources to carry
that out so we can say this program is a ``yes'' and this
program is a ``no.''
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Rehberg. Getting close to the end. We have two Members
that have additional questions, and we will call on Mr.
Kingston first and then Mr. Flake.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I think this is a great report, but I would say,
though, it is kind of a teaser, because we are halfway across
the water. I want to get back to my question which Rosa had
also picked up on is I really would like under the
consolidation of existing programs your recommendations of
which ones do need statutory authority to do and which ones
could be done maybe by report language urging the bureaucracy
to do it themselves.
And then I want to go back to page 3 on teacher
enhancement. Often when I am in a town meeting, I ask people,
how many of you had a good teacher? And the hands go up. How
many of you had a bad teacher? Hands go up. Then I say, can you
give me how you could define the difference? And I notice that
we do spend a lot of money for assessment tools on evaluation
of a teacher and how a teacher could be distinguished, a good
teacher from a bad teacher. Is there anything in the Department
of Education that tackles that?
Mr. Gordon. I think I will have to get back to you on that
one.
Mr. Kingston. Well, you know, it is very important because
we have all had good teachers. We have all had bad teachers. We
want to nourish good teachers. We want to get rid of the bad
teachers, and the system wants to get the bad ones out. So I
think it is something that it would be good to have a useful
tool to know.
One question I would have, internationally, we see these
tests that American students are falling behind on math scores.
Have we ever looked at, well, how much of that is a teachers
issue? Do we look at a Japanese math teacher versus an American
math teacher or the way that they are teaching math in these
countries that they are outscoring us so much?
Mr. Scott. Yes. I am not aware of any GAO work that has
looked at that issue. We would be happy to go back, and to the
extent we have some prior GAO work on that, we would be happy
to send it to you, but I am not aware of any.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. Also, in Georgia we passed in 1985 QB--
Quality Basic Education Act, and you know, it had some good and
bad. It had a career ladder for teachers, and that was the one
part, once the bill was passed, that people fought against, the
teacher groups did. But one result of that is continuing
educations and master's degrees by teachers.
Have you ever evaluated the value added in a kindergarten
teacher having a master's degree versus a kindergarten teacher
that doesn't have a master's degree? Because as you know, once
they get the master's degree, you get locked into a 5- to
$10,000 salary difference, and if a teacher is going to be
there for 20 years teaching kindergarten, you are locked into
that limit.
Mr. Gordon. We have not assessed the specific impact of
credentials on student achievement ourselves.
Mr. Kingston. Well, would you venture to give an opinion
that advanced degrees don't necessarily give a better product?
Mr. Scott. Actually we haven't done any work on that. So,
no, I would not venture an opinion on that.
Mr. Kingston. But since States--and mostly States, but I
think there is a Federal hook to it, too--are encouraged for
their teachers to get graduate degrees, that is costing
millions and millions of extra dollars in payroll. And it might
be a waste of money; that somebody might just be a great
teacher without all the fancy diplomas on the wall, and
somebody with diplomas on the wall still might be a lousy
teacher. And in terms of evaluating what is a good versus a bad
teacher, it would appear that is in that mix, because, right
now salary remuneration indicates if you have got a graduate
degree, you are a better teacher, and we ought to be paying you
more.
Mr. Scott. As Bryan mentioned, we haven't done any work on
that issue, but we will go back and take a look at to see what
Education may have done on that.
Mr. Kingston. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Sorry, Mr. Flake. Mr. Simpson jumped in ahead
of you.
Mr. Simpson. I just wanted to comment on the prior question
on what Jack was just talking about and a short story to
demonstrate the problem.
One day a friend of mine that I graduated from high school
with--this was 5 or 6 years ago--we were out playing golf
together, and we were talking. We were talking about our high
school education, you know, the old days, the good old days.
And I mentioned who I think was my best teacher. Everybody
hated to take her class because she was tough, but in
retrospect, I think she taught me more than any other teacher I
had. And I asked Lynn, I said, what did you think about so-and-
so? He said, I think she was the worst teacher I ever had. I
said, who do you think was your best teacher? And when he
mentioned it, I looked at him and said, you have got to be
kidding; I would have put that down as my worst teacher.
When you are measuring teacher quality, it is tough,
because different teachers connect with students differently.
And the same thing that works for this high-quality teacher
here may need to be somebody else for another group of
students. So we need to be careful when we are just saying, you
know, trying to measure teacher quality, that is a tough goal.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Just, again, the gentle lady from Connecticut
mentioned that we have got to analyze these programs
scientifically and otherwise. The trouble I have there as
well--and I am not saying we shouldn't--but it seems that every
time we are presented with the analysis, we reject it and then
say, we just need to spend more money. And Exhibit 1 is Head
Start.
The last best information we have on Head Start is that any
benefits gained are gone by the time the child exits first
grade. We heard that at the last hearing. Now, there are
studies that are under way again, but the last evidence we have
is that. And now another program is the DARE program. We heard
evidence a few years ago, a GAO study saying that the DARE
program was not effective. I believe it was GAO. And I knew you
wouldn't----
Mr. Rehberg. I knew this would happen. I knew it.
Mr. Flake. But the DARE program, again, no effectiveness.
What did we do? We ramped up funding, I think, 20 percent.
On our side of the aisle, a lot of conservatives push for
abstinence education. The last evidence we had there, it wasn't
working there either; yet still we move ahead and plow ahead.
So it seems that nothing will lead to budget cuts unless we
are just in a budget crunch, and that is my difficulty with,
oh, let us do some more analyses. The analysis always comes
back that, well, maybe if we spend a little more, we would get
a different result, and so we never seem to get the costs under
control. So I yield to the gentle lady to refute my claim.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. I would just say about Head Start--and I thank
the gentleman. I know the gentleman brought up this study in
another hearing but the fact of the matter is that there are
many, many studies on Head Start, and there are many recent
studies. I spent time a week ago in my district with the
founder of Head Start, Dr. Edward Zigler, who would be the
first person to say that Head Start programs that do not work
should be shut down, and he has recommended such. In fact, he
has a new book out talking about evaluating Head Start
programs.
But Head Start programs were designed to address a
combination of efforts and goals. They include academic
development, the socialization of children, and the engagement
of parents in the education of their children. Head Start
attacks all of those things and more. There are myriad studies
out there about what Head Start does and how Head Start is
effective. Head Start kids are less likely to be at odds with
law enforcement. They are healthier children. They are better
educated children. The studies are there.
I want to reflect what has been said about the teachers.
You can do all of the quality training of teachers that you
care to do. That may be effective or ineffective. The fact of
the matter is that we must also address the issues that we have
in our communities and the environment where some of our kids
are growing up today. Most low-performing schools are in high-
poverty areas of this country. If you don't take a look at the
school itself and the principal, training for teachers to deal
with the problems that youngsters do bring to school, whether
it is health or nutrition or other areas, then we are not going
to succeed. You can have the best teachers in the world, but if
they are not equipped to work with children who are coming to
schools with the deficits that they have, then we are not going
to succeed.
And that begins with early childhood education wherein you
try to make up some of that deficit, both academically and
socially, in order that children can build on their experiences
and be able to perform well and to be able to succeed.
I will provide you with all of the studies, and I will tell
you that we know today. We have so many studies that tell us
that when children learn, it is from zero to three, zero to
five, and the kind of education you can provide and the quality
of that education that you provide in those years sets the tone
for their future. We don't need more studies in that area. We
have them. We ought to heed them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson, I couldn't agree with you more. I am actually
reading a book right now by John Maxwell called Everyone
Communicates; Few Connect, and I am going to give it to my
daughter who is student teaching right now because it talks a
lot about education and how some teachers connect and some
teachers don't. Some teachers talk over the head, and they just
want to impress their colleagues and be evaluated well. Others
really do care about trying to make a connection with the kid.
And I have often said many times that everyone comes to
education in a little different way. I joke about it with
myself just to make the point about I was involved in music and
sports, and that is what kept me in school. But frankly, it is
one of the things that did keep me in school, and we
participated together in a fraternal banquet last night. Again,
that is one of the things that kept me in college is joining a
social organization that kind of made studying cool as opposed
to what it was.
So it is very difficult to evaluate teachers. That is why
merit pay sometimes can be--you are not going to get a chance
to talk, Jack.
Mr. Kingston. If the gentleman will yield.
Mr. Rehberg. I have to admit----
Mr. Kingston. I just want to know what fraternity made
studying cool. For the record, we have to know. You all were a
fun date.
Ms. DeLauro. I never belonged to a fraternity.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, the sororities were there last night as
well. There were about 3- or 400 of us at the banquet last
night. When I spoke, I picked on Mr. Kingston a lot. So that is
why I am not going to allow him an opportunity to get in front
of the mike.
So, just to close as well, as far as evaluations come and
go, GAO has done some yeoman's work on Head Start, and one of
the things you did identify within your GAO report--and I don't
know if you did it, Mr. Scott--was the level of fraud that
exists in Head Start with people that are signing up that are
over the qualification income level and fraudulently signing
kids up that don't even exist in some of these community
programs, to the extent that it has been estimated that at
least $500,000,000 is being spent in fraudulent Head Start
programs.
And so if we are not going to take your advice, how many
more studies do we need you doing, or how many more
evaluations, because that is one of the things or changes we
tried to effect in this subcommittee. We won't just willy-nilly
try and cut programs just for the good of cutting the program,
we are trying to effect savings.
So I want to thank you for identifying within the GAO
organization some of the fraudulent actions that occur within
Head Start. And, again, I am a fan. It is a big deal in
Montana. We like it. But if we are not going to then seriously
consider your studies, how many more evaluations need to be
done--because if we even enter into, as Mr. Simpson said, an
arena that has a built-in advocacy, all you are doing is
inviting criticism without ever effecting change.
So thank you for your study. We look forward to working a
lot with you over the years.
Ms. DeLauro. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to make one
point if I can, because I think wherever fraud exists and abuse
exists, it ought to be rooted out. We ought to be pretty even-
handed about that. I told you--and you know that I serve on the
Agriculture Committee--we have been paying people who have been
dead for years in agriculture subsidies, I think. Am I right,
Mr. Flake?
So I think we ought to be even-handed about rooting out
that waste, fraud, and abuse in whatever program we have and
whatever agency we have, and do so governmentwide. I think it
would be a useful, useful effort.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you very much. Meeting is adjourned.
Thursday, April 14, 2011.

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

WITNESSES

DAVID MICHAELS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND
HEALTH
JOSEPH A. MAIN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF LABOR, MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH

Introduction of Witnesses

Mr. Rehberg. Welcome. Nice to have you. I appreciate you
coming out today. Normally I do not give an opening statement,
and I am going to turn it over to Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to
say a thank you to our witnesses this morning, and I am
delighted you are here and am anxious to hear your testimony.
We are here today to discuss the budgets of two vitally
important Federal agencies, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, OSHA, and the Mine Safety Health Association,
MSHA. As it happens, this year marks the 40th anniversary of
the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
Over those four decades, tremendous progress has been made
in the realm of workplace safety. To note only a few examples,
OSHA standards on cotton dust have virtually eliminated new
cases of brown lung disease and its lead standard has
dramatically reduced occupational lead poisoning.
Most importantly, the number of workplace fatalities has
been cut by more than half. It is estimated that 410,000 lives
have been saved by the Act. If anything, it is clear that we
need to continue to strengthen our workplace safety efforts. In
2009, more than 4,000 workers were killed by injuries on the
job, an estimated 50,000 to 60,000 people died of occupational
diseases and there were more than 4 million work-related
injuries or illnesses.
If we have any doubt about the importance of workplace
safety, let us recall some of the tragedies we witnessed last
year. The disaster at the Upper Big Branch mine which killed 29
coal miners; the explosion at the Tesoro refinery in Washington
State which killed seven workers; the explosion and fire on the
BP Transocean oil rig in the Gulf which claimed 11 workers'
lives and did still untold damage to the environment and our
economy.
My district was also touched by tragedy. In February 2010,
six workers were killed due to an explosion at the Kleen Energy
Plant in Middletown, Connecticut. Along with the Chemical
Safety Board and the panel convened by the Governor, OSHA has
been instrumental in helping us figure out exactly what went
wrong so it will not happen again.
So, what these agencies do is tremendously important to
protecting the health and the lives of American workers, and it
is important for business as well. A robust OSHA and MSHA allow
for a level playing field for small businesses and save
companies money.
As is mentioned in your testimony this morning, according
to Liberty Mutual Insurance, work-related injuries and
illnesses cost companies between $155 billion and $232 billion
a year in direct costs, lost productivity and work retraining,
and that is why 95 percent of business executives believe
investing in workplace safety has a positive impact on
financial performance, with 61 percent arguing a $3 return on
every $1 investment in workplace safety.
Yet during the previous administration, we saw years of
slow growth in OSHA's budget that did not keep up with costs
and the size of OSHA's staff dropped to the lowest level in the
agency's history. The development of several important
standards was stopped and enforcement was weakened.
In the last couple of years, Congress was able to turn
around this declining trend in resources. With increased
funding provided in 2009 and 2010, the OSHA workforce has been
rebuilt back to 2001 levels. We have leadership at these
agencies firmly committed to the mission of protecting workers
on the job. Enforcement has been stepped up against those who
violate the law willfully and repeatedly.
Unfortunately, the new majority has put these improvements
at risk. H.R. 1, passed by the majority in February, would have
cut OSHA's budget by almost $100 million, forcing the agency to
lay off something like one-fifth of its inspection staff and
greatly reducing support for State compliance efforts. In
addition, more legislation has been proposed that would
hamstring the development of new standards and rules needed to
address serious workplace hazards.
Fortunately, the appropriations legislation that the House
takes up later today does not include any cuts to either OSHA
or MSHA. In fact, we were able to secure a small increase for
MSHA to help reduce the serious backlog of mine safety
citations awaiting adjudication. However, I remain very
concerned about the adequacy of the resources for both of these
agencies and hope we will continue to keep in mind their
importance as Congress works on future budgets.
This is not big government or intrusive government.
Spending Federal resources to ensure worker safety is not a
frivolous expense. It is a necessity. No one wants to see any
more lives lost or ruined by readily preventible injuries in
the workplace, and we should all be able to agree that we
should do everything in our power to protect our workers.
I look forward to the testimony of our two witnesses, and
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Dr. Michaels.

Assistant Secretary of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health

Mr. Michaels. Chairman Rehberg, Ranking Member DeLauro,
thank you for the invitation to testify about the fiscal year
2012 budget request for OSHA. As Secretary Solis said in her
testimony last month, winning the future requires a successful
competitive market where all firms are playing by the rules to
keep workers safe. Protecting workers is the right thing to do,
and it also makes economic sense. Workplace injuries, illnesses
and fatalities takes an enormous toll on this Nation's economy,
a toll that we can ill afford.
This year marks the 40th anniversary of the establishment
of OSHA, and I think that by any measure this agency has been
one of the true successes of government. Forty years ago, most
American workers did not have the legal right to a safe
workplace. Since that time, workplace fatalities and reported
injury rates have decreased by more than 60 percent, but far
too many preventable injuries and fatalities continue to occur.
Today, an average of 12 workers are killed on the job every
day and tens of thousands more are estimated to die every year
from work-related diseases. More than 3 million private sector
workers are seriously injured each year. Far too many of these
injuries permanently impact the worker's income and destroy
their family's middle-class security. The President's request
includes an expansion of the compliance safety and health
officer workforce to continue OSHA's commitment to preventing
injuries, illnesses and fatalities.

OSHA'S ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM

OSHA's enforcement program targets the most dangerous
workplaces and the most recalcitrant employers. We recognize
that most employers want to keep their employees safe and they
make great efforts to protect them workplace hazards. But there
are still far too many employers in high-hazard industries that
cut corners on safety. For them, OSHA enforcement is clearly
the best means to ensure the safety of their employees. Strong
enforcement and meaningful penalties for those who don't follow
the rules levels the playing field for those employers who are
doing the right thing.
OSHA is a small agency, so we rely heavily on workers to
help identify hazards and work with their employers to control
them. To protect those workers from possible retaliation,
section 11(c) of the OSHA Act seeks to protect employees from
discrimination when they report hazards or exercise other
rights. Since the Act was passed, Congress has added 20
additional whistleblower laws to OSHA's enforcement
responsibility, protecting employees who report violations of
trucking, airline, nuclear power, pipeline, environmental,
rail, mass transit, consumer product safety and securities
laws.
The fiscal year 2012 budget request includes additional
resources to help reduce the backlog in whistleblower claims
and expedite the handling of complaints.

DEVELOPING OSHA REGULATIONS

One of the primary responsibilities Congress has given to
OSHA is to issue commonsense standards to protect workers.
Developing OSHA regulations is a complex process that involves
sophisticated risk assessments as well as detailed economic and
technological feasibility analyses in order to ensure that our
regulations protect workers and make sense for businesses. This
process also includes multiple points where the agency receives
extensive comments from large and small employers, professional
organizations, trade associations, workers and labor
representatives.
The request includes funds to ensure that OSHA is able to
continue its efforts in this area, as well as for the
development of a injury and illness prevention program rule.
Under this standard, employers would develop a program to
address hazards in a systematic proactive way. This approach
has been modeled by OSHA's voluntary protection program members
and will also be based on the experiences of 15 States that
have similar requirements.
Finally, we know that the majority of employers want to do
the right thing, but many just need more information and
assistance. OSHA's active and growing compliance assistance
program works to ensure that employers and employees understand
workplace hazards and how to prevent them.
For example, OSHA's on site consultation program provides
free evaluations and advice to small businesses. Last year the
program conducted over 30,000 visits to small businesses. These
programs are run by States and receive 90 percent of their
funding from OSHA. The budget request includes a $1 million
increase for these activities.
The fiscal year 2012 budget request reflects one of the
country's major priorities, ensuring that the Nation's working
men and women are welcomed home safely from work to their
families. Secretary Solis and I are fully committed to a simple
goal, good jobs for everyone, and no job can be a good job
unless it is a safe job. We can accomplish this goal while
being good stewards of the public's money.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for inviting me today.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.152

Assistant Secretary of Labor, Mine Safety and Health

Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Main.
Mr. Main. Thank you, Chairman Rehberg, Congresslady DeLauro
and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity
to be here today to discuss the President's request for the
Mine Safety Health Administration's budget for fiscal year
2012.
First, I would like to report on MSHA's action since the
April 5, 2010, explosion at the Upper Big Branch mine that
tragically took the lives of 29 miners. We have made
significant progress in MSHA's investigation of the Upper Big
Branch explosion and most of the costs of the Upper Big Branch
investigation have been supported by funds provided in the 2010
supplemental, which remain available through this July.
The underground investigation, which has been extensive, is
nearing completion. Based on the evidence we have gathered so
far, it appears that a low volume of methane and/or methane
from natural gas provided the fuel for the initial ignition on
or near the face of the tailgate side of the long wall shearer
or cutting machine. Small methane ignitions are not uncommon in
coal mines, but when proper safety measures are followed, these
ignitions are generally controlled and extinguished.
Our preliminary analysis shows, however, that at Upper Big
Branch this small ignition was not contained or quickly
extinguished. Instead, a small methane ignition transitioned
into a massive explosion fueled by an accumulation of coal dust
that propagated the blast. While the investigation is not yet
complete, we know already that explosions in mines are
preventable and that a workplace culture which puts health and
safety first will save lives and prevent tragedy.
I have deep respect for those who choose mining as a
career. That is where I started my career as well. Mining is
critically important to our economy and I believe that a
commitment to safety is fully compatible with a thriving
industry. In fact, we not only owe it to our miners, but also
to those mine operators who play by the rules to do what we can
to encourage all operators to live up to their obligations to
provide a safe and healthful workplace.

FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR MSHA

The budget request for MSHA for fiscal year 2012 is $384.3
million. These funds will allow us to ensure that we continue
to use all the tools at our disposal to effectively enforce the
Mine Act and the MINER Act.
After the explosion at Upper Big Branch, we needed to
rethink how we approached mine safety and health. That took on
new urgency, I think, for all of us. Our fiscal year 2012
budget priorities reflect this urgency.
For example, the President's budget request allows MSHA to
meet its responsibilities to conduct complete and annual
inspections of each mine and target the most egregious and
persistent violators using MSHA's most aggressive enforcement
measures, such as the impact inspection, the pattern of
violations program and injunctive actions.
Our impact inspections have proven to be one of our most
effective enforcement tools and our ability to continue them is
essential. We have conducted these impact inspections at times
during off hours, taking hold of phone lines to prevent advance
notice and covering key parts of the mine quickly before
hazards could be hidden or covered up.
The Upper Big Branch disaster also focused attention on the
need to address the backlog of contested mine enforcement cases
at the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission. Delays
in swift resolution of contested mine cases undermine MSHA's
enforcement tools and put miners' lives at risk. The 2010
supplemental has allowed the Commission, the Solicitor of Labor
and MSHA to begin to reduce the case backlog. The 2012 budget
requests an additional $18.3 million to continue the
administration's backlog reduction efforts.
The fiscal year 2012 budget also proposes $5.5 million for
our regulatory program, an increase of $2.1 million from fiscal
year 2010. The standards we are planning on moving forward are
critical to implementing what we have learned from the Upper
Big Branch disaster and to protecting the mine safety and
health of our Nation's miners.
One particularly important regulatory initiative is our
effort to improve the broken pattern of violations program. We
adopted new screening criteria and used those criteria to put
14 mines on a potential pattern of violation. Some of these
mines have successfully reduced their violations and some have
not. MSHA has also published a proposed pattern of violation
rule which would address laws in the current rule to meet the
intent of the statute.

END BLACK LUNG ACT NOW INITIATIVE

Another major regulatory effort is our work on dust
initiatives. We will move forward on our End Black Lung Act Now
initiative, which is designed to fulfill the promise made 40
years ago by Congress to eradicate black lung disease.
Thousands of miners have died from black lung and miners are
still getting the disease, including younger miners.
We are also reducing the risk of explosions in coal mines
by moving forward our emergency temporary standard on rock
dust. Our fiscal year 2012 budget includes two important dust
initiatives, which will allow us to improve how we handle
analyses of both respirable dust and rock dust.
MSHA has taken a number of other actions as well to ramp up
our efforts. This includes a proposed rule that would revise
requirements for operator examinations of underground coal
mines, as well as the issuance of a number of targeted
compliance guidelines.
I believe that many mine operators want to find and fix
hazards in their mines themselves before they cause accidents
or injuries. In order to assist mine operators, MSHA has
undertaken extraordinary education and outreach efforts. That
is why the President's fiscal year 2012 budget seeks $36.3
million for education policy development activities.
I have traveled the country----
Mr. Rehberg. Sir, we will allow you the opportunity to have
your testimony submitted for the record, if you could summarize
very quickly, please.
Mr. Main. I have traveled the country speaking to miners,
mine operators, mining organizations and associations and
listening to their ideas and concerns. We are working together
to improve consistency in enforcement of the mining standards
as well as to implement new compliance programs and initiatives
to improve mine safety and health.
I look forward to working with the committee so MSHA has
the resources it needs to accomplish our shared goal of
protecting our Nation's miners and assuring that they return
home every day from work safe, and free of injury and illness.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.165

MINER ACT

Mr. Rehberg. I will point out to you gentleman that the
lack of attendance is not a lack of interest. We have quite a
few subcommittee chairmen that serve on this committee, so from
time to time they are in their own hearings. But we are honored
to have our full committee chairman here, Mr. Hal Rogers, and I
would like to turn it over to you for any statement.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome to both you, Mr. Main and Mr. Michaels. Thank you
for being with us today and giving us your testimony.
As you know, the mining industry has proved a staple both
for our Nation's energy supply and for our economy, and I
witnessed generations of miners carry on this proud tradition
in my region of Appalachian Kentucky.
As you mentioned, we have recently commemorated the one
year anniversary of the tragedy at West Virginia's Upper Big
Branch mine. We policymakers and regulators have a special
obligation to the 29 men who lost their lives on that fateful
day, to their brethren who continue to make a living by
traveling deep into those mines, and to their loved ones at
home, to remain ever vigilant in ensuring that safety remains
paramount and always in the forefront of our mines.
That is why I was proud to support the comprehensive mine
safety MINER Act in 2006. Notably, that Act strengthens the
Federal Government's ability to enforce safety regulations,
holding accountable operators with chronic and persistent
health and safety violations.

BACKLOG OF MINE SAFETY CITATIONS

I am pleased that MSHA's fiscal 2012 budget request
includes increased funds to reduce the backlog of mine safety
citations currently pending before the Mine Safety and Health
Review Commission. The number of MSHA inspectors has increased
exponentially in the last decade and has resulted in a
commensurate increase in safety, but also an increase in the
number of citations perceived as ``inconsistent'' or
``arbitrary.''
A startling IG report recently indicated more than a
quarter of inspectors considered themselves deficient in
technical training that is necessary to perform the duties that
they were assigned.
As you noted, Mr. Main, this backlog of nearly 20,000 cases
has created an unacceptable delay in adjudicating appeals,
which are vitally important to ensuring that safety standards
are enforced and enforced uniformly across the 14,000 mines
under MSHA's purview. Any step to reduce that backlog is a step
in the right direction.
All of that said, my colleagues and I have all expressed
frequent flabbergastion at wrong-headed policies by this
administration that would drive these mining jobs out of our
economy when we need them most. Greenhouse gas emissions,
surface mining guidance, coal ash regulation, taken together,
this administration is poised to regulate all of these miners
right out of their jobs.
I look forward to discussing one of these proposed
regulations with you today related to respirable coal mining
dust. Significant concerns have risen about the data being
utilized to develop this proposal and the availability of
technology that would be needed to adhere to any new
regulations.
Thank you.

BACKLOG OF SERIOUS VIOLATIONS

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the interesting points that has been brought up, you
mentioned it in your statement, was the serious backlog of
violations, and I think we are all concerned about the serious
backlog. We are also concerned about the serious violations.
The problem is the backlog of serious violations is not
necessarily creating the problem.
I have gone through and spent a little time asking some of
the mines around the country, some of the associations, some of
the businesses around the country, and a couple of the ones
that were sent to me, here is a violation for there were no
single service drinking cups provided at the potable water
cooler in the shop building.
One of my mines in Montana, the violation was written
because the toe spacing between ladder rungs was 2\3/4\ inches
instead of 3 inches. The ladder had been there for years and
was never previously cited by MSHA on other inspections. That
becomes a citation.
A citation was written because the mine failed to contact
MSHA within 15 minutes of a storage facility catching fire,
which would have been perhaps a danger. However, the facility
was not owned by the mine or its parent company and was located
30 miles from the mine housed on a railcar full of ore that
originated from the mine and was en route to be refined.
Therefore, MSHA considered it to be mine property, again, 30
miles away owned in a building by someone else and subject to
the requirements of contacting the agency after the accident.
So, I don't think any of us would ever criticize OSHA or
MSHA for any citation of a violation of a health safety issue.
The problem is, you create problems for yourself when you are
creating citations that become part of a backlog where the
serious violations cannot be adequately considered.

EMPLOYEE SAFETY COMMITTEE

One of my frustrations as I am talking to one of my
facilities in Montana is they had an employee safety committee
that was working very well with the old administration and
moving along to try and have a safe workplace, and then when
the new administration took over, it was canceled. There was no
longer a connection between the agency that was enforcing the
regulations and the law and the community that wants to work in
the healthy workplace.

VOLUNTARY INSPECTIONS

So I guess my question is, do you have a process in place
for voluntary inspections? If they want to invite OSHA or MSHA
to come in and voluntarily cite issues, or not cite issues, I
hate to use that word, but identify potential problems, where
they don't then end up on the list for coming back and then
ultimately giving them a citation, because they are trying to
do the right thing. And if you ever want to get together with
some of the employees, I am not talking about the owners of the
company, I am talking about the employees themselves who want
to work in a safe environment, and they are as angry at you,
MSHA, as they are oftentimes at their own management.
Mr. Main. Yes, let me--there are probably about three or
four issues in there. On the consistency issue, it is something
we have been working hard on. The day I took this job, I
realized half my inspectors had, as far as on-the-job
inspection experience, about 2 years, and I have launched a
number of projects to improve consistency. One of those was a
training program for mine supervisors, which we are in the
process of running all of our field supervisors through on how
to manage the inspection process.
But I have traveled throughout the country, met with
several mining associations, aggregate associations, to
actually talk through some of the complexities, because we
are----
Mr. Rehberg. Do you have a free inspection process?
Mr. Main. Do we have a free inspection process?
Mr. Rehberg. Yes, inviting them in, voluntary?
Mr. Main. The Mine Act we are currently under was created
in 1977 and it has a very straightforward requirement that when
MSHA goes to the mine, the inspectors are obligated to cite
what they see. That has been in the----
Mr. Rehberg. So they can't just invite you in, voluntarily
invite you in. But if you see something, then you are going to
ding them. So what is the incentive to invite them in?
Let me ask you, Dr. Michaels. I am going to run out of
time.

SMALL BUSINESS CONSULTATION

Mr. Michaels. We recognize the problem. In fact, we have a
small business consultation program which we fund 90 percent
of, but is run by States, so it is absolutely independent of
OSHA. In fact, Montana, the Montana Department of Labor and
Industry does that. They go to employers, and we like this
program because it is before an OSHA inspector gets there. It
is an OSHA inspector-type person who goes through and says here
are the hazards, here is what you have to do. It is absolutely
free to small businesses.
In our budget request, we asked for a $1 million increase
in that program. We think it is a very important program. It is
unfortunately in some danger. In some States even 10 percent is
difficult for them to match.
Mr. Rehberg. As a courtesy, I always follow very closely
the time on every witness and all of my colleagues, just so we
can get as many rounds in as possible. I will probably come
back to some of that and let you fully answer the question. But
I really watch the time very carefully, just as a courtesy to
my colleagues.
Ms. DeLauro.

EFFECTS OF H.R. 1 ON OSHA

Ms. DeLauro. Dr. Michaels, H.R. 1, the 2011 appropriations
bill passed by the House in February would have cut OSHA's
budget almost $100 million, about 18 percent below last year's
level. Fortunately, the final bill that will be taken up later
today does not include any cut to OSHA. Nevertheless, I would
like to inquire about the effects of H.R. 1 in the event that
cuts of this magnitude are proposed for fiscal 2012.
So let me ask what impact would these cuts have on OSHA's
ability to protect the safety and health of American workers.
As well, if you could then quickly address this, one of the
programs that would have been cut by H.R. 1 is the support for
State occupational safety and health enforcement. What is the
role of these State programs, what support is provided to
States from the OSHA budget, and how important is that
assistance to the States?
Mr. Michaels. If H.R. 1 or the equivalent were to be
passed, it would have a dramatic effect on OSHA's ability to
protect workers across America. You know, OSHA and its State
partners have about 2,200 inspectors to cover almost 8 million
workplaces and 130 million workers. This program would cut 400
OSHA employees, and 200 of those would be inspectors. In
addition, another 155 inspectors would be eliminated from State
plans.
So it would quite a dramatic effect. We wouldn't be able to
train our inspectors nearly as well. We would lose our ability
to protect whistleblowers, who raise issues not just in OSHA,
but around safe transit, safe commercial nuclear power
reactors.
We spend a major amount of our time working on emergency
preparedness. OSHA in the Gulf, we had 35 to 40 people full-
time down there helping protect the workers, the 60,000 workers
involved in the cleanup. It would be a big piece of our
emergency budget. I could go on, but there are a lot of very
big impacts.
Ms. DeLauro. Quite frankly, what I would like to do and you
can get this to us, I really do want to know what the
implications are. I think it is important for us to get out
what those implications are. We, some could say, dodged a
bullet here, but I think we may be re-upping here for 2012.
Mr. Michaels. I will provide them.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2340B.167

PATTERN OF VIOLATIONS

Mr. Main, the law gives MSHA certain additional enforcement
powers when it finds that there has been a pattern of violation
at the mine. I understand that MSHA has been trying to make
better use of this authority in order to more effectively deal
with some of the worst safety problems in the mining industry.
Would you describe the pattern of violations process for
us, the change you have been making and why you believe this
authority is important? What have been the results of your
efforts so far?
Mr. Main. I think the short message is that Congress
enacted a law in 1977 establishing a pattern of violations.
This was after the Scotia mine disaster in Kentucky in 1976.
They intended for the agency to go after mine operators more
forcefully that had chronic----
Ms. DeLauro. Repeat offenders.
Mr. Main. Repeat offenders. So after the statute was
enacted, there was an expectation that the agency responsible
would enact regulations and prevent the action. Unfortunately,
in the 33 year history, I think I have that right, but it is
pretty close to 33 years, no mine had ever been placed on the
pattern of violation as intended by Congress.
Ms. DeLauro. In 33 years?
Mr. Main. Thirty-three years. And right after I became
Assistant Secretary, we began to look at the pattern process
and had to deal with the backlog as well, because there is a
fear we had that some mine operators may be contesting
violations to avoid the potential pattern of violations process
that was in place.
We took a look at that, particularly after the Upper Big
Branch disaster, and that became a very important issue, and we
decided to make some substantive changes in the current
administrative process. We looked hard at mines that would be
selected, put in stiffer requirements for mine operators to get
off, and really made mine operators who had trouble create mine
management programs to clean up their act.
We sent notice to 14 mine operators late last fall that
they were on the new potential pattern violations, and thus
far, eight mines have improved their compliance and two have
not, and they have been placed on the actual pattern.
Ms. DeLauro. I don't know if you have anything to say, but
my time is going to run out and I wanted you to get that in,
because it would appear to me after 33 years, we finally have a
process in place because there are repeat offenders, is that
correct?
Mr. Main. There are repeat offenders, and it is a pretty
stiff law that Congress created, and there was an expectation
that we as an agency employ that.
Ms. DeLauro. I don't know, Mr. Chairman. I think I have 8
seconds here. If you have anything to say in 8 seconds, Mr.
Main, go for it.
Mr. Rehberg. Or two or one.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, by the way,
congratulations on your elevation to this great chair.
Mr. Rehberg. Yeah. Thank you.

PROPOSED DUST RULE

Mr. Rogers. Mr. Main, on the proposed dust rule, tell me
when the criteria document that you are relying upon from the
Secretary of Labor advisory committee, when was that data first
published?
Mr. Main. The criteria document issued by NIOSH was in
1995.
Mr. Rogers. And is that the information that you are
relying upon to propose the rule?
Mr. Main. There are actually two documents or two different
results that were provided that we have relied on. One was the
1995 criteria document, and the second is a 1996 Federal
Advisory Committee Report that was a committee comprised of
labor, industry, academia, the government that developed
recommendations for eradicating this disease.
Mr. Rogers. Is it common practice for Federal agencies to
rely on 15-year old documents when promulgating regulations in
this highly technical field?
Mr. Main. Well, there is current relevancy with the
findings and recommendations made by those two reports. We are
trying to deal with a disease that has been plaguing coal
miners since we have been mining coal. Thousands of miners have
died of this disease. The cost, I think, since the black lung
provisions took place in the Mine Act----
Mr. Rogers. Well, the question is, why did you rely upon
15-year-old information? Surely there is more recent
information about this problem. I have read it myself.
Mr. Main. The disease is still with us. Miners are still
getting the disease. We are finding younger miners showing----
Mr. Rogers. You are telling me things that you can read in
the daily newspaper. Why did you rely on 15-year-old
information? Is there not newer information available about the
impact of black lung in the mines, of dust in the mines?
Mr. Main. Well, the information that was developed is still
relevant today.
Mr. Rogers. But there have been changes in the industry and
in the technology since that time.
[The information follows:]

The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health

The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
just posted the final version of their Current Intelligence Bulletin
64: Coal mine dust exposure and associated health outcomes, a review of
information published since 1995. http://www.cdc.goviniosh/docs/2011-
172/
In it (p. 11) NIOSH notes reports in 2006 and 2007 that ``called
attention to advanced pneumoconiosis in working underground miners''
where ``most of the affected miners had started work after 1969 yet had
still developed severe CWP.'' Following those reports NIOSH performed
additional field studies that showed that ``the prevalence of CWP
appeared to have stopped declining around 1995-1999, and has risen
since then.'' They also note, ``of particular concern are the
prevalence values for the last three five year periods (1995-2009) for
miners with
