- MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------

Wednesday, March 7, 2012.

INSTALLATIONS, ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY AND BRAC

WITNESSES

HON. DOROTHY ROBYN, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (INSTALLATIONS
AND ENVIRONMENT)
HON. KATHERINE HAMMACK, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY (INSTALLATIONS,
ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT)
HON. JACKALYNE PFANNESTIEL, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY
(INSTALLATIONS AND ENVIRONMENT)
HON. TERRY A. YONKERS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE
(INSTALLATIONS, ENVIRONMENT AND LOGISTICS)

Chairman Opening Statement

Mr. Culberson. The Committee on Military Construction,
Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies will come to order. Thank
you for joining us.
I will pass to my good friend, Mr. Bishop of Georgia, for
any opening remarks comments he would like to make.

Ranking Member Opening Statement

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank this distinguished panel.
I view this hearing as a continuation of our budget
overview hearing, with a few more topics. As you know, last
week, we had the military brass before us, and today we have
the civilian leadership.
Last week, I thought we had a good hearing that shed light
on some difficult issues that are facing the Department of
Defense. Some of these issues include ending two wars, starting
a force draw-down, and dealing with lower budgets. As you can
imagine, the Department has a full plate.
In addition to those issues, let's not forget that
sequestration is looming due to the Budget Control Act. It
would be harmful to our national defense if we have
sequestration. But I would like to also say that it would be
harmful to all the Federal agencies. And I don't want to give
the impression that I am only concerned about the Department of
Defense, because I am concerned about all the agencies.
There is one more item that concerns me, Mr. Chairman. As
you know, the fiscal year 2013 budget requested not one but two
BRAC rounds. As I said last week, the Department should
proactively consider taking further reductions in the overseas
bases before initiating another BRAC round for bases in CONUS.
The witnesses before us are dealing with some of the
serious challenges that we face, but I want to assure them that
our subcommittee will do all that we can to make sure that our
military has everything that it needs to accomplish the mission
while taking care of our men and women in uniform and their
families.
Thanks for the opportunity to share my concerns, and I look
forward to the discussions and the challenges as we hear from
the panel this afternoon.
I yield back; and I am going to go run and vote, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Sanford.
This committee, as I know each of you are aware, works arm
in arm. Perhaps the only real distinction between us is
geography; and, even then, we are working arm-in-arm.
I am delighted to have you here. And each one of our
witnesses--you have all got written statements which, of
course, will be made a part of the record; and we invite you to
summarize them.
We are sort of in a bind here, because I am going to have
to slip out to go vote. But what we will attempt to do is, as
soon as one of my colleagues comes in that I can pass the gavel
to, I will slip out briefly in order to go vote. And then we
will just rotate so that in the interest of time--because I
know how busy you all are, and we are delighted to have you
here.
If I could, I would like to start with the Honorable
Dorothy Robyn, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Installations and the Environment; and I would encourage you to
please summarize your statement and, of course, it will be made
a part of the record in its entirety.

Opening Statement

Ms. Robyn. Thank you Chairman Culberson, Ranking Member
Bishop, and other members of the subcommittee who are not here.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the President's
budget request for military construction and environmental
programs.
I want to touch on three issues very briefly: our MILCON
and family housing budget, our request for two new BRAC rounds,
and environment and energy.
First on MILCON. The Budget Control Act reduced defense
spending over the FYDP by $259 billion. That, together with
reductions in force structure, has led us to cut sharply our
fiscal year 2013 request for MILCON as we reassess our
infrastructure needs for the new, leaner force structure.
We are asking for $11.2 billion for MILCON and family
housing, of which $9.1 billion is for pure MILCON. That is a
reduction of between 25 and 45 percent from fiscal year 2012,
depending on the department. The exception is the defense-wide
MILCON accounts, which are up by 6 percent over fiscal year
2012, and that reflects support for high-priority improvements
in hospitals and DoD schools.
We are requesting another $14 billion to sustain, restore,
and upgrade the condition of our existing facilities.
Let me highlight one thing we are not asking money for:
family housing here in the United States. That is because we
have now privatized nearly all of our 200,000 units of family
housing. Using the power of the commercial market, we have
leveraged a $3 billion investment of DOD dollars to generate
$27 billion worth of high-quality, well-maintained homes; and
that has done a lot to improve the quality of life of military
families. It is an extraordinary success story, the most
successful reform my office has carried out and something we
should be looking to do more broadly.
The second issue, BRAC. We need another BRAC round, ideally
two. The math is straightforward. Force reductions produce
excess capacity. Excess capacity is a drain on resources. Only
through BRAC can we align our infrastructure with our defense
strategy.
Let me say two things in anticipation of criticisms and one
apropos of Congressman Bishop's comment.
First, we have already made significant reductions in our
European footprint, and we will do more. I describe in my
statement both what we have done and the BRAC-like process that
we will follow looking forward. But even if we make a
significant cut in our footprint in Europe we will still need a
domestic BRAC.
The second point I want to again respond to, critics point
to the 2005 BRAC round as evidence that BRAC doesn't produce
savings or at least not in a reasonable period of time. But
unlike the first four BRAC rounds, which paid off in 2 to 3
years, the 2005 round was not about savings and eliminating
excess capacity. Carried out in a post-9/11 environment when
the Department was at war, it was about transformation. The
Army, in particular, used BRAC 2005 to carry out major
transformational initiatives, such as the modularization of
BCTs, initiatives that would have otherwise taken decades to
achieve.
That said, a 2013 BRAC round would look more like the BRAC
rounds of the 1990s, where the focus was on savings, because
that is the priority now.
Issue three, the environment and energy. There is an
enormous amount to say on this topic. I have a very long
statement. You will hear from my colleagues about the wonderful
things that we are doing in the energy area. We are making a
robust investment to continue our efforts in the environment.
I want to highlight just one thing in the interest of time,
and that is technology. Technology has been the Department of
Defense's comparative advantage for 200 years. The Department
of Defense is a technology agency. It is an innovation machine.
Although we tend to talk about technology in the context of
weapons systems, it is important to harness that advantage for
what we are trying to do with respect to both the environment
and energy. Let me give you an example from the environmental
area.
A decade ago, the two environmental technology programs
that I oversee, SERDP and ESTCP, took on a challenge, defending
technologies that could discriminate between scrap metal and
hazardous unexploded ordnance, UXO; in other words, distinguish
beer cans from bombs. The existing technology which we still
use today cannot make a distinction between those two. The
false positive rate is 99.989 percent. As a result, contractors
must dig up literally hundreds of thousands of metal objects in
order to identify and remove a handful of pieces of UXO.
Mr. Culberson. That is an unhappy job.
Ms. Robyn. And contractors are paid for every hole they dig
up.
Because this process is so labor-intensive, the bill is
very high. Our estimated UXO cleanup cost is $14 billion.
Remarkably, 10 years of investment has yielded technologies
that can discriminate between UXO and harmless metal objects
with a very high degree of reliability. We are now doing live-
site demonstrations of this new technology on an accelerated
basis, and we are working with the cleanup community and State
regulators to get them comfortable with what is a fundamentally
new approach, one that we believe can save billions of dollars.
That is the power of technology.
Similarly, in the energy area, we can leverage high
technology. The same folks who brought us the UXO technology
run something that I oversee called the Installation Energy
Test Bed, and the rationale is similar.
In the energy area, as in the environmental area, emerging
technologies offer a way to significantly reduce DOD's costs
and improve its performance. But because of fundamental market
failures, those technologies are very slow to get to market.
As the owner of 300,000 buildings, it is in the Defense
Department's direct self-interest to help firms overcome the
barriers that inhibit innovative technologies from being
commercialized and/or deployed on our installations; and we do
this by using our installations as a distributed test bed to
demonstrate and validate them in a real-world, integrated
environment. And we have about 70 of these going, and I hope I
have an opportunity to talk about some of them in short.
As budgets tighten, we need to invest more smartly. Using
the market as we have done with housing privatization and
leveraging advanced technology, as we are doing with our
Installation Energy Test Beds are critical.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Dr. Robyn.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.026

Mr. Culberson. We go next to Ms. Hammack, if I could; and,
Madam Secretary, thank you very much for being with us today.

Opening Statement

Ms. Hammack. Thank you very much, Chairman Culberson,
Representative Bishop, and other members who may join us later.
On behalf of soldiers, families, and civilians of the U.S.
Army, I want to thank you for the opportunity to talk to you a
little bit about our budget for fiscal year 2013.
The budget request supports an Army that is in transition,
yet we are still at war. We know the fiscal challenges that the
Nation faces and are planning accordingly to implement what was
asked us by the Budget Control Act. The committee's continued
support will ensure that the Army remains ready, manned,
trained, and equipped to face the challenges of protecting this
Nation.
Mr. Culberson. Secretary Hammack, forgive me. I will have
to step out and go vote. None of my colleagues are here yet. If
you would excuse us, we will just have to stand in recess as
briefly as possible. Thank you for your patience and
understanding.
We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Culberson. The subcommittee will come back to order.
We thank you for your patience in light of these votes. I
apologize for the interruption.
Secretary Hammack, I would ask you to please continue with
your statement. Thank you very much.
Ms. Hammack. Thank you very much, Chairman Culberson.
The Army's budget request reflects the Nation's current
fiscal reality and is a 32 percent reduction from the prior
year. Pending the strategic decisions on Army's end strength
reductions, force structure, and stationing across the country
has required the Army to review our facility investments and to
defer some of those investments that could be impacted by force
structure changes. The Active Army MILCON budget in particular
has been reduced to defer projects, while we have not taken
similar cuts in National Guard or Reserve. Once the total Army
analysis has been completed, the Army will then rebalance the
fiscal year 2014 military construction budget to meet the needs
of a realigned force.
The Army has implemented a Facility Strategy 2020, which is
a facility investment strategy to provide quality energy
efficient structures while taking down some of our more
inefficient buildings. This strategy is a cost-effective and
efficient approach to facility investments that reduces
unneeded footprint, saves energy by preserving the most
efficient facilities, and consolidates functions for better
space utilization. It also, as I mentioned before, demolishes
failing buildings and uses appropriate excess facilities as
lease alternatives.
For fiscal year 2013, the Army's budget is $3.6 billion,
103 projects, of which $1.9 billion is Active Army, $614
million National Guard, and $306 million for the Reserves.
I want to talk a little bit about Base Realignment and
Closure, echoing a little bit that Dr. Robyn said, that the
Army met our BRAC 2005 obligations within the 6-year
implementation window.
BRAC 2005 was very different for the Army in that it was a
transformational BRAC, transformed how the Army trains,
deploys, supplies, equips, cares for and garrisons its
soldiers, families, and civilians. We shut down 11
installations, 387 Reserve component sites, realigned 53
installations and/or functions at an investment of almost $18
billion, which included 329 major construction projects.
As of January, 2012, the Army conveyed an unprecedented 47
percent of our BRAC 2005 total excess acreage of over 35,000
acres, which was higher than we had in any other BRAC round.
Other BRAC rounds waited until the BRAC date of closure and
then transfer started. But we were able to in this BRAC round
transfer land during the BRAC process.
For fiscal year 2013, the Army is requesting about $100
million for BRAC 2005; and, of that, there is a significant
portion, about a 50/50 split, for BRAC 2005 to handle
environmental and caretaker. The 48.4 is the caretaker. But we
also are requesting $79 million for prior BRAC rounds. The
prior BRAC rounds, a more significant portion is for the
environmental cleanup. Only $4 million is for the caretaker
status.
The Army does support the DoD request for BRAC authority
for 2013 and 2015, because changes in force structure will
necessitate evaluation of our facilities to optimize usage and
capability. We have listened to Congress and have followed your
guidance to reduce costs and footprint in Europe and in Korea.
In Europe, over the last 6 years, we have closed 97 sites and
returned 23,000 acres. In the next 4 years, we plan to close
another 23 sites and return 6,400 acres, primarily in Germany.
In Korea, over the last 6 years, we have closed 34 sites, with
7,300 acres returned; and in the next 4 years we plan another
20 sites and 9,400 acres. So we are implementing a BRAC-like
Base Realignment and Closure overseas similar to what has been
done in the United States.
BRAC 2005 also greatly benefited the Army Guard and Reserve
in that they consolidated on a three-to-one basis out of
failing facilities into newer facilities, returning that land
in communities for greater economic use and taxpaying use.
On energy, the Army has a comprehensive energy and
sustainability program. Reducing energy at Army facilities is
mission critical to us, as we have seen energy challenges due
to recent weather events. The tornadoes that we have seen over
the last 12 months have had an impact on some of our
installations in reducing access to energy as power lines go
down, causing us to rely on generators. So we recognize that
energy is mission critical to us. It is also operationally
necessary, while at the same time it is a fiscally prudent use
of funds.
Since 2003, the Army has reduced our installation energy
consumption by 13 percent, while, at the same time, our number
of active soldiers and civilians has increased by 20 percent.
The Army also, instead of developing our own high-
performance building code, we adopted a national standard
ASHRAE 189.1, which is a peer-reviewed, publicly available
standard, something that is used by contractors in the private
sector as well and that simplifies working with the Army. It
also develops or returns to us a 40 percent savings in energy
and water for new construction.
We have implemented in the last 12 months a net zero
initiative, which focuses on reducing energy, water, and waste
on our Army installations. We have 17 pilot installations that
are looking to get to a net zero point by 2020.
We also have implemented an Energy Initiatives Task Force
that is focusing on large-scale alternative energy production
to give us the energy security on our installations that we so
desperately need.
At the same time, we have accelerated the use of energy
saving performance contracts. These are contracts where the
private sector invests in energy efficiency projects and puts
the capital up to install it on an Army installation, and we
pay them back out of energy savings. In the first quarter of
fiscal year 2012, we implemented $93 million of contracts for
energy saving performance contracts; and that was more than we
did in all of fiscal year 2011, which was at $74 million. So
the Army is on track, if not ahead of schedule, to meet the
goal set by the President of high-performance contracting in
the military sector.
At the same time, though, we have been working on our
process time, which has been a challenge historically in
getting contracts signed. And we have cut our process time in
half, down to 12 to 14 months in contracting.
With that, I would like to thank you for your attention,
and I look forward to your questions after the other
secretaries have a chance to introduce.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.046

Opening Statement

Mr. Culberson. It is now my pleasure to introduce Secretary
Pfannenstiel. We are glad to have you here, Assistant Secretary
of the Navy for Energy, Installations, and Environment. We
welcome your testimony.
Ms. Pfannenstiel. Thank you, Chairman Culberson,
Representative Bishop, and members of the committee. I am
pleased to appear before you today to provide an overview of
the Department of Navy's investment in shore infrastructure.
The Department's fiscal year 2013 budget request includes
$13 billion of investment in military construction, facility
sustainment, restoration and modernization, previous rounds of
BRAC, family housing, environmental restoration, and base
operating support.
The military construction request of $1.8 billion supports
our combatant commanders, new warfighting platforms and
missions, facilities recapitalization, and servicemember
quality of life initiatives for the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps.
Military construction projects in Bahrain and Djibouti support
high-priority missions in the region, enhance our forward
presence, and provide stability for U.S. interests. Two
projects in Spain support the forward deployed naval forces,
and a project in Romania supports European phased adaptive
approach infrastructure.
Equally important are military construction programs that
invest in support facilities for the Joint Strike Fighter and
MV-22B, infrastructure improvements, training and education
facilities, and the safety and security of nuclear weapons in
the United States.
I would specifically like to emphasize that we remain
committed to establishing an operational Marine Corps presence
on Guam. We know Congress has concern about the execution of
the Guam military realignment, and we are taking the necessary
steps to address those concerns and move the program forward.
The U.S. Government is currently meeting with the government of
Japan to discuss adjustments to the 2006 realignment roadmap
agreement.
As Secretary Panetta has testified, Guam is an important
part of the U.S. effort to reposture our forces in the Pacific.
We believe the adjustments being discussed will address
execution concerns, increase our flexibility, and strengthen
our presence in the region.
This is an important year for the Guam realignment. We will
continue to work with you and our partners on Guam and in Japan
as more information becomes available.
As for the 2005 BRAC round, the Department met our legal
obligations by the statutory deadline of September 15, 2011,
and successfully implemented all required realignment and
closure actions, as has been previously specified in our
business plans.
Our fiscal year 2013 budget request of $18 million enables
ongoing environmental restoration, caretaker, and property
disposal efforts. For prior BRAC rounds, our fiscal year 2013
budget request of $147 million will enable us to continue
disposal actions for the remaining 7 percent real property and
meet the legal requirements for environmental cleanup. The
Department of the Navy fully supports the Secretary's proposal
for additional rounds of BRAC to improve the alignment of our
shore infrastructure with our force structure.
Finally, we intend to meet the energy goals set forth by
Congress and the Secretary of the Navy. We recognize that
energy is a critical resource for maritime aviation
expeditionary and shore missions. We must strengthen our energy
security and reduce our vulnerability to price escalations and
volatility. With this in mind, the Navy and Marine Corps
continue to reform how we produce, procure, and use energy. Our
budget request includes $1 billion in fiscal year 2013 and $4
billion across the FYDP for operational and shore energy
initiatives.
To help meet Congress' renewable energy goals and our own
goal of producing 50 percent of our shore energy from
alternative sources, we will develop a strategy to facilitate
the production of large-scale renewable power projects on naval
installations. We will use third-party financing mechanisms
such as power purchase agreements, joint ventures, and enhanced
use leases to avoid adding costs to taxpayers.
Currently, our bases support about 300 megawatts of
renewable energy, 270 megawatts of which is produced by a
geothermal power plant at China Lake. We have awarded contracts
for three solar projects in the Southwest and are finalizing a
similar contract in Hawaii. The three awarded power purchase
agreements at China Lake, Twentynine Palms, and Barstow will
save the Department $20 million over 20 years. In all three of
these places, we were paying less per kilowatt hour for
electricity than we would for conventional power.
In closing, your support of the Department's fiscal year
2013 budget request ensures we can build and maintain
facilities that enable our Navy and Marine Corps to meet the
diverse challenges of tomorrow.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify here. I look
forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much for your testimony.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.074

Mr. Culberson. It is now my pleasure to call on Secretary
Yonkers.
Of course, your written statement will be made a part of
the record; and we welcome your summary of your written
statement. Thank you, sir, for your service and for your
testimony today.

Opening Statement

Mr. Yonkers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all, Congressman Bishop, distinguished members of
the Subcommittee. I really do appreciate being here today and
being able to talk to you all about the Air Force's
installation, energy, and environmental programs; and let me
just say from the git-go to thank you again for your unwavering
support of our Air Force and our Airmen and their families.
Our fiscal year 2013 budget request responds to two main
drivers: the Budget Control Act that the Congress passed last
year and the new strategic defense policy that the President
and Secretary Panetta announced in January. As we prepared our
fiscal year 2013 budget, we looked across the entire Air Force
portfolio and made difficult decisions to achieve the Air
Force's share of that $487 billion in defense savings mandated
by the Budget Control Act.
In our installations, energy, and environmental portfolio
we are focusing on investments and the critical infrastructure
needed to sustain our air bases and the quality of life
improvements for our Airmen and their families. We are
requesting funding to meet the COCOM's most critical facility
requirements and facility modifications to bed down and sustain
the Joint Strike Fighter, the MC-12, surveillance aircraft,
plus the stand-up of an additional B-52 squadron at Minot Air
Force Base, North Dakota.
We are ever cognizant of the smart investments that will
drive down our cost of doing business, and we are requesting
$215 million this budget year to reduce our energy footprint by
demolishing old, energy inefficient buildings and upgrading
systems like HVAC and other high-energy-use systems,
investments that will have a tangible payback over the FYDP.
Moreover, we are re-evaluating the policies and contracting
mechanisms in the areas of military construction and
environment with the primary objective of reducing construction
and environmental restoration costs.
As funding for the military construction becomes more
austere, we have made a deliberate effort to build only where
existing capacity is not available or where the cost-benefit
analysis validates demolishing the aging facilities and
construction of more efficient and fundamental replacements.
Our fiscal year 2013 budget request also contains $3.9
billion for military construction, family housing, and
facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization. For
military construction we are requesting $442 million this year,
and that is $900 million below fiscal year 2012.
As you heard in testimony before, the deliberate pause in
our program is prudent in light of the force structure
decisions that are stemming from this new defense strategic
guidance.
Also on our fiscal year 2013 budget request, we are
continuing to emphasize first-class housing and strive to
improve the overall quality of life for our Airmen and their
families. Our new dorm plan for 2012 to 2016 will guide our
future investments for sustaining existing facilities and
recapitalizing those which are inadequate. As we progress
through 2012, we are nearing completion of our efforts to
privatize family housing in the continental United States and
to upgrade family housing overseas, especially in Japan. Our
fiscal year 2013 budget request for military family housing is
$580 million.
On September 15, 2011, like the other Services, the Air
Force successfully completed its 2005 Base Realignment and
Closure program on time and within the original $3.8 billion
budget. This up-front BRAC investment has resulted in $1.4
billion in annual savings to the Department of Defense, and we
are reinvesting those dollars today in missions in fiscal year
2013.
However, with that being said, I must also say that BRAC
2005 fell short of the Air Force's expectations and goals to
reduce our overhead and our operational costs by reducing
excess installation capacity. Today, 7 years later and almost
500 fewer aircraft in the inventory, the Air Force continues to
maintain large amounts of excess infrastructure. It is costing
us hundreds of millions of dollars a year, and those are
dollars that we need to invest in other areas.
The excess capacity that we have at these installations can
effectively only be eliminated by closing installations. So we
fully also support the Secretary of Defense's request for two
more rounds of Base Realignment and Closure.
Let me close just by touching briefly on our environmental
programs. This budget year we are asking for $1.1 billion to
meet our environmental compliance and cleanup requirements at
our installations, a funding amount that has been relatively
stable for a number of years.
Specifically, we are asking for $469 million to meet our
ongoing compliance commitments. This includes $46 million in
pollution prevention, again, dollars that will be invested to
reduce our hazardous waste streams and reduce our environmental
liabilities and future costs.
We are requesting $644 million to continue our
environmental cleanups at both BRAC and non-BRAC bases. Last
year, we implemented a new cleanup policy that relies on firm,
fixed-price, performance-based contracts to achieve closure of
sites. In employing this new method, we have already found that
it reduces our costs by nearly 20 percent, and we are moving
sites to closure three times faster.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, we all
recognize that we are operating in challenging financial times;
and if sequestration takes effect that is going to be even more
difficult. We continue to look at every aspect of our
operations and aggressively pursue efficiencies to reduce our
cost of doing business without sacrificing either readiness or
quality of life programs. We will continue to make these
strategic investments that have the tangible returns that I
have talked about and do our part to try to meet the financial
obligations of this Nation.
I also thank you again for your time and look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.092

CURRENT FISCAL ENVIRONMENT

Mr. Culberson. I know that we have all got questions. I
will be as brief as I can to ensure time for my colleagues, but
I have to hit on a couple of things that are particularly
pressing in my mind and highly relevant to the work of this
subcommittee.
You have about $3.9 billion worth of projects. The Air
Force, Secretary Yonkers, you are presenting about $3.9 billion
worth of recommendations to us today?
Mr. Yonkers. $3.9 billion for military construction, and
facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization.
Mr. Culberson. And the result of folks abusing a privilege,
like a lot of privileges, has lost it here temporarily with
this earmark thing. It is a great example for all of us. I hope
the whole subcommittee will work arm in arm. We have got to fix
this. I hope it is just a temporary problem.
For example, I am circling back to military construction.
The Army Corps of Engineers came in to see me. Arizona may not
have this directly, Jeff, but you will certainly see it. Or,
obviously, in Kansas it may not be as big a deal.
But the Panama Canal--I am going to tie this right back
into what we are doing here today, folks, because it just
struck me. I didn't realize how bad this problem was.
The Panama Canal--they are about to open a third Panama
Canal that will be in the next 12 months open for business, and
they are going to be able to bring supertankers across the
Isthmus of Panama. They are all--those giant ships--deeper than
48 feet. The Port of Houston, the Port of New Orleans, all the
Ports in the Gulf of Mexico--Mobile might be deeper, I think.
But almost all of them are 48 feet or shallower.
So I asked the Corps, all those giant ships--how do we
bring them into--how do we bring all that cargo, all those
jobs, all that economic growth into the Gulf of Mexico?
And the Army Corps said, you can't do it.
I said, we can't do it? Why?
Because we would have to authorize them--the Army Corps is
only authorized to dredge the Ports of Savannah, New Orleans,
Houston, all of them to 45 feet.
But it is something we have really got to fix. We have
really got to fix it.
So for public works projects, I hope we would all work
together so we could public works projects for Federal, State,
or local government that are obviously absolutely transparent
and in which we do not increase spending and that we don't
obviously have any conflict of interest ourselves. Because we
are dead in the water. We cannot expand any of the ports to
handle all that cargo.

FOREIGN MATERIEL EXPLOITATION LAB

Another one that came to mind that is circling right back
into the work of the subcommittee is I had a chance to visit
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. And God bless them for the
work they are doing. If you guys get a chance to do it--Jeff,
when you get to the Senate, I hope you will go see what they
are doing at Wright-Patterson. It is extraordinary and highly
classified. But I will say that we all know--and the name of
the facility, Secretary Yonkers, what is that called out there?
Mr. Yonkers. It is the NASIC, and it is the foreign
materiel exploitation laboratory in particular.
Mr. Culberson. But there is a name for it. The foreign
materiel acquisition?
Mr. Yonkers. I thought it was a laboratory, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Oh, excuse me. Okay.
Well, the work that y'all do there is extraordinary and
unique in the United States. They have got multiple customers.
And remembering that England almost lost the war because of
the German U-boat menace in the Gulf, and what finally turned
the tables was a German U-boat was partially sunk and the crew
got off the ship so fast before it sank. And the British were
quick enough to go on board, and they captured the Enigma. And
the British Parliament was able to----
Oh, here it is. I am sorry. This is out in the open, the
Foreign Materiel Exploitation Lab. And listen carefully to that
name.
I really wanted to make sure we all are focused on this,
because the testimony we have here before us today is a perfect
example of why we have really got to fix this problem to
restore a fundamental obligation of the Congress as stewards of
the Treasury, as guardians of the Treasury, and to do so in a
way that obviously we don't want to increase spending. We want
to make sure it is transparent and there is no conflict of
interest. But we have got a responsibility.
When the British captured that U-boat and captured the
Enigma, the British Parliament was able to invest in a massive
new facility to take advantage of that and they broke the
German codes and won the war. That is what saved England, is
because they were able to intercept Admiral Donitz's messages
to the U-boats and send out destroyers exactly where the U-
boats were and nail 'em. That saved England, which won the war.
Now we are handicapped. We can't help the Air Force. When
is that facility scheduled to be expanded, Secretary Yonkers,
at Wright-Patterson?
Mr. Yonkers. Right now, sir, it is in the fiscal year 2016
military construction.
Mr. Culberson. 2016. So as Mr. Moran, who has served so
many years--and so many of y'all have so many more years
experience at this than I do. The extraordinary work--I hope
you have been out there to see it, Jim, incredible work that
they are doing.
But we are in the position, Judge, as you--in the
courtroom, I know judges are limited. They have to just sit
there passively like spectators with a catcher's mitt, and they
can only handle what drops into their lap.
And it is just a violation I think of everything that we,
as policymakers, as stewards of the Treasury, our constituents
entrust us with this extraordinary privilege to use our good
judgment. And as the good Lord said, if they lie about the
little things, they will lie about the big things. Well,
conversely, if you can trust us with the big things, you can
trust us with the smaller ones. Long conversation leading up to
some discussion with the Secretary.
And I really hope we will all work together, guys, on
fixing this so we can do public works projects, Federal, State,
or local, absolutely transparent, no conflict of interest, and
don't increase spending. Because it is just incredible. If I
attempt to move--if any of us on this committee, for example,
for any of the projects that y'all are working on attempted----
For example, Mr. Yonkers, I hate to keep picking on the Air
Force, but the list that you have given us, Mr. Secretary, if
we were to attempt to move a project that you had listed
further down and move it up, could we do that?
That is prohibited by the earmark ban. It just doesn't make
sense.
It is highly relevant. Because the Israelis are going to
probably have to deal with Iran some time in the months ahead.
And God bless y'all for what you are doing, and I won't
necessarily say where it is being done. But the extraordinary
work that is being done by our men and women in uniform is
going to become even more relevant if the Israelis have to take
out the Iranian nuclear reactor.
And because of the earmark ban, we can't, as policymakers,
do what the British Parliament did when they captured the
Enigma machine. We can't make good policy judgements and move a
project up on the list. That is nuts, and we have got to fix
it.
I want to ask specifically about, if I could, Mr.
Secretary--actually, to each one of you--an open-ended
question. And then I will pass it to my good friend from
Georgia.
One of my big concerns in the hearing that we just had with
the chiefs that really concerns me--and I didn't express it as
well as Senator Levin did. And I just want to quote in today's
CQ that Senator Levin, at one of their hearings on Wednesday,
said to the--who did he have in front of him? I am not sure who
he had in front of him.
But he said, quote, I am surprised and disappointed to hear
our military commanders are focused on Afghan force size based
on what they think might be affordable instead of the number of
Afghan security forces they believe will be needed to maintain
security. It strikes me as extremely unwise to base decisions
on the future size of the Afghan Army and police exclusively on
projections of future affordability instead of military
requirements to secure the gains that have been made at great
cost to America--obviously, to our soldiers, men and women--and
to prevent the Taliban from returning to power.

AFFORDABLE RATHER THAN MILITARY REQUIREMENT AND MISSION

That is one of the things I wanted to ask each one of you,
to please comment: To what extent are the recommendations that
the Air Force, the Navy, each one of the Army are making to
this subcommittee and to the Congress based on what is
affordable rather than military requirement and mission? That
is a real source of concern.
Mr. Yonkers. In the context of military construction?
Mr. Culberson. Yes. Obviously, the sequestration. We have
got this asteroid entering the atmosphere that we have to deal
with and deal with the mandatory programs that are what are
really killing us. We have to make sure we protect our
extraordinary defense capability. We have to deal with
sequestration down the road and deal with, obviously, balancing
the budget. That is, I hope, going to come out of mandatory,
primarily. It needs to.
But to what extent are the recommendations you are making
to us here today--for example, there is no new construction,
Mr. Secretary--Secretary Yonkers. The Air Force is not
proposing any new construction. We talked about this in my
office. I am just concerned that there is no--are the
recommendations you are making driven by what you think is
affordable more so than by what our mission requirements are
and the needs of the Nation's security?
Mr. Yonkers. Well, certainly the recommendations that--or
the requests that we are making here are reflective of what we
are trying to do under the Budget Control Act and $487 billion
in cost reductions. But we think we have fine-tuned it to the
point where we have hit on all of the high notes with regards
to meeting the requirements that we have to support our COCOM
commanders and to support our forces. Would we like to have
more money in the budget to buy more MILCON? Obviously. But,
right now, it is a belt-tightening situation. So I think we
have got it right.
Mr. Culberson. You are not concerned about risk at this
point with this recommendation?
Mr. Yonkers. Not at this point in time. I am not concerned
overly about risk in our military construction or the
Facilities, Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization (FSRM)
program.
Mr. Culberson. Anyone else want to comment? And then I will
pass it on to my friend, Mr. Bishop.
Ms. Pfannenstiel. Mr. Chairman, I would echo what Mr.
Yonkers has said, that the budget request was based on the
strategic review of meeting our military mission, and what we
have put in front of you does meet that mission.
Ms. Hammack. Thank you.
From the Army's perspective, we looked at quality and
capacity. And when we looked across our portfolio and across
the list of MILCON requests, we looked to spend our money where
we had failing facilities, buildings that were in what we call
a Q-4 condition, the worst condition, where they needed
replacement or where we did not have the capacity that we
needed in order to do the primary mission. So we rate things on
a one-to-four scale for quality and capacity.
So when we prioritize the projects in our list of requests,
we have prioritized those that were correcting quality and
capacity issues which we considered to be most mission
critical.
Mr. Culberson. Well, thank you. I am taking too much time,
but I am really exercised, as you can tell.
My concern is that our responsibility as legislators is to
make sound policy decisions based on our best judgments. And I
think we have almost, by the abuse of people in the past and
with the earmark ban, which really is a temporary situation, I
hope. We need to fix it. We are sort of reduced to the
situation of judges, where we just have to deal with what is
dropped in our lap.
Thank you for the indulgence, members; and I am going to
pass it to Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman; and I want
to thank all of the panel members for your appearance and for
your service. I guess I will go service by service, starting
with the Army.

PROJECTS DEFERRED FROM FY2013 PROGRAM

Ms. Hammack, what types of projects were deferred from the
fiscal year 2013 program as a result of the force draw-down?
How much of an impact did the lack of a finalized brigade
combat team structure have on the '13 programs? And when the
brigade combat team structure is decided, do you think that the
Army will need to make some changes to its fiscal year 2013
program? Or will the problems be addressed in 2014?
Ms. Hammack. The projects that were deferred were primarily
barracks or brigade combat team centers, and we deferred those
out and will reprioritize them for fiscal year 2014. We do not
believe that there is anything in the total Army analysis or
the core structure change that would have any impact on our
fiscal year 2013 priorities.
Mr. Bishop. So you anticipated having to do that in 2014
because you don't have the brigade combat team structure in
place now?
Ms. Hammack. That is correct. And we did not want to be in
a position where we built property that would become excess. So
we deferred projects.
And, again, we are going to conduct a gap analysis once the
total Army analysis comes out. But at this point in time we do
not believe there is anything in the fiscal year 2013 budget
that would be impacted, and we will re-evaluate the projects in
2014 based upon the force structure decisions.

ARMY FACILITY STRATEGY 2020

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Can you take a few moments and explain what the Army
Facility Strategy 2020 is to the committee and what metrics
were used when developing the Army Facility Strategy 2020 and
explain how the Army used that strategy when putting together
the 2013 program.
Ms. Hammack. The Facility Strategy 2020 is taking a look at
what our capacity is currently and is directly in line with the
total Army analysis. So as we are evaluating our future force
structure requirements, we are evaluating that in concert with
the current capacity and availability on installations. So that
when the force structure analysis is complete, we will preserve
the most efficient facilities; we will consolidate functions
for better space utilization; and then we will demolish failing
buildings directly in line with what Secretary Yonkers said in
order to save costs, those facilities that are costing us more
to sustain than is viable. So we will be consolidating
operations.

OVERSEAS MILCON PROJECTS

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, ma'am.
Let me move to the Navy and Marine Corps construction.
Secretary Pfannenstiel, approximately 30 percent of the
Navy's construction program is for overseas projects. Can you
explain the importance of these project requirements?
And then I would like for you to talk about the homeport
initiative. What type of progress has been made?
And is the goal for reaching facility requirement--for E-1
thru E-4 ranks by 2016 a realistic goal, given the fiscal
climate that we are in?
Ms. Pfannenstiel. Certainly, Congressman.
Taking the first question about the overseas MILCON, much
of that MILCON is in direct support of the combatant
commanders' requests there. In Spain, in Djibouti, in Bahrain,
we are enhancing what the combatant commanders have needed
there. As well, the construction that is being done overseas--
and it is laid out in detail in my written statement--is
supporting different missions and different platforms that will
be moved around both in Europe and in Japan.

HOMEPORT ASHORE INITIATIVE

Mr. Bishop. You are looking a lot to improve the quality of
life of the junior sailors who are living on ships. Given the
reduction in end strength that is coming, are you having to re-
evaluate that Homeport Ashore Initiative?
Ms. Pfannenstiel. The Homeport Ashore Initiative is an
attempt to get the younger sailors off of the ships and have
everyone have a bed on shore, and we had anticipated that that
would take until about 2016 to do that. We are on track to do
that still. When we have finished, it will have created about
5,000 spaces for the sailors to get off of the ships and give
them a bed at shore. So we are on track for that.

MARINE CORPS FORCE REALIGNMENT

Mr. Bishop. Okay. And the final question is, the United
States has consistently taken the position that the realignment
in Okinawa is contingent on progress toward the Futenma
Replacement Facility. Now, that replacement facility and the
move have been delinked, is this the beginning of the Marine
Corps moving away from the new facility in Okinawa?
Ms. Pfannenstiel. Not at all. We are still moving towards
the Marines having a presence, an operational presence on Guam.
That is still our intention and discussions are ongoing.
Mr. Bishop. Are you still committed to the relocation on
Guam, as opposed to other locations like Australia?
Ms. Pfannenstiel. We are looking at the entire Pacific
posture in a lot of different areas. But Guam will be one place
where we will move Marines, something fewer perhaps than we had
originally thought. Probably fewer than 5,000 Marines, but we
will still have a presence of Marines on Guam.
Mr. Bishop. Okay. We haven't been able to confirm that from
anybody in DoD. We have been getting all of the information
from the Japanese press. We are trying to get some valid
information from DoD.
Ms. Pfannenstiel. Well, let me confirm that we are still
intending to move Marines to Guam. It will be in the order of
5,000 Marines.
Mr. Bishop. But you said you would lower that number, which
is what they have been reporting in the Japanese press, and
possibly disperse them to other locations, like Australia,
throughout the Pacific.
Ms. Pfannenstiel. We have announced that there will be
Marines moving to Australia. So it is really a question of
Marines coming off of Okinawa and where in the Pacific in a
number of different places where will they be? And those are
decisions that we are making now, and then there are
discussions going on with the Japanese Government about----
Mr. Bishop. You don't have the plan finalized for the
construction projects in the Pacific?
Ms. Pfannenstiel. That is absolutely the case. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
And, of course, if it was the considered judgment of the
Congress that actually we needed that facility in Australia, we
couldn't do that; could we?
Right. We have got to fix that problem.
Mr. Carter, I recognize my friend from Texas.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let's not pick on judges anymore today.
Mr. Flake. Or earmarks.
Mr. Carter. Secretary Hammack, General Odierno met with us
a while back. In fact, it was last week. And he said the $3.6
billion request for MILCON support is for our most critical
needs. And I understand that. I understand the draw-down and
what we have got to do. I am not especially happy about it. I
worry about our end strength. But I certainly respect it. But
is it prudent to ignore current MILCON needs in hope of a BRAC
solution?
And one of the things that you just said is--I think I
picked it up. Maybe I missed it. I was listening for it. We
haven't actually completed the 2005 BRAC yet, have we,
completely?

ARMY BRAC AND BARRACKS PROGRAM

Ms. Hammack. The Army has completed an '05 BRAC, yes.
Mr. Carter. But the overall BRAC process for all the
services is not complete. And I think someone said something
about $100 million from the 2005 BRAC.
Ms. Hammack. What is complete is the construction process
and the moving of people. What is not complete in this BRAC
round nor any of the other BRAC rounds is the closure.
Mr. Carter. And that is the environmental impact that my
friend, Mr. Farr, is always talking about in California.
Ms. Hammack. Absolutely. That is the environmental cleanup
that is residual from the prior BRAC rounds which had a much
larger environmental cleanup bill associated with them than the
BRAC 2005 round.
Mr. Carter. Just remembering what my friend, Mr. Farr, has
talked about, it is almost a never-ending story in some places,
right?
Ms. Hammack. It can be a challenge.
We have a program to clean up. But, as you are cleaning up,
you can find things that are unexpected that could change your
cleanup plan.
Mr. Carter. And, for me, this is a military construction
committee. But it is really--when we are looking at the
military, I view defense committee as the big picture
warfighters and I view us as the people protectors.
And at Fort Hood at least we have some of our barracks that
are substandard and they don't meet the goals that we set for
ourselves in housing our soldiers. So as these warfighters come
back--and at Fort Hood at least we are in like our fifth or
sixth deployment. For many of the troops at Fort Hood, I mean,
these guys have done their job. And as they come back, some of
them are becoming second-class citizens. Yet they have been
promised these barracks are going to be----
And it is not a big push, but it is something that I wonder
if that is really prudent for the morale of our troops--these
people have given us 10 years of their lives fighting these
wars for us--to have them come back and still be in substandard
housing.
And is it actually a cost savings over the long run?
Because it is my experience in the private sector, when I used
to build things, every year they get more expensive. So if you
don't build it this year, it is going to cost more next year.
It is going to cost you more the next year after that. And
unless something really strange happens, it never seems to drop
down a whole lot. It just always seems to get more.
Do you feel this is prudent? Because what you are really
doing is passing the ball or allowing the ball to fumble from
our current reduction to the BRAC process. The BRAC process
doesn't always save us any money. Sometimes it costs us money.
Would you argue with that?
Ms. Hammack. I am going to let the BRAC process question be
answered by my colleague, Dr. Robyn.

BASE REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE--MODERNIZING BARRACKS

Mr. Carter. Dr. Robyn, that would be fine by me.
Ms. Hammack. As it goes for barracks, we have two
processes. One is new construction and the other is using our
restoration and modernization. And many of our older barracks
that have gone through the refurbishment we are finding our
soldiers like better because we are taking a room that used to
be designed for two people to live in it and it is being
reconverted to a one-person room. So they have a little more
space in the older barracks than they do in some of the newer
ones.
Mr. Carter. And we have some of those barracks.
Ms. Hammack. Yes. So we do have a program to continue to
restore and modernize our barracks.
What we have delayed is some of the new construction,
because we don't want to build excess capacity. So we have
looked--and we call it racking and stacking and building a list
of barracks projects, and we are fixing those that are in the
worst condition--or replacing those that are in the worst
condition first and working our way through.
Mr. Carter. And I asked the question because I have talked
to soldiers that come back from deployment, and they have said,
I had better quarters in Baghdad than they got at Fort Hood. So
I raised that issue for that reason.
Ms. Robyn. Can I answer your question?
Mr. Carter. Yes, ma'am. Please.
Ms. Robyn. All BRAC rounds yield savings. The payback
period is different. And in my opening statement I
distinguished between the 2005 round and the previous four
rounds. There is a lot of misunderstanding about that.
The first four rounds focus, by design, on eliminating
excess capacity and generating savings. The 2005 round was
different, by design. You heard Katherine describe the Army
transformation. That was why it was different. It was set out
to be a BRAC round that was largely about transformation and
largely Army. So the payback period on the 2005 round--with
savings, $4 billion a year, but is longer than the payback
period for the earlier BRAC rounds which paid back within 2 to
3 years. For the 2005 round, we won't cross that line until
2018.
Mr. Carter. I hope so and that it is not just voodoo
accounting. But I will take your word for it.
I think my time is up, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
I recognize the gentlelady from Minnesota, Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to thank you all for being here today; and, as has
been pointed out, thank you for your service to our country.
Our drive to achieve energy security by decreasing our
dependence on foreign oil is an issue Americans all agree on,
and I know that it is part of the mission of the Department of
Defense. You know, it even becomes more important--we have all
watched gasoline prices go up, oil prices. We watch what
happens with fuel oil in my part of the world. As oil is sold
on an open market, it is supply and demand. It doesn't make any
difference who generates it, who is pumping, who is refining
it. It is supply and demand for the cost. So I think making a
long-term investment in clean domestic energy makes a lot of
sense for a lot of reasons.
There was a Pew report on national security, energy, and
climate; and it highlights the Department of Defense and the
work that it is doing to increase spending on renewable energy
investments by 300 percent between 2006 and 2009.
The report also goes on to say that these investments will
reach more than $10 billion annually by 2030. That is a lot of
money. But there is a reason why you are going that way.
So I probably won't have time to hear from everyone. So I
would ask Secretary Hammack. Your leadership in this has been
outstanding. And the Army is the largest energy user in the
Federal Government. So when you make a difference, you make a
difference for taxpayers in reducing energy costs and keeping
things down lower as well as making our national security
objective of using less foreign oil move forward.
So, in your testimony, you discussed an Energy Initiatives
Task Force and how it is going to make the Army a leader in the
use of renewable energy. So I would like you to elaborate more
little more on that.
But I would also like you to point out to the committee how
this is nothing new to the Obama administration, that this has
been a decision that was taken by the Commander in Chief of a
previous administration, the Pentagon seeing the need to do
this because it is part of the Pentagon's mission. This isn't,
you know, trying to be green or friendly. This is trying to be
smart and efficient and a good use of the taxpayers' dollars.
So could you maybe give us just a little bit of the history of
how you have come to be here with the energy efficiency
programs?
And the other thing that I have seen in public entities, in
our schools, they make the investment, they are recouping the
dollars. So even though we are putting a lot of dollars in, if
you have a cost-benefit analysis you could share with the
committee, I would appreciate it.
Thank you.

ENERGY INITIATIVES TASK FORCE

Ms. Hammack. Certainly. Thank you for your comments.
The Army has been working hard on this and for a long time.
The Energy Initiatives Task Force was stood up to augment
our garrison staff to help come up with large-scale energy
projects, over 10 megawatts. We have come to the realization
that that is something that is beyond the capability of a
garrison staff who is focused on working with soldiers and
families and providing them the quality of life and running the
garrison. So installing and developing a large-scale, renewable
energy project is beyond their capabilities.
The Energy Initiatives Task Force currently has about 10
projects that they are reviewing that could generate up to one
gigawatt of energy. Currently, we are scoping the projects; and
the intent is for those to go out to bid to the private sector
using the authorities Congress has given us, enhanced use lease
or power purchase arrangements so that we are not coming to
Congress and asking you for the $7 billion investment that it
would take to put the renewable energy project on the Army
installations.
We are going to the private sector. And it has got to make
financial sense for the private sector. It has got to make
financial sense for our Nation. It has to make good financial
sense for the Army.
These projects are going to give us more energy security by
relying on natural resources. It is going to give us the
ability to reduce risk and reduce vulnerability. It is going to
also incentivize the private sector to invest in American-made
alternative energy equipment, because it is going to have a
requirement to comply with the Buy American Act.

ENERGY SECURITY

So we have put out a multiple award task order contract for
$7 billion. An RFP was released last week, and we are receiving
responses right now. So it is a way of leveraging the
authorities you have given us to do what is right for our
Nation and to do what is right for energy security.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, I think that this could be
something that would be interesting to find out what more we
can do with alternative energy and that. I am not anti-oil. Oil
is going to be part of the mix, but it needs to be a part of
the mix in a very smart way. So thank you for your work on this
issue.
Ms. Hammack. Thank you.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Ms. McCollum.
And, in particular, natural gas is a terrific option. The
United States has got vast reserves of natural gas, and it can
be burned safely and cleanly and basically in a way that,
frankly, puts out almost more water vapor than anything else.
So I would love you to see you guys move to more natural gas.
Yes, ma'am? Did you want to comment?
Ms. Robyn. I would like to say something by way of follow-
up.
I think there is a lot of misunderstanding about why the
Defense Department is putting up solar or raising wind
turbines. Over the weekend, Washington, D.C., lost power to its
911 system for a half hour. It was a Pepco issue, and the
backup generator failed, and two other backup systems failed.
So for 30 minutes over the weekend, Washington, D.C., did not
have 911 service.
We have that same concern about our military installations.
They are 99 percent reliant on the commercial grid. Our backup
system is generators and diesel fuel. We need to do better than
that.
Renewables doesn't get us there entirely. But that is the
beginning. And if you combine that with storage and microgrid
technology, that gives us the ability to continue critical
operations for weeks or months at a time if the grid goes down.
That is why we are doing renewable energy.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Carter. Would the gentleman yield for a question?
Mr. Culberson. Sure.
Mr. Carter. I have a question. I am concerned about what
you just said. What do you envision this alternative energy--do
you envision it to be at the established base level in the
country? You don't envision erecting solar panels to power our
soldiers in the field as they fight wars? Or you are certainly
not going to put up wind towers. I mean, if you do, how will
you keep the enemy from knowing where you are, if you are
putting up a wind tower?
Ms. Robyn. We are doing them both, for tactical reasons and
on our installations. And the strategy is very different. And
third-party financing refers to what we are doing on our
installations. But I will let one of my service counterparts
talk about what we are doing in theater.

ALTERNATE RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES

Mr. Carter. I just don't understand. We actually have more
wind towers in Texas than any State in the Union, and I can
promise you that you can go to the plains of Texas and you can
see a wind tower for 200 miles. And how are you going to keep
the enemy from knowing where your troops are if your power
source is going to be wind towers?
Ms. Pfannenstiel. Well, we will move off of wind towers and
talk about some of what we are doing with solar power, where
the Marine Corps has found and developed a number of
applications for solar power that they have actually brought
into the theater, as has the Army.
So a number of applications that are not about being green
in any way--rather, they are being more effective in their
warfighting. They have to carry fewer batteries, because they
have these small solar arrays that charge the batteries.
Mr. Carter. I can understand that. I can understand that.
Small solar arrays like you can use to charge cell phones and
things like that, radios, small radios.
Ms. Pfannenstiel. But in a wide variety of different
technologies that have become now more standard than they were
even 5 years ago.
Mr. Culberson. If I could--excuse me. We are going to lose
Mr. Moran, who has to leave at 4:00; and Mr. Yoder graciously
agreed to allow Mr. Moran to go first. We will circle back to
this, Judge. I just wanted to make sure Jim had a chance to ask
questions.
I recognize my friend from Virginia.
Mr. Moran. That is very thoughtful of you, Chairman; and I
would be the first to recognize that it would be no big deal if
you will lose me. But I do want to take the opportunity to say
something nice.
We could have had chaos in northern Virginia in terms of
traffic congestion for 200,000 commuters due to a BRAC-related
building. But we now have very thoughtful, responsible traffic
management. And I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Bishop and your excellent staff and particularly Mr.
Washington and Ms. Hammack and particularly Dr. Robyn and her
staff, John Conger, who used to work for the former chair of
the committee, Mr. Edwards, and Colonel Troy Moore.
Look, your team really made it happen. Oftentimes, our
questions are critically oriented. All I can do is to heap
praise upon you. And I am not sure all of my constituents
realize what you did. But, boy, you saved the day. So thank you
very much for that.

ANTI-TERRORISM/FORCE PROTECTION STANDARDS

I have only one other question, and it is not meant to be
critical. But DoD has anti-force protection standards that are
at variance with GSA. They are more expensive; and, in some
cases, they are somewhat less rational. In some cases, it is as
though because one building or agency is near an earthquake
fault line every other building in the country has to meet the
same standards to protect against an earthquake. We have got a
lot of civilian agencies that might also be under attack, but
GSA manages their force protection.
So I wonder if you would just tell us for the record what
you are doing to come more in line with GSA to exercise some
judgment, to save some money, and to enable metropolitan areas
like mine, Mr. Farr's, and probably others from having to--
really for not being able to compete when you have to have an
82-foot setback from a sidewalk, you can't have parking
underneath, you can't have any kind of public access, you can't
be near a Metro station. Some of those things don't work in a
metropolitan area. And I trust we are making progress in that
area, Dr. Robyn?
Ms. Robyn. I think we are. I don't want to pop the cork yet
on the champagne. But our standards are not different just from
GSA's. They are different from the entire rest of the Federal
Government.
Mr. Moran. Basically, the whole world.
Ms. Robyn. Yes. The rest of the Federal Government uses
interagency security committee, ISC, standards that were
developed by a 21-agency group led by the Department of
Homeland Security, updated in 2010. And they are sensibly risk-
based. So the standards for each building are based on the risk
faced by that individual building, based on location, number of
employees, symbolic value, critical missions.
Our standards are different in that it is one-size-fits-
all. So for even buildings that are not high risk we require
certain minimum standards. So we have been going through a
fairly elaborate process within the Department, began with six
very detailed case studies. What is the difference in outcome
depending on whether you use IFC or DoD standards? We are
letting the security folks have the final say. I think it is a
good process.
We focused initially on leased space. Once we make a
decision on whether to adopt the IFC approach on leased space,
we will then look at buildings on an installation. Right now,
we treat a building in the middle of Fort Hood the same as a
building in downtown D.C. We don't treat them differently in
terms of their requirements. And it seems irrational.
So I think it is an important area. The costs are
significant, obviously. It is a policy judgment as well as a
technical one. But I think we are making good progress.
Mr. Moran. Thank you very much; and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Certainly, Mr. Moran.
I want to reiterate to all of you, if any member of this
committee--frankly, any Member of Congress but particularly
this subcommittee contacts you, they have a problem with a
facility you are building, that request certainly is as though
it is coming from me. Because each Member's district, they know
them better than certainly any of us do. And I am really glad
that worked out for Mr. Moran. Thank you for working with him.
And, Jim, ride herd on it. Let us know what else we need to do.
Mr. Moran. I really am appreciative.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Yoder from Kansas.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to all of you for being here today.
This is certainly an important hearing as we deal with the
critical component of our responsibilities to our Nation's
military, the men and women in service, the facilities we
utilize. This committee does some really important work and
special work, and I am pleased to be part of it.
It is also a time, as we determine how we are going to
solve our national debt crisis, that we have to look at where
we are reducing expenditures; and I want to commend all of you
for the tough, tough work that goes into the BRAC decisions
that are made and a lot of the heartbreak in communities when
things change. You know, in many regards, the things you have
done related to BRAC have been held up in State legislatures
and local communities as models of how things can be done in a
way that reduces expenditures. That is where we hope we can go.
So as we are dealing with the importance of supporting our
military men and women in service and reducing spending we are
also looking on these committees on how we can help promote and
support the private economy and job creation to get the economy
rolling again. Ultimately those jobs fund the ability for us to
fund our military. So it is all kind of intertwined.
And I note a lot of the expenditures that we are
encumbering related to our operations related to BRAC are
mostly dedicated to environmental cleanup, surplus real
property in preparation for transfer of titles to non-DOD
entities. That certainly is a consumption of a lot of energy
and time.
We have such an area in Kansas called the Sunflower Army
Ammunition Plant (AAP) you may be familiar with. Sunflower AAP
is a BRAC managed commission that has had to endure
environmental cleanup. And probably, in many cases, this is a
situation where you have partnered with private industry and
ultimately to transfer title as both sides work together to
finance the cleanup. It is one of those great examples where
public-private partnerships work, and our goal ultimately is to
get places like Sunflower all across the country back into a
situation where it can be put back into productivity. Homes,
schools, parks, whatever that are planned for these areas, what
a great thing when we can turn these into job-creating areas.
So, knowing that that is all of our goal, I wanted to ask
you some questions about how that has been going across the
country. Certainly that has been a challenge locally.
We have some challenges regarding the EPA. And when we get
into agreements with private industry and we get into agreement
with local communities to clean up sites based upon
assumptions, Ms. Hammack, I think your statement was there are
unforeseen challenges that occur later down the road. Some of
these are unforeseen and some of them are challenges that are
created because of an unexpected decision that a regulatory
agency might make, not just a challenge but that was maybe
unforeseen when something was uncovered but maybe a different
regulatory approach. And we deal with this in the private
sector, and the public sector is a sort of regulatory
uncertainty.
I am sure all of us here talk to small business owners. I
just talked to a whole group of folks in wastewater treatment
who mentioned specifically regulatory uncertainty from the EPA.
So we are trying to do everything we can here to create
regulatory certainty so that the economy can recover. This is
an area where I think we need to work together to find a
solution.
I want to know, is this happening elsewhere in other areas
of the country where later decisions by the EPA or other
regulatory agencies are coming in to dramatically increase the
expected cost of the cleanup, thereby making the public-private
partnership and the financing of that essentially unworkable?
And now the military branch is out of the resources that they
had expected to pay, the private industry is out of the
resources that they expected to pay, and, in many cases, we
have an unusable plot of land that we have already put good
money into.
The question is, do we continue to throw good money after
bad? Is this a prevalent problem across the country? What is
the cost to taxpayers when these after-the-fact regulations
come in, after agreements have been made? What can we do in
Congress to combat this and how do we fix these particular
situations?

ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

Ms. Hammack. Well, let me answer that question.
First of all, is it a prevalent problem? We probably have a
handful of these occurring right now where the regulatory rules
have changed while we are in the process of cleanup. So we have
a plan for a cleanup that is well under way. It is funded. It
is planned. It is scheduled. And then there is a new set of
regulations that are dropped in. And all of a sudden we have to
go to a Plan B and completely change.
We are also having issues where regulatory agencies are
revisiting situations where environmental cleanup had been
complete, had been closed out, and they want us to go backwards
and revisit the problem.
So the question is, how much of this reevaluation can you
do? It would be great if when you started a project under one
set of rules you were able to complete it under that same set
of rules. I do not know if that is possible. And certainly from
an environmental perspective, I think we discover new things
every day or find things in our environment that are causing
health hazards or other problems to the environment. I don't
know if there is a solution.
What is the cost to taxpayers? That is hard to determine.
There is a cost to taxpayers when you are operating in an
uncertain regulatory environment or the regulations change. We
have gone in and followed the plan completely; the regulatory
agencies have checked us every step along the way; and we get
to the closing table, the closing desk, and they hand over a
new set of regulations, which is essentially start over at the
beginning. That is not good for the economy, that is not good
for the taxpayer, and I question whether it is good for the
environment at that point in time.
With that, I will let Terry Yonkers comment.
Mr. Yonkers. You read my mind.
First of all, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
done some unbelievable and miraculous things and so have the
State agencies that regulate air and water and hazardous waste.
In my mind and building on what Katherine is talking about,
there are a couple of things that have kind of gotten out of
balance here.
First of all, the processes that we follow are tremendously
complex and elaborate, and they don't necessarily lead you to a
quick decision, and it is more of an art than it is a science.
As Katherine is articulating, you may find out that you think
you have got a site, a groundwater tetrachloroethylene (TCE)
plume or something pretty well characterized, only to find that
when you put in another well somewhere or somebody starts
looking at the water that you are drinking that you have got
TCE in the water. So you have to deal with it. So site
characterization is also a problem.
But I think one of the things that we are seeing here--and
it is going to have a fairly substantial impact, I think--are
the changing of the standards. So, for example, the EPA right
now is contemplating a change in the TCE standard from five
parts per billion to one part per billion. If that happens,
there is going to be a substantial cost growth in our
environmental clean-up programs.
Our guys, back of the napkin, looks like $2 or $3 billion.
We have already spent $25 billion in our environmental cleanup
program to date. So where it will go--and it is frustrating
that, if we had a set of rules that we could count on and move
towards that end point, we could get there faster with greater
certainty.
Mr. Yoder. Well, I certainly appreciate your comments. And
I appreciate--it seems like the combined frustration many of us
feel.
Mr. Chairman, these are examples of our own--we deal often
in our communities with complaints about regulatory agencies
making it hard for our small businesses to create jobs. This is
an example of one hand of the Federal Government driving up the
cost of another area of the Federal Government which comes back
to this committee that we have to pay for.
So we have land around the country that could be put into a
usable format, put people to work, build houses, put on the tax
rolls, growing the economy, that we have after-the-fact
regulations coming in that essentially make it impossible for
these folks to plan. They are partnered with private businesses
to clean up the sites in an agreement that costs will be
covered in a certain way, that now there is a whole new cost
factor that nobody knew about when they went into the site. The
site hasn't changed. The regulations have changed. Or someone
has come in later and said, hey, we should have brought this
up.
So, ultimately, this affects our national debt; it affects
the ability for these folks to get their job done in a timely
fashion; and it affects the economy because we can't get these
pieces of property back in a usable form.
So I am frustrated. I think that this is something that
ought to be of paramount importance for Congress to look at. It
is just useful for me to know this is a common challenge and
one that we need to get ahold of here in Congress.
Ms. Hammack. I might want to add that we are in dialogue
with the EPA, voicing our concerns very loudly. And, as a
matter of fact, tomorrow I have several EPA regulators coming
in and it is joint with the Air Force because we are seeing
some of the same challenges on particular environmental site.
Mr. Yoder. Well, let's work together to try to fix this.
Ms. Hammack. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. That is really interesting. I was just
double-checking with Sarah to find out if we could do anything
in our bill specific to that facility, and we cannot because of
the earmark ban. Something we have to fix.
A public works project that--you have obviously identified
a sound policy reason. There is a real problem here. With the
EPA, like you said, the left hand doesn't know what the right
hand is doing. Another great example of why we have really got
to fix this, so we can do public works projects, transparent,
no conflicts of interest, don't increase spending.
I am just on a tear this week because I am so upset about
the Army Corps of Engineers, about what I have discovered with
the Air Force and these incredible facilities. We have great
opportunities dropped in our lap, and we can't make a policy
decision to move things up on the list. We can't help your deal
in Kansas, either. So, hopefully, we will work on that
together.
Mr. Farr, my good friend from California.
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have been on this committee longer than anybody, I think
12 years now. I have been through this. Frankly, it is really
difficult to change these regulations. A lot of them are
Congress-driven.
What I did was created what we call the smart team, where
we got all the regulators in one room and they went out and
looked at the site and there on the spot decided what was going
to be done. So once you had that plan, it didn't take a lot of
meetings. And then you release that plan, and then you have got
everybody saying essentially, if you do this, it is a green
light, and we can give you the permits. And I think that is a
faster way to get it done than trying to rewrite the
regulations. But I think we need to keep pushing on it.
Mr. Chairman, I know how much you and I love our daughters
and appreciate them; and I would just like for you to know that
this is National Women's History Month. And today we see
history in this committee. Never before has there been three
women in such powerful positions, and I congratulate you and
congratulate the President for making wise decisions in putting
you in those positions.
Mr. Culberson. Of course, every smart man knows that women
actually run the world anyway.
Mr. Farr. Well, our daughters run our lives.
Mr. Culberson. Isn't that the truth.
Mr. Farr. I would also note that every one of you have the
word ``environment'' in your titles. Three of you have the word
``energy.'' We have had a lot of discussions here about the
environment and energy.
And I want to drill down. I think I have been through more
BRAC issues than any Member of Congress, the biggest base ever
closed, most issues of cleanup, every single thing you can
imagine. We are not very far along, and that closure happened
in 1993.
The only probably good thing about it was that it trained
our new Secretary of Defense, who was my predecessor, about
base closure. Because you will hear him talk about Fort Ord,
and he handed it off to me.
I want to just say a couple of things. One, on the
cleanup--and this is the testimony, and I am quoting Leon last
week before the Budget Committee. Mr. Blumenauer was asking
questions, and his response was, ``Well, frankly, the only way
to ultimately achieve savings when you do BRAC rounds is to be
able to have the cleanup and do it expeditiously so communities
can reuse the property and not be stuck with holding a property
that can't be reused.''
The problem is, it is the last thing you want to do. That
mission statement of what your responsibilities are does not
talk about environmental cleanup. It talks about preparing
warfighters and providing lift and getting to theater and be
trained. So what happens is, in the budget priorities, it is
the last one.
And I would like to compliment you. At least you got a
little bit more money in this year for BRAC.
But I am also a little bit worried by what I see and hear
in this committee. It sounds like you are approaching this
sequestration process by pre-doing BRAC. We will just take the
FYDP list and we will implement it.
I mean, first of all, we have to decide whether we are
going to do BRAC, not you, not the Department. If we are going
to do BRAC, then your responsibility is to make recommendations
to the President as to what ought to be in the Commission, as
to what ought to be closed, realigned, or reinvested in. And it
seems that you are delaying the FYDP list.
I mean, I am very upset about that. Because, frankly, you
know, you have delayed a barracks projects at the DLI. You are
not going to close the Defense Language Institute. It is just
not going to happen. I went there before and learned all the
reasons why it shouldn't happen, and that was before we even
realized how important languages were.
So I am concerned that you are administratively doing a
pre-BRAC before Congress has even gotten around to it, and I
resent that.
And I want to ask my friend, Dr. Robyn, I think you are one
of the outstanding human beings in public service. You really
spent a life committing to a really professional group. But I
want to know, because you have the ability to do this, do you
intend to re-evaluate the manner in which we use the BRAC
process--the COBRA model? Is that going to be used again?

BASE REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE

I mean, the problem with the COBRA model, one, there is no
transparency. It is totally subjective. It is just numbers. It
can't put any value. And that is what has happened in the past
when the Commission--for example, the Defense Language
Institute, the suggestion that we just move it. And I guess the
COBRA model said, yeah, you are going to save money.
But when you have found that none of the faculty would
move, and you found that there was no capacity to taking it
in--it wasn't the water. It wasn't the infrastructure. It was
all these things that aren't measured in the COBRA model. And
it seems to me that why we get into so much trouble in that
process is because we realign this damn procedure to just think
that a computer can tell us the best judgment.
Now perhaps there is merit in having some of that. But to
using it so strongly and defending it I think is all wrong. So
I want to know if you are going to continue to use that. In
fact, I asked that last week in the hearing with Comptroller
Robert Hale, and he said to ask you when you got here. So I
hope he told you you were going to be hit with this.
Ms. Robyn. Let me respond first to your point about doing a
pre-BRAC.
We are in a very constrained budget environment. We have to
cut $259 billion over the FYDP. And if you look historically,
MILCON drops disproportionately when there are cuts in the
defense budget.
We are taking cuts in force structure. We are reducing
force structure. Given that, it makes sense to pause to look
and see how those force-structure cuts are going to play out
before we embark on a lot of new MILCON.
Now force structure is the major reason we are asking for
more BRAC rounds. There are going to be cuts, and we want to
cut the tail as well as tooth.We are not holding back on MILCON
waiting for BRAC. We are waiting to see how the force structure
cuts play out.
You probably know more about COBRA than I do. I think--it
is a tool for comparing alternatives. The major criticism is
that the number that it generates for what BRAC is going to
cost is not a budget quality number, and people tend to treat
it that way. It is merely a tool for comparing alternatives.
I have been reading all the back GAO reports on BRAC, and
they defend it. They say it is a reasonable approach, which is
about as positive as GAO gets.
Mr. Farr. My concern isn't that you don't use it as part of
your tool in your BRAC decisions. I think it is too heavily
relied on. Because what you miss in that is all the--and they
are. It is difficult to measure the quality of----
For example, you know, we have put together--because I have
been through all this BRAC, of how to get smart--this Team
Monterey. None of the services knew what the others were doing.
These are all services in Monterey County. I am going to give
you all a brochure.
This is remarkable. I have seen more reform in that county.
We had no idea that they were all there. We had no idea all the
capacity they had. And when all of the heads of all the
missions got a room, they couldn't believe it. They said, you
have it here next door? We have been trying to get access to
that for years. We just did a whole changeover on the computer
thing for DLI. It would have cost millions of dollars. It was
all in-house. We are just borrowing the talent that was----
And if you did this in every county in the United States--
--
Ms. Robyn. I have asked OEA to replicate that other places.
It is a model.
Mr. Farr. And what is happening now, it is now becoming a
recruiting tool. So instead of just downsizing--I mean, a
recruiting tool for the private sector. They are moving in and
saying, my God, you have all these assets here. We want to be
next to you.
So I think you have to put this kind of a value into your
assessment as to how we are going to close and where we are
going to move people and----
Ms. Robyn. The key thing or the criteria--and those are set
out in statute. Four of them have to do with military value,
including the cost of operations. And four of them have to do
with things other than military value.
I think there is a tension between trying to make the
process transparent and auditable, for which you want to use
some sort of a tool like COBRA. And then, on the other hand,
you want to take into account a lot of things which don't
reduce well to numbers. So I think there is a tension there.
But I think the key are the criteria, and we put forth the
same criteria that Congress modified last year. You haven't
gotten the bill yet, but you will get it soon. And maybe that
is something worth looking at.
Mr. Farr. We will look forward to that. I am going to be
working on it.
I am going to ask two other questions, one about cleanup
and one about energy.

CLEANUP

Having stated what you have heard in this room and what the
Secretary said, it warrants that we put some more money into
cleanup now. You can't shortchange cleanup on the eve of asking
Congress for another BRAC round. Because every one of us who
have been shortchanged in cleanup are going to say, hell, no,
don't do another BRAC round. Make sure they spend money on it
right.
You are coming in--I don't know what it was, $26 million
more this year than last year. I mean, thank you for doing
that, because it is the first time we have had an increase. But
$26 million for--it is embarrassing.
And you have communities like, you know, Fort Ord and
28,000 acres that still has a significant amount of land to be
cleaned up. It has cost $100 million to do it because we have
waited so long. We had to go through all of these regulatory
processes. But it is not cleaned. And that base was closed in
1993. So, 20 years later, we are not there yet.
And that is the kind of message that I think I have heard
from a lot of my other colleagues, where you had the smart
team, where they got in there. Of course, the smart team didn't
do it, UXOs. It had to do with all the other kinds of cleanups.
But if we put UXOs and all the other kind of cleanups together
and figure out what the real cost is and start asking for that
money, that is the way you are going to build some credibility
for BRAC. But without it----
Ms. Robyn. I think that is a fair point.
Mr. Farr. And I really want you to figure out how we can
get some more money for that account.
Sitting behind me is my staff, Rochelle Dornatt, and she is
the world expert on unexploded ordnances. We even created a
caucus here in Congress, and we are trying to make sure that we
can do this in a modern way.

ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY

Ms. Robyn. Congressman Farr, you weren't here for my
opening statement. But I did talk about our terrific new UXO
technology which I think will allow us to save billions of
dollars in UXO cleanup, which means we will be able to do UXO
cleanup faster.
Mr. Farr. Well, I have suggested to the Naval Postgraduate
School--because we have such a big cleanup at Fort Ord, which
is right next door, that they actually implement a course in
UXO technology, in cleanup, because that is where they are
trying it all out. It is amazing.
Ms. Robyn. That is a good idea.
Well, the gentleman who runs the SERDP/ESTCP program, Dr.
Jeff Marqusee, is at the Naval Postgraduate School this week
talking about some other stuff. But that is a good conversation
to have.
Mr. Farr. Well, they are looking at how to come up with an
academic curriculum that could warrant academic credits.
Let me close with Katherine Hammack and a couple of issues.
In discovering the assets in our district--we discovered.
We knew about them. I knew about them, but they didn't know
about them--is two properties. One is Fort Hunter Liggett,
which is now under the command of the Army Reserve. It is the
largest Army Reserve installation in the United States. And
next door to it is Camp Roberts under the command of the
National Guard. Obviously, these aren't the first people you
speak to. But that Camp Roberts is the largest west coast
training facility.
Between them, it is over 205,000 acres. I mean, if you look
at military properties, training properties--that has got to
rank right up there near the top. They are right next to each
other. Now they are starting to talk to each other.
And I have a couple of issues there. One is that--I think
that Camp Roberts, which is probably the most forgotten base--
and that is probably why we gave it to the National Guard. But
SATCOM is right in the middle of it. And SATCOM is there
because that is a geophysical spot. You are not going to move
that or close that. It is going to be there. To have secured
communications around the world, you are going to need that
relay station. It is right in the middle of Camp Roberts.
What we are doing is trying to improve Camp Roberts so it
can serve the needs of SATCOM. Because there is no meals. There
is nothing--these bases are both in the middle of nowhere.
You have really used Fort Hunter Liggett Army Reserve as a
test site for your new energy initiative, and I thank you for
that. I think you ought to use Camp Roberts, which is right
next door, as kind of just a skunkworks of energy savings.
Because it is weather perfect for you. It is very accessible,
even though--there is a freeway going right through it, even in
the middle of nowhere.
But I think if the Army and the Defense Department is
really going to get into these savings--and Ms. McCollum stated
it really well, about being the biggest cost to you is energy
costs. In the Air Force, I know it is just huge. When the price
of gasoline goes up, it is just outrageous.
So, I mean, a 1 cent increase in aviation fuel is billions
of dollars to United Airlines. I don't know what it is to the
Air Force, but you are bigger than United Airlines so it has
got to be huge.
We have got to find these--we ought to be the leader.
Because, frankly, the military has the ability to do it, kind
of your command system to make these decisions. If you do it,
everybody else will follow.
I used to be really critical of the Navy about being
environmentally sensitive, ships and paint and all that,
because of my keen interest in the ocean. And I always said,
well, you know, the Navy ought to follow what the private
sector does. We got into this, and the Navy was leading the
private sector. All of the shipping industry was coming around
saying, what are you doing?
You were the first ones to recycle, to make sure that your
waters weren't contaminated. You weren't dumping spoils into
the ocean and the nonfiling paint and all that other stuff. It
is fantastic.
So I think that on your energy areas you can be the leader,
all of you, for it; and I am just suggesting there is a trial
site.
And the last thing on Fort Hunter Liggett, we are in a bind
because you, the Army, BRAC'd that property. And miraculously,
several years later, just snuck back and unBRAC'd it, which I
still haven't figured out how you did that.
But, in BRAC'ing it, there is a piece of property way
outside the cantonment area. It is not used, but it is under
your title. And on top of it is one of the most historic
buildings in California, an old, old hotel that was used in the
1800s, and it is on the National Register of Historical Places.
It is owned by the County of Monterey. You own one acre under
that property, and it has taken us a decade to figure out how
to transfer that one acre to Monterey County who can put it to
some economic use.
Everything we want to do is fine with the command at Fort
Hunter Liggett. Can you make this happen? It is just nuts. The
amount of money they wanted to charge to do appraisals, to do
economic--the value of land has got to be nothing, because you
don't own the building. And it is in the middle of nowhere, and
it is not zoned for commercial. If it hadn't been a historic
property, it wouldn't be there. So one acre. My God. Make it
happen.

LAND TRANSFER

Ms. Hammack. And I know you met with the Reserves
yesterday. My apologies I couldn't attend. But it is something
that we are looking at to see what we can do, and I think there
are several options on the table that we are investigating. But
I will follow up with you on that. Because I agree with you,
that it is something that we can make happen. We have just got
to figure out what the restrictions are in transfer of land and
the restrictions----
Mr. Farr. I have been through all of those. You have
transferred--Dr. Robyn knows at Fort Ord you transferred about
18,000 acres without cost, free. Whole cities, whole
communities without a cost. There is no reason you can't
transfer one acre of land that you don't own the building on.
Mr. Culberson. I want to stress, my good friend, you have
got my full support on this. And I hope you will do more than
just look into it. Get back to him. Because it just makes good
sense. Each one of us knows our districts better than anybody
else. It is a good suggestion. And, as with Mr. Moran, I want
you to know Mr. Farr has my full support in this.
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. I hope you will do more than just look at
it. Can you give him a little more assurance than just look at
it?
Ms. Hammack. I can tell him he has my full support to
evaluate options and get back to him.
Mr. Culberson. Let us know how I can help. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Farr. It is a good thing we have the control of your
budget in our hands.
Mr. Culberson. That is an important thing to remember as we
deal with this.
Mr. Nunnelee, thank you for your patience. I recognize my
good friend from Mississippi.

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH FORCE STRUCTURE CHANGES

Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yonkers, the Air Force released the 2013 force
structure. Are you going to be releasing any data relating to
military construction costs associated with force structure
changes?
Mr. Yonkers. Sir, we really don't have that many in the
budget. When we sort of noodled through all of this stuff, we
looked at some of these things. There were some things that
were early to need. For example, with the Joint Strike Fighter
and with the KC-46 and you know those aircraft have slowed down
a little bit. So we pushed some of those military construction
projects out of the 2013 into the 2014 and 2015. We canceled
some of them like the C-27 that, when we made the announcement
on force structure, we no longer needed the facility upgrades
that we had planned.
So, I mean, we could go through and let you know
specifically, sir, what has changed, but there really hasn't
been too much change in the 2013 program with regards to that.
Mr. Nunnelee. Well, what I am really looking for is an
assurance that the Air Force, if you do make force structure
movements and you are moving aircraft from one site to another,
that you are going to take into account military construction
projects at the receiving site that may be required in order to
complete the force structure change.
Mr. Yonkers. We will, absolutely. And we know the
sensitivity of not only this subcommittee but every other
committee in terms of the cost of doing business. And so our
paramount criteria, anytime we look at a new basing, cost is
right up there next to military value and operations.
Mr. Nunnelee. And I will just ask you to report back to
this committee on that issue if it becomes an issue.
Mr. Yonkers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nunnelee. That is all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Nunnelee.
I really appreciate you all taking the time to spend all
this time with us here this afternoon.
And I did have a specific question that really affects the
Gulf Coast that I would like to ask you about, if I could,
Secretary Yonkers. I have got a little more clarification on
the question that you and I discussed, the movement of the C-
130s out of Fort Worth. I want to stress in the most emphatic
terms possible that I am strongly opposed to that move. I want
to make sure that the Air Force is not using any--because that
is apparently under way.
There is apparently, from the information I have got, a
plan that those airplanes will be moved out of Fort Worth by
October 1, 2013, that we may see that in next year's MILCON
proposal. I just want to make sure that the Air Force is not
going to use any money out of the 2012 MILCON appropriation
bill to do anything, either to enlarge hangars, either in
Montana, or do anything to move those airplanes.
Mr. Yonkers. Sir, right now, there was a wedge, put into
the 2013 program to look at what it might cost to move the C-
130 Hs out of naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth
Texas to Great Falls in Montana. Corollary to that are the MC-
12s that would come to Fort Worth. That is a great mission,
more aircraft.
And, actually, as I talk to Lieutenant General Henry M.
Wyatt III, who is the director of the Air Guard about this,
based on our conversation recently, a mission set that had
already existed there at NAS JRB Ft Worth. So the Air National
Guard had RC-26s, which were another civilian platform----
Mr. Culberson. These are intelligence-gathering assets,
electronic, other types of intelligence-gathering aircraft?
Mr. Yonkers. They are very similar to the MC-12s. Yes, sir.
And they are support of Customs and Border Protection. That
is a primary mission, as Customs and Border Protection asked
for that assistance. But it is also a mission that supports
deployed forces when we go to war, and that Intelligence
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) platform is a critical
asset.
Mr. Culberson. Yes, sir. I understand.
I want to stress in as strong as possible terms our
strenuous opposition and my determination to make sure that we
block the move of those planes.
I want to submit for the record a letter from the Governor
of Mississippi, joining with the Governor of Texas, the
Governor of Louisiana--I have never even seen letterhead like
that before--the Governor of Alabama and the Governor of
Florida, all unanimously asking the President and this Congress
not to move the aircraft out of Fort Worth because of their
essential role in disaster relief.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.094

EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE

Mr. Culberson. We had a whole slew of hurricanes here over
the last several years, and those C-130s were vital in flying
supplies. You got hammered in Mississippi, in Gulfport; and
these C-130s were vital in flying in food and supplies to
people in Mississippi, the people of Louisiana, Texas, and the
Florida Panhandle and Alabama.
We all suffer from--and for some reason this year, we just
didn't get hit as bad as we did before. So would you assure us
that there is not going to be--none of the money. I want to
make sure. And also Kay Granger is going to be taking care of
it on the other end in her subcommittee.
Mr. Yonkers. We will lock it down for you, sir. To my
knowledge, there is nothing in the 2012 program.
Mr. Culberson. And we want to make sure they are not moved.
You will help us make sure of that so we don't have to do it in
our bill?
Mr. Yonkers. Sir, if I could respond to your concern with
regards to emergency assistance. There is an agreement amongst
the Governors of almost every State called an EMAC. It is an
Emergency Management Assistance Compact that allows that
Governor to pull up any asset from any State that has a C-130
to provide support to a Governor of another State. It is a
paperwork exercise that takes only a few days to consummate.
There is also under the Defense National Authorization Act
last year that you all had a hand in the same wherewithal to
call up both Reserve and Active Duty assets.
So when the question was asked whether or not we have
enough C-130 lift or other kinds of assets to respond to
natural disasters, the answer is, by all means, we do.
Mr. Culberson. Where are those C-130s?
Mr. Yonkers. There are some in Dyess, and there are some
throughout.
Mr. Culberson. Dyess is in Abilene?
Mr. Yonkers. Dyess is in Abilene. We have C-130s in the
Active Duty, in the Air Force Reserve, and the Air National
Guard, all over the 50 States.

CHARTER SCHOOLS

Mr. Culberson. Well, I look forward to working with you to
make sure we don't move those aircraft. Thank you.
And let me ask about a subject that is near and dear to my
heart. I didn't get a chance to ask--I did get to mention DoD
schools and charter schools to you, Ms. Hammack, and you, Mr.
Yonkers, when we met. But I really want you to please follow
up. I know that the Air Force has one at Andrews, but you
mentioned there were none in the Army, to your knowledge.
The people of Fort Hood do a great job of supporting those
men and women at Fort Hood. Great local schools there, Judge. I
understand they really do a good job. That may not be true in
other parts of the country.
What can you do, Ms. Hammack, and also on behalf of the
Navy can be done, what could this committee do to help
encourage the creation of charter schools as needed on bases
around the country where enlisted personnel feel like they need
them?

SCHOOLS

Ms. Pfannenstiel. I think we would ask that Dr. Robyn
respond for the DoD. I think that it is something that goes
across all services.
Mr. Culberson. It really does. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Robyn. I didn't realize until we got together to
prepare for this hearing that DoD had charter schools. Two of
the Air Force charter schools are a product of housing
privatization. So the housing privatization partner I think
worked to create them.
I like that model myself. It really is a P&R decision,
Personnel and Readiness, within the Office of the Secretary of
Defense, rather than an installations issue. But I would like
to take it up with them.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
I bring it up because I gather from everything that I have
seen and heard that you already have the authority to do this,
that where there is a State law authorizing charter schools and
an interstate compact exists that would allow for the grades to
be transferred--because, obviously, that is important with a
mobile population of servicemen and women. You have already got
the authority to do it. So I bring it to your attention to
help, if I could, encourage you to do so.
There are none on any Army base. I don't know whether there
is any on----
Ms. Pfannenstiel. We were actually looking at some--at
least in one instance that I know of right now on a Navy
installation. I don't know of any others.
Mr. Culberson. And if it weren't for the one at Andrews,
those men and women that are stationed there would really be in
trouble. Because the local schools are just not really very
good, and it is a real problem. And I am grateful for the Air
Force having done it.
Mr. Yonkers. We actually have four, sir, one of them at
Vandenberg, Little Rock, and Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, and
Joint Base Andrews. And, as Dr. Robyn mentioned, two of those
were at the generosity of the developers that are building our
military family housing. And one of the reasons they are doing
it is, if they keep quality schools and quality education right
there on the installation, they will have a high occupancy
rate, and that is cash flow for them.
So the thing that sort of occurs to me is that as we think
through these other housing privatization deals that we are
about ready to finalize, maybe there is another opportunity.
But we are also finding that in some places that the school
systems are good enough and they are not something that our
military members and families are particularly concerned about.
So it is not a one-size-fits-all.
Mr. Culberson. Well, I would particularly appreciate it,
Dr. Robyn, if you would make this a priority. Obviously, it is
important to all of us on this committee in the work that you
do to ensure that the men and women in uniform have a high
quality of life, they have peace of mind, and they have to
worry as little as possible about their home life.
There is nothing more important to any of us who have
children than the quality of our kids' education. And if you
would please make this a priority, in addition to the charter
schools, also the DoD schools, as needed.
Certainly the committee has been very supportive. We have
funded the request that you have sent to us for the improvement
of DoD schools or simply to build new ones. It is a real
problem. I know, for example, at Fort Bliss, they really have
got a problem out there.
Let me, if I could, ask a question, and we will submit most
of these for the record.

NATIONAL SECURITY

But, for all of you, circling back to what I opened with,
and it is a real source of concern for me that the requests
that are being submitted at Chairman Young's subcommittee and
certainly to this subcommittee--I am just concerned--it may be
a reflection more of what you think can be afforded rather than
the mission requirement that faces the Nation in terms of
national security and what threat you see over the horizon and
the threat right in front of us, particularly with what is
going on in the Middle East and I think the imminent and very
real possibility that the Israelis are going to have to take
out the Iranian nuclear reactor.
And I expect and hope--would expect the Commander in Chief
to support the Israelis 110 percent if they have to do so. They
are our best friend in the world, and they have an absolute
right to defend themselves and to do so preemptively, as
President Bush saw the need to.
The Israelis really have a need to do so with the Iranians
who have promised that they will use a weapon as soon as they
get it, and they will use it on Tel Aviv. And that is going to
trigger a whole string of events. So we have got a whole
variety of threats.
And I am just concerned, as Senator Levin was in his
comments--as I said at the beginning that it is his impression,
certainly my impression, it is a concern of a lot of my
colleagues that the budgets we are seeing, the draw-down in
forces we are seeing--
For example, there is no new MILCON that the Air Force is
proposing. You know, we see a significant draw-down in the
Army's MILCON. Talk to us a little bit about, for example,
specifically, as DoD has been asked by OMB--and, obviously, we
have got the deal with the sequestration. But the DoD has been
asked to reduce the defense budget by about $450 billion over a
10-year period. And, as I mentioned, we have already seen a
real trend of reducing significant MILCON budget reductions
from the services.

RISKS OF CUTS

Where do you see the most risk? If I could ask each one of
you to talk to us about the risks of cuts of that magnitude, of
reductions in your military construction requirements and
reductions in facilities, sustainment, restoration, and
maintenance? Where do each one of you see the risks associated
with those draw-downs of that magnitude?
Mr. Farr. Mr. Chairman, just remember that we ordered these
risks. We put them into statutory law.
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Farr. We didn't order any specifics. We just ordered
the cuts.
Mr. Culberson. Right. With the sequestration in particular,
right. All of us need to get our arms around the scale of the
problem that the sequestration creates for the Defense
Department and what that does to our Nation's security around
the world. So that is why I wanted to ask you to talk to us a
little bit about the risk associated with the $450 billion
reduction over a 10-year period.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACT

Ms. Hammack. The budget that you have in front of you for
fiscal year 2013 MILCON does not take into account
sequestration. We would have to completely redo our fiscal year
2013 budgets if we were subject to sequestration. It would have
a dramatic impact and subject us to dramatic risk to readiness
and responsiveness if we had to take into account
sequestration.
Mr. Culberson. Help us understand what that risk looks
like. That is why I am asking the question.
What do you envision would happen in that scenario so we
can help talk to our colleagues, our constituents in the
Nation. Hey, we had better pay attention to the mandatory
spending side, guys. Medicare, Medicaid, that is what is
killing us. Social Security. We have got to obviously save
money in the Pentagon. But cuts of this magnitude mean x. What
does x look like?
Ms. Hammack. We would have to significantly reduce our
manpower in order to account for a budget under sequestration,
and that would have a dramatic impact on the bases.
Mr. Culberson. Could you quantify ``significant'' and
``dramatic'' to the best of your ability?
Ms. Hammack. Right now, General Odierno said it would take
another 100,000 soldiers out of the Army. That is what he
envisions the risk would be. If we took another 100,000
soldiers out of the Army on top of the 80,000 that we are
taking right now, that would require us to close bases, lay off
civilians, and take dramatic cuts to MILCON, SRM, and any other
budget that we have right now.
Mr. Culberson. So another 100,000 beyond the 80,000. What
kind of reductions does that mean to California, to Texas, to
our colleagues around the country? How many bases? Is there any
way to just----
Ms. Hammack. Sir, I would say everybody would equally feel
the pain.
Mr. Culberson. Do you know what that means at Fort Hood,
Judge?
Mr. Carter. I don't think anybody has given a directed spot
at your post right now.
There is another issue on sequestration that I think these
Secretaries will agree. They have all got ongoing contracts,
and there is going to have to be an 8 percent cut in every
contract, which means every contract that is ongoing has got to
be renegotiated. It is a nightmare at that level, because it is
basically--you have got to rework everything you are doing in
every one of these services. That, and coupled with, in the
Army, which their biggest asset is soldiers, 100,000 soldiers
is a whole lot of folks.
Mr. Culberson. This is very helpful. So about a 100,000
reduction beyond the 80,000 for the Army.
Any other way? Any other information?
Ms. Hammack. That is what General Odierno projected and
testified in one of his posture hearings. I can't even remember
which one at this point in time. So those are not my numbers.
If I were told that I had to account in installation
budgets for a reduction of another 100,000, the only thing I
can say at this point in time is that every installation would
equally feel the pain. It would be another huge round of BRAC.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACTS

Mr. Culberson. Could I ask the Navy, what would that mean
to the Navy, Marine Corps----
Ms. Pfannestiel. We have not done the strategic analysis
that would be necessary. The budget that you have before you is
based on our analysis of meeting our military mission at the
level that we believe it needs to make. It has some risks, the
fiscal year 2013 budget has some risks, but largely they are in
sustainment, not so much in the----
Mr. Culberson. Sure.
Ms. Pfannestiel [continuing]. In the MILCON. I think will
you see our MILCON from 2012 to 2013 was maintained pretty
close to where it had been. If we had sequestration, clearly,
there would have to be another examination, a strategic
examination, of what makes sense. We have not done that
examination at this point, and would not be able to project
what that might look like.
Mr. Culberson. I encourage you to do it as soon as
possible. It is important for us as a part of this debate in
helping to understand what the impact would be that we can talk
to our constituents and our colleagues to help understand the
scale of the problem that creates for our national security.
Ms. Pfannestiel. Absolutely. I believe that Secretary
Panetta said starting this summer we would have to start doing
the analysis of what would happen with sequestration.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
Secretary Yonkers.
Mr. Yonkers. Mr. Chairman, same situation with the Air
Force. We haven't put into paper yet and tried to look at what
the impacts from the sequestration might be, but it is just
sort of, again, back of the envelope. When you look at the 487
billion, and we are pulling 300 aircraft, and we are affecting
every State and every territory with regards to personnel and
force structure reductions, and the military construction
program and the other kinds of things across the budget,
another half a trillion dollars would at least double that
impact, if not more.
Mr. Culberson. It is important information for us to hear
and see.
Tell you what, let me go to my friend Judge Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been in
meetings, and while this has been just kind of give you a gut
estimate, it is frightening. The gut estimate they gave us was
100,000 soldiers from the Army, a full carrier group from the
Navy, and Joint Strike Fighter from the Air Force. That is
gone, the numbers. That doesn't mean that is what they will get
rid of; that means that is an example of what you--when I say a
full carrier group, I don't mean just a carrier, I mean all the
ships that sail with the carrier. That is a whole bunch of
them. Of course, the Joint Strike Fighter we have been trying
to get in place for a long time, and we have already spent a
ton of money getting it there, and we desperately need it. We
are undergunned by all of our enemies.
I am going to have to go back to some mundane stuff, but it
is kind of important. I am going to have to spend my next
Tuesday all day in Albuquerque, New Mexico, discussing with the
regional director of Fish and Wildlife some issues that are
going on in my county.
And I think you are probably aware of this, but due to a
settlement made by U.S. Fish and Wildlife with the WildEarth
Guardians Group, we are required to determine whether 252
candidates for endangered species list are to be placed on that
list. And the overwhelming majority of those 252 various
species lie in the southern tier and the western tier of our
country.
The estimates that we got, that Florida would have about 28
candidates; California and Washington--and that is Navy and Air
Force--California and Washington would have--that is Air Force,
Navy, and Army--would have 23 candidates; Texas, again, in all
three--has all three services, would have 21; New Mexico would
have 16. And many of these things are rolling off the drawing
board fairly rapidly.
And the first, I guess, the question is, I am sure you are
aware of this, but it has been our experience at Fort Hood that
one species shut down all of the training ranges at Fort Hood,
and we had to negotiate a set-aside, which we commend the fish
folks for being willing to do it. We did some creative
thinking. We set up a conservatory area to preserve this
species, and we were able to start firing at our firing ranges.
But if you are an armored post, and you can't shoot your
weapons, you are not a very effectively trained post. And I
understand that some of the amphibious work in California was
shut down for the Navy and Marine Corps because of species on
the coast.
We have got this all coming our way. First, I guess the
question--and really, I would address it to Dr. Robyn because
she is DoD, but all of you are going to have this issue--are we
prepared to make--to be able to protect realistic training as
we deal with this? Are DoD and the services prepared to get
involved, because this is really a fast-track situation?
The other question that I guess is have you come up--there
is the Sikes Act, and it is set up to assist us in dealing with
this. Is it sufficient, in your analysis, to deal with these
issues? Two hundred fifty-two species coming at you one at a
time can be extremely expensive and extremely onerous in time
and talent. In Sikes is there enough help there? Do we need to
try to get you more help in dealing with this issue, because I
am very concerned about these things that are coming down
rapidly.

THREATENED ENDANGERED SPECIES

Ms. Robyn. Thank you for your support.
To put this in perspective, we do have on our installations
roughly 440 threatened endangered species, and of those, 40 are
found only on military installations. Our installations have
become a haven as population has developed up around
installations that were at one time fairly isolated. They have
taken refuge. So it is something we manage very, very carefully
and aggressively, and the Sikes Act and our integrated natural
resources management plans are key to that.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has to evaluate these
251 candidate species by 2017. Of them, 60 are sufficiently
prevalent that if they were listed, it would have some impact
on our mission. So 60 of the 251 could create an issue.
Mr. Culberson. If I could, would the gentleman yield for
just a second?
Mr. Carter. Certainly, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Do you have a voice in the settlement? Since
60 of those species go on a list will have an impact on your
mission, do you have a voice?
Ms. Robyn. Well, no.
Mr. Culberson. Do you object to the settlement?
Ms. Robyn. Well, by law, under the Endangered Species Act,
we work very closely with U.S. Fish and Wildlife. We have a
partnership which we doubled down on to share data and
scientific data, and to discuss what kinds of natural resource
management actions we can take. We have told the services to be
managing very aggressively using these plans that the Sikes Act
makes possible. We are not panicking at this stage.
I think I liked your question about are there ways that we
can amend the Sikes Act, and I had two suggestions for my
staff, and I am not sure I can do them justice. One has to do
with being able to pool resources with the Department of
Agriculture and the Department of Interior when our land is
adjacent to their land. For example, at Fort Belvoir and the
Prince William Forest, and we are both managing the bald eagle.
If we could join forces, we could more effectively manage
threatened and endangered species.
Mr. Culberson. Could you object to an settlement like that,
Judge? Normal you can----
Mr. Carter. Well, no. It is a very unusual act. At least
this is what I have been told, and I have been working on this
for Highway 195 for 3 years; got the money, and everybody is
ready to go except for one cave beetle. And I am having to buy
caves. And if you own a cave, hold on to it. It is worth at
least a million dollars, because I bought three now, and I need
to buy one more; $4 million we are going to spend for a cave
beetle.
But this is more important. It is a catch-22 to this
extent. Once the court has declared a scientific study shall be
made, there is a year to make that study. They can delay
ordering the study, but once it is ordered, you have got a
year. There are 252 of them, and they have all got to be done
by 2016. Add it up. That is a whole lot of scientific studies.
We have got three salamanders. That is three studies we have to
do just in one county. And we are coming right back with two or
three species of sweetwater clam, or something like that. There
are six studies out of two counties in the State of Texas that
have to be--that could potentially have to be done before 2016.
That is not very long until 2016, and the consequence is if
the study is not done, the court calls the court to order and
says, may I see the study, please? I am sorry, Your Honor, the
study is not done. It is placed on the Endangered Species Act
on this. It is your burden to have the study done, and fish
can't do them, and they will tell you they can't do them.
In protecting our training mission on all of our posts and
bases that we have got in the country, you have got to stay on
top of that catch-22. If they don't do the study, you have
either got to have one to present to defend your side, and that
will cost you about a million bucks apiece, but they won't
let--contract out those studies.

THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES

I already asked that question, will you contract with a
private industry to do the study because you can't do it, you
tell me you don't have the resources, and, no, we won't.
Because at the point in time when it reaches that judge, if
they don't have a study, it goes on the list. And that is what
you better be looking at.
I mean, if I am wrong, I would be glad to hear I am wrong,
but I don't think I am. And that really needs to be fixed in
the act, but that is a whole different story. But this is
serious stuff.
Ms. Robyn. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Carter. It will shut down the entire western half of
two counties in my district, which are the two fastest-growing
counties in the United States. And they will stop growing.
Actually, it is salamanders, three salamanders.
Ms. Robyn. I will follow up with them with a more thorough
answer on what we are doing in terms of those studies.
Mr. Carter. And you have done wonderful work. Four years
ago with the golden-cheeked warbler, you guys came in there,
you put together a conservation plan. Our comptroller is a big
assistance of that in Texas. She has got a lot of
trustworthiness. People trust her, and she is doing a great
job. But I am afraid, like you say, 252 by 2016, that could
very quickly become overwhelming.
Mr. Culberson. Yeah, and it does seem like you can work out
some reasonable mitigation.
Mr. Carter. We should be able to compromise this.
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Judge, I still don't understand how parties can enter into
a settlement agreement and affect the rights and----
Mr. Carter. Read the Endangered Species Act.
Mr. Culberson. Even though you are not a party----
Ms. Robyn. What we have been able to do is in many cases,
most cases is, avoid what is called critical habitat
designation. If they designate Fort Hood or Belvoir a critical
habitat for a threatened or endangered species, that severely
limits our flexibility to do training and other operational
activities. We are able to avoid that in many, if not most,
cases through this integrated natural resources management
plan.
Mr. Culberson. I know we need to wrap up. I know Sam needs
to step out, too.
Sam, do you have any follow-up questions you want to do
before you need to leave, my friend?
Mr. Farr. Just one suggestion. If you really want to do
some savings, this interagency agreements, I mean, base op
agreements with the local communities, if you would ask the
Congress for the authority to do that.
Ms. Robyn. Will we get the authority?
Mr. Farr. Well, I think it is very important that you seek
it, and seek it with passion, because I don't know how many
bases you could do, but, you know, you have saved just little
old Monterey with the defense languages and naval postgraduate
school a savings of millions and millions of dollars. And I
think if you project that with all of the services all over the
United States, it is a smart thing to do.
Ms. Robyn. It is a wonderful model. There are some
impediments to doing it elsewhere, and I would love to hear
your thoughts on what is the best way to go about getting that
authority. We would like to get it at a minimum on a pilot,
renew the pilot authority. I am working with the Air Force and
Army on this. I think Army has been very supportive, as you
know, of this. We would like to get that authority more
broadly.
Mr. Farr. Do you have the ability to give us all of the
bases that would be subject; if you had open authority, who
might want to engage in it? At least I can talk to the Members
of Congress from those communities.
Ms. Robyn. All right. Good.
Mr. Farr. As you know, it is a big educational process.
Essentially what this does is allow your municipal government
to provide all of the base operations. They contract with the
city, who already has a fire department, public works
department.
Mr. Culberson. Right. Utilities.
Mr. Farr. You know, parks department. So whatever the base
needs, we have a Federal--I mean, the union pushback, but those
are usually union jobs in the States.
Ms. Robyn. Right.
Mr. Farr. But if the communities are already doing these
services, and they can provide them at the base for a little
additional cost, not as expensive as having our own operations.
Mr. Culberson. Plus the local government has got a revenue
stream, Sam, that they can use, the property taxes, because--
they may have property taxes.
Mr. Farr. Yeah. So it has worked very well for Monterey and
the facilities there. In fact, they all get better attention.
Things get fixed faster. It is just a very happy relationship.
Mr. Culberson. I want to thank you all so much for being
here. Submit the remainder of the questions for the record in
writing to the working group.
We want to make sure that members in the uniform have as
few worries as possible when it comes to their safety,
security, and the quality of life for themselves and their
families.
Thank you for your service to the Nation, and the hearing
is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.319

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.320

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.321

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.322

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.323

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.324

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.325

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.326

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.327

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.328

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.329

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.330

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.332

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.335

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.338

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.339

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.340

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.341

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.342

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.343

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.344

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.345

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.346

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.347

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.348

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.349

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.350

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.352

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.353

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.354

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.355

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.356

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.357

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.358

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.359

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.360

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.361

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.362

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.363

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.364

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.365

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.366

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.367

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.368

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.369

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.370

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.371

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.372

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.373

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.374

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.375

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.376

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.377

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.378

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.379

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.380

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.381

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.382

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.383

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.384

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.385

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.386

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.387

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.388

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.389

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.390

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.391

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.392

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.393

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.394

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.395

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.396

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.397

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.398

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.399

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.400

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.401

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.402

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.403

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.404

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.405

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.406

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.407

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.408

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.409

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.410

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.411

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.412

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.413

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.414

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.415

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.416

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.417

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.418

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.419

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.420

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.421

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.422

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.423

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.424

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.425

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.426

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.427

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.428

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.429

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.430

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.431

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.432

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.433

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.434

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.435

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.436

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.437

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.438

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.439

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.440

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.441

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.442

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.443

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.444

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.445

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.446

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.447

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.448

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.449

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.450

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.451

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.452

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.453

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.454

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.455

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.456

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.457

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.458

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.459

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.460

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.461

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.462

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.463

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.464

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.465

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.466

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.467

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.468

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.469

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.470

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.471

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.472

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.473

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.474

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.475

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.476

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.477

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.478

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.479

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.480

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.481

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.482

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.483

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.484

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.485

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.486

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.487

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.488

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.489

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.490

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.491

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.492

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.493

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.494

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.495

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.496

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.497

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.498

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.499

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.500

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.501

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.502

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.503

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.504

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.505

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.506

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.507

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.508

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.509

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.510

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.511

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.512

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.513

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.514

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.515

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.516

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.517

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.518

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.519

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.520

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.521

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.522

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.523

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.524

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.525

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.526

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.527

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.528

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.529

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.530

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.531

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.532

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.533

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.534

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.535

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.536

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.537

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.538

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.539

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.540

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.541

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.542

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.543

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.544

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.545

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.546

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.547

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.548

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.549

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.550

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.551

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.552

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.553

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.554

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.555

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.556

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.557

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.558

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.559

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.560

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.561

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.562

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.563

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.564

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.565

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.566

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.567

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.568

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.569

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.570

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.571

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.572

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.573

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.574

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.575

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.576

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.577

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.578

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.579

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.580

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.581

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.582

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.583

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.584

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.585

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.586

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.587

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.588

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.589

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.590

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.591

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.592

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.593

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.594

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.595

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.596

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.597

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.598

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.599

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.600

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.601

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.602

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.603

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.604

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.605

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.606

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.607

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.608

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.609

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.610

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.611

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.612

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.613

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.614

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.615

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.616

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.617

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.618

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.619

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.620

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.621

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.622

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.623

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.624

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.625

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.626

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.627

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.628

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5969A.629


