- DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  NITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, and Miles Taylor,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 3

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
Immigration and Customs Enforcement..............................    1
Transportation Security Administration...........................  195
Southwest Border Enforcement.....................................  439

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 3

ICE

TSA

SW Border

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  NITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, and Miles Taylor,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 3

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
Immigration and Customs Enforcement..............................    1
Transportation Security Administration...........................  195
Southwest Border Enforcement.....................................  439

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

67-979                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\        NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\          MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia              PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia               NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama          JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri             JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                   ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho            DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida              LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana               SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana          CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                   SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio           BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                  MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida           BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT

WITNESS

JOHN MORTON, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, U.S. IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Opening Statement: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. Good morning. The hearing is called to order.
This morning we would like to welcome John Morton, who is
the Director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
better known as ICE, as we consider the President's FY12 budget
request. This is the Nation's second largest Federal
investigative agency. Director Morton, we thank you for being
here this morning; and we look forward to hearing your
testimony before the Subcommittee.
Let me take just a moment to express this Subcommittee's
condolences for the loss of Special Agent Zapata. Our thoughts
and our prayers go out to his family and friends, his
colleagues, and all those who knew him. His death is a stark
reminder of the risks law enforcement officers face in the line
of duty each and every day. I want to thank the men and women
of ICE for their service, in recognition that it comes with
great personal sacrifice.
Turning to today's hearing, we want answers to three main
questions:
Number one, how does the FY12 request stabilize ICE's
budget in terms of eliminating waste and improving
efficiencies; two, how does the budget match resources to
operational needs; and, three, how does ICE demonstrate real
results in terms of the best possible security at the lowest
possible cost?
ICE has come a long way in its relatively short history.
Eight years ago, field offices were rationing vehicle use due
to shortfalls in equipment and other accounts. ICE's mission
expanded and contracted multiple times, as the Office of Air &
Marine, the Federal Air Marshal Service, and the Federal
Protective Service were transferred in and then out of ICE. As
a new agency, ICE has had to distinguish itself among other law
enforcement agencies to carve out its mission space.
To see the progress ICE has made, one only has to look at
the news over the past few weeks. On March 1st, ICE led 173
Federal, State, and local law enforcement partners in 168 U.S.
cities in Project Southern Tempest, resulting in 678 gang-
related arrests. 447 were charged with criminal offenses, 231
were administrative arrests, 322 had violent criminal
histories, and 421 were foreign nationals.
On February 24, an ICE-led investigation in Virginia
resulted in indictments against 22 individuals involved in one
of the largest document fraud rings in United States history.
In 2 years, the criminal organization sold 15,000 fraudulent
drivers' licenses, social security cards, and other IDs, the
proceeds of which were wired to Mexican drug cartels, and that
was more than $1 million.
Also on February 24th, a joint ICE-FBI investigation led to
the arrest of a 20-year-old Saudi student in Texas who was
amassing chemicals for a WMD attack.
These cases demonstrate the breadth of ICE's authority and
why the agency must use all available tools, including
administrative arrests on immigration violations, to disrupt
illegal and dangerous activity.
Congress has consistently provided robust resources to meet
ICE's mission needs and support its personnel. Today we are
challenged not only to meet our national security needs, but to
do so in a way that is responsible and disciplined with respect
to our Nation's mounting debt.
Director Morton, in a time of fiscal crisis, the American
people are demanding responsible budgets that demonstrate
accountability for every dollar that is spent, and that means
this Subcommittee will do its part to prevent waste or misuse
of funds. In light of these priorities--national security and
fiscal responsibility--the House passed H.R. 1. It provides an
increase to ICE operations above the current levels of $57.8
million. H.R. 1 fully funds ICE agents and the minimum 33,400
detention beds that Congress expects ICE to maintain this
fiscal year. This Subcommittee has always put a priority on
operations and the needs of frontline personnel, and H.R. 1
continues to uphold that commitment.
Turning to the FY12 request, I am pleased that your budget
pledges to fully fund agents and the authorized minimum
detention beds. However, as ICE continues to mature, we need to
see that resources are responsibly applied to meet operational
needs and deliver real results for security.
The FY12 priorities raise longer-term issues about bed
space utilization. The focus on criminal alien removal means
longer average stays, and expansion of Secure Communities will
put pressure on detention space. We need to understand the
right resource level within this fiscally constrained
environment to adequately support custody operations.
The FY12 request also includes reductions that cause some
concerns. I will be asking about the nearly $100 million in
undefined professional services and administrative savings
across operational accounts, as well as the $114.6 million cut
from information technology that reduces modernization efforts
by 85 percent. These so-called savings and reductions will
likely reverse some of the progress ICE has made as an
organization as well as impact operations.
Director Morton, the American public demands
straightforward answers on Immigration and Custom Enforcement
efforts. Truth in budgeting, discipline, and transparency with
respect to operational needs are essential in this fiscal
climate, and this Subcommittee will demand no less.
I do appreciate you appearing before the Subcommittee. I
appreciate your candor in helping understand ICE's budget
request for FY12.
At this time I would like to recognize Mr. Price, who is
the distinguished Ranking Member of this Subcommittee, for his
opening remarks. Mr. Price.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, I am happy to join you in welcoming back Assistant
Secretary John Morton from the U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, or ICE, to discuss his agency's $5.51 billion
budget request for fiscal 2012. This is basically a ``current
services'' budget, with a 1.4 percent increase from 2010,
generally permitting the agency to operate at the same level
from 2010 through 2012. But, Mr. Assistant Secretary, as with
the rest of DHS, you have been asked to tighten your belt with
regard to a number of your agency's programs.
Since you have taken the leadership at ICE, I have enjoyed
our good working relationship. I am pleased that we share the
goal of focusing ICE's investigative and removal resources on
the individuals who pose the greatest danger to our
communities--gang members, drug traffickers, weapons smugglers,
and other serious criminals.
It was 4 years ago when this Subcommittee first brought
attention to the large population of criminally convicted
aliens who were being ignored by the previous administration in
favor of low-level offenders. We enacted statutory language in
ICE appropriations requiring ICE to devote a large portion of
its enforcement budget to criminals. The results have been
significant. ICE removals of criminal aliens rose by 12 percent
in 2008, by 24 percent in 2009, and by 37 percent in 2010.
Part of ICE's response to our directive was to establish
the Secure Communities program. I have been impressed with the
results of the rapid build-out of Secure Communities and
support your request to increase the program's funding in 2012.
The shift in removals from mostly non-criminals before your
time to mostly criminals now has, in large part, been a result
of this effort. Nonetheless, your implementation of the program
can always improve, including the sharpness of your focus on
the criminal population and your interaction with local
authorities. I look forward to exploring that with you today.
For years we have also pushed ICE to expand its
Alternatives to Detention program, which allows ICE to keep
track of low-risk individuals in the immigration court removal
process. It is more humane, it is more cost-effective than
penal detention for individuals who pose no danger to society.
So I am pleased to see an increase in alternative to detention,
however modest, which would allow thousands more individuals to
be enrolled in this program. And while this does not have 2012
monetary implications, I am pleased that ICE has implemented
the detainee locater system, making it easier for people to
locate someone detained or released from ICE custody.
While these are areas I applaud, I have a number of
concerns.
First, despite some recent remarkable seizures of both bulk
cash, narcotics, and weapons that ICE should be proud of, the
power of the Mexican cartels is not significantly degraded. I
am concerned that the budget does not request any new funds to
dismantle drug trafficking and human smuggling operations along
the Southwest border. I will reserve further comments and
questions on this issue until the hearing we have next week
specifically devoted to Southwest border enforcement.
The budget also greatly reduces ICE automation programs by
85 percent and eliminates funding for many critical activities
such as the electronic health records and financial systems
modernization. The 2012 budget eliminates all funding for
construction activities and rescinds previously appropriated
construction funds, leaving only a small amount of funds for
emergency maintenance needs. If this means that we are
deferring construction now only to accrue greater costs down
the road, this course would be penny wise and pound foolish.
Finally, the budget has no funding to expand the visa
security units overseas, even though ICE is only operating in
40 percent of the countries we have defined as high risk. As we
learned from the Christmas Day bombing attempt 15 months ago,
it is better to deny a visa overseas based on derogatory
information than to have to stop an attack while it is
occurring. So, Mr. Secretary, we will need to discuss this
further, both to understand the pace at which ICE is expanding
this program and what is delaying the establishment of the visa
security units in more countries.
Mr. Morton, we value the work ICE does day in and day out.
Many of your personnel operate in very dangerous areas, as seen
most recently when ICE Agent Zapata lost his life and another
agent was seriously wounded at the hands of the drug cartels in
Mexico. It is a tough job. I am glad we have a tough prosecutor
like yourself at the agency's helm.
We look forward to continuing to work with you to help you
fulfill its mission, beginning with this review of your
proposed budget.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Again, Director Morton, we welcome you today. We turn it
over now for your testimony for the FY 12 budget request.

Opening Remarks: Assistant Secretary Morton

Mr. Morton. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Aderholt,
Ranking Member Price, members of the committee.
I obviously appear before you today to talk about the
President's proposed budget for fiscal year 2012.
Let me start by recognizing and thanking you for the kind
words about our special agents. As everyone here knows, two of
them were stopped on a highway in San Luis Potosi in Mexico
while driving between Monterey and Mexico City. Two cars of
armed men forced them off the road and fired into their
vehicle, killing Jaime Zapata and wounding Victor Avila. Our
thoughts and prayers remain with Mr. Zapata's family and with
Victor, who I am happy to report is making a remarkably speedy
recovery, notwithstanding having been shot twice.
While the investigation is ongoing, I note that Mexican law
enforcement officials have arrested several individuals that
they feel were involved in the shooting. This is welcome news;
and I can tell you we will continue to work very, very closely
with the Mexicans to see that justice in this particular case
is swift and firm.
Let me also note my condolences for the families who lost
loved ones in Japan as a result of the earthquake and tsunami.
We have searched the records both in Japan and in Hawaii; and
all of our people are safe and accounted for, thankfully.
Turning to the budget, let me note first how much I
appreciate the bipartisan and consistent support we have had
from the Subcommittee. Our enforcement efforts have steadily
grown over the past few years, notwithstanding the fact that we
are a relatively young agency, and this simply would not have
been possible without the important appropriations we have
received from the Congress.
As the Chairman noted, we have become the second-largest
criminal investigative agency in the entire Federal Government.
We are the principal investigative arm of the Department of
Homeland Security, and I look forward to working with the
Committee to solidify these gains, and I commit myself and my
staff to a relationship marked by professionalism and candor.
The President has proposed an appropriated budget of $5.5
billion, which is roughly an increase of slightly over 1.3
percent, or $155 million, over our enacted 2010 budget.
The emphasis of the budget is very simple. First, we seek
to maintain full enforcement operations; second, we seek to
fully fund our detention program at the levels previously
directed by Congress; and, third, we seek to continue the
expansion of Secure Communities so that we reach over 3,000
jurisdictions by the end of the fiscal year, which will roughly
be 96 percent of all the eligible jurisdictions in the United
States.
The main enhancements are $157 million for increased
detention funding and $64 million for the expansion to Secure
Communities. We are also seeking modest enhancements for data
center consolidation and 2,500 more Alternatives to Detention
positions.
Recognizing the top-line fiscal constraints, our budget
does recommend delaying facility consolidation plans, it does
significantly reduce the scope of many of our automation
initiatives, it eliminates construction projects and expenses
to address only emergency health and safety requirements, and
it identifies additional efficiencies of $100 million in
management and administration costs. I know these are of
concern to the Committee, and I look forward to discussing them
with you. They are just hard but necessary causes. We seek to
maintain enforcement operations and results while observing
some fiscal restraint.
So what are our enforcement priorities going to be for the
coming fiscal year? The same as now: aggressive investigation
of national security threats and cross-border crime, and smart,
effective immigration enforcement.
Let me just deal with each very quickly, starting with
criminal investigations.
We have become a very, very large investigative agency. We
have 7,000 special agents posted in every single State of the
Union and 47 foreign countries, including Mexico, where we will
be increasing our staff to 40, making it by far the largest
overseas office we have in the world.
Through our agents, we investigate a wide variety of
crimes. I think most people and the public have no idea how
broad ICE's reach is, everything from the illegal smuggling of
drugs and guns, money laundering, bulk cash smuggling, human
smuggling and trafficking, child pornography, child sex tours
and child labor, illegal exports of sensitive weaponry and
technology, counterfeiting and piracy, and, of course,
immigration visa and document frauds. We are going to stay
focused on those things.
With regard to immigration enforcement, we have over 6,000
officers and 900 attorneys dedicated to the removal process.
You will see a continued use of these resources to maintain our
key priorities and keep focus on strong overall enforcement.
To that end, I would note that we have removed more people
in the last 2 years than in any similar period in our history.
We also prosecuted more people for illegal reentry. We put more
people on the border. We audited more companies than we ever
have before. And I note that just last month we reached an
important milestone of our 20,000th gang member or associate
arrest. We will stay focused on the removal of criminal
offenders and national security threats.
Mr. Price is entirely correct. The agency through this
Committee had its attention sharpened and focused on criminal
offenders. It was the right thing to do, and we are going to
continue to do that through the Secure Communities program.
We are going to continue to focus on the removal of border
violators. Our support of CBP and the Border Patrol in
particular along the border is strong and increasing. And we
are going to focus on people who game the system. If you come
back here after being previously deported, you are a fugitive
in the face of a final order, or you obtain your status by
fraud, we are going to focus on you.
Finally, we will continue our strong emphasis on work, site
enforcement, focused on employer compliance.
With that, let me thank you again for your support and
welcome any questions that you may have. I will do the best to
answer them with transparency and candor; and if I don't know
something or need a detail to get back to you, I will tell you
so.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Director.
Before we start the questioning, let me say there is a
chance that we could have votes this morning during the
hearing, so we will move as quickly as possible through the
first round of questions and then hope to get through a second
one after that.

COST SAVINGS

While the FY 12 request prioritizes agents and bed space
needs, we still lack truth in budgeting. We need a responsible
request from the Administration for operations with clear
results and impacts. I know you have concerns about the
reductions proposed: the approximately $100 million in
undefined savings, cuts in information technology of $114
million, and other reductions. Can you tell us, the
Subcommittee, today how you plan to identify these savings and,
given the reductions, how you will continue to provide your
agents and officers with the tools they need to do the job?
Mr. Morton. Mr. Chairman, we are going to do it primarily
through two ways, our professional services contracts and our
administrative activities, travel, supplies, conferences, with
roughly about the same amount of money for each, $45 million
for the professional services and $54 million for the
administrative activities.
We are going to go down program by program. We have a
number of contracts where private contractors provide us
administrative support. If we can do that more cost-effectively
with Federal employees, either existing or new, we will do
that. If there are some of these contracts that ultimately in
the grand scheme of things are not critical, we will eliminate
them.
Then with regard to the administrative activities, we are
just going to do some good old-fashioned belt tightening on
travel, copying, conferences, printing, and the like. We have
already done a fair amount of that this year. We have
drastically reduced the number of conferences that we hold. We
will look at video teleconferencing instead of in-person
meetings.
I don't want to suggest that this is easy. It is not. I
appreciate the fact that these are very difficult budget times.
These are hard calls. I know the Committee has concerns about
them. I am more than willing to continue to work through them
as the budget process unfolds. And all I can say is we are
going to do the very best we can to identify the savings so we
can maintain an emphasis on operations and detention budgeting.
Mr. Aderholt. One thing that the Subcommittee would like to
see is a detailed list of proposed reductions compared against
what ICE currently spends on these activities to help us better
understand where these savings would come from.
Mr. Morton. Again, I think we can actually provide that for
you, Mr. Chairman. Why don't I commit to doing so here,
actually by program, the amount by program within the agency.
We will give you a full list of what we are looking in each
program to save and how we plan on saving it.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

DETENTION BED SPACE: COST

Mr. Aderholt. Congress has provided every request that ICE
has made for detention bed space. It is a significant
investment, accounting for nearly $1.4 billion, or a quarter of
ICE's total budget. As we discussed last week, ICE will meet
the minimum authorized level of 33,400 beds in FY 11 if
provided additional funds in H.R. 1.
Fiscal year 2012 priorities raise longer-term issues about
bed space utilization. The continued emphasis on criminal alien
removal means longer stays, and expansion of Secure Communities
will also put pressure on detention space. Let me say that we
cannot go back to the days of catch and release. The gains that
have been made in terms of border control and the integrity of
the immigration system would be completely lost if we did.
That brings me to your FY 12 request for bed space. Dollars
are scarce in Washington these days, budgets are being cut, but
I am proud to say that this budget request does not cut funds
for illegal immigrant detention space. As Chairman of this
Subcommittee, I pledge to you that we will fund every dollar
needed to house and detain illegal immigrants in order to keep
them off the streets. However, we can't do a penny more. It is
incumbent on you, Director Morton, to ensure that these dollars
are used wisely and that we get the most out of each and every
dollar.
I would ask you, what steps are being made to ensure that
we are indeed getting the best possible security at the best
possible cost? How are we going to get the most out of every
bed space dollar while also meeting mission needs?
Mr. Morton. Mr. Chairman, you have identified a very
important management issue for us that we spent a lot of time
on in the last 2 years. The truth of the matter is, we spend a
lot of money on detaining people. It is an expensive prospect,
and we operate an extraordinarily large system.
One of the things we are trying to do in this budget is to
fully meet what Congress has required us to do in the past and
we have not met for a full fiscal year to date. Part of the
problem was our original estimates that we provided to the
Committee many years ago were not accurate, and that was the
agency's fault. It cost us far more money to actually detain
people than we were estimating at the time.
So one of the first things that I did when I came into
office, that we needed to have, to use your phrase, was truth
in budgeting, and we figured out what does it really cost? So
that has meant that we have identified a significant gap year
after year in trying to meet our mandate of 33,400, and for the
first time in this budget we tell you up front this is what it
costs.
Now, that said, we are always looking to save money, and
there are a couple of ways we have been doing it and we can do
it in the future.
One, in past years, the agency entered into some contracts
that, let me say, I don't think were the most sharply
negotiated, and we have been steadily trying to get out of
those contracts as they come up for renewal to get something
that is a better value for the taxpayer. In many instances, we
can find and use detention facilities that are not only an
improvement over the facility we are using but we can do it at
less cost. So that is an important part, and we are going to
continue to do that as all of our various contracts turn over.
The other thing that we can do is to be as efficient as we
can in cycling people through the beds. The more we can reduce
the length of stay in our beds, it is, in effect, an increase
in the number of beds that we have available to us. So we can
increase our bed space by either going out and getting more, or
we can be more efficient with the bed space that we have.
We are focused on that, trying to use the full authorities
that we have under the statute to move people quickly where an
administrative process is permissible, working on getting
better travel documents. We have had a sustained problem with a
number of foreign countries who are what we call recalcitrant
countries, they don't take their citizens back in a timely
manner, and that means that we have to detain people longer. We
are working hard with the State Department to really start to
push some of these countries who have been dragging their feet
on giving us travel documents. Because it is a requirement, it
is an international obligation for people to take their
citizens back, and we shouldn't have to fuss around for 2 or 3
months to get a travel document. And that really affects the
amount of time that we spend in detention.
Then we have a small but hard core number of people that we
cannot remove that are so violent and so dangerous that we
can't release them, and that is just--we are between a rock and
a hard place on them. But that is a relatively small number.
I completely agree with your sentiments. It is a work in
progress. We are going to stay at it, and wherever we can
identify inefficiencies so the taxpayer doesn't have to spend
one more dollar but we can increase our enforcement operations,
we will do it.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CRIMINAL ALIENS

Mr. Secretary, I would like to return to the question of
identifying and removing criminal aliens. We have recalled how,
over the past 4 years, this Subcommittee has pressed for as an
emphasis for ICE the identification and removal of criminal
aliens, and part of the response has been, the Secure
Communities program, which we fully supported. Since 2008,
resources have consistently grown for ICE to make progress in
finding aliens in penal custody and removing them at the
completion of their criminal sentence. I am pleased you are
requesting these funds for growth, an additional $64 million.
The program got off to something of a slow start, but you
appear to be on track now for nationwide deployment by 2013. So
there is much to tout, but I do have some concerns, and I would
like to focus on these briefly today.
I am sure you are well aware of the recent case of the
suspected gang member who had been previously deported and was
recently arrested then in Loudoun County, Virginia. But he
wasn't flagged through the Secure Communities program. He was
allowed back into the community, only to commit a heinous crime
in neighboring Fairfax County. Secure Communities should have
flagged him as someone who had been deported, and he should
have remained jailed. However, fingerprints of many of the
deportees that were obtained before 2005 were not taken
electronically, as I understand, and therefore are not in the
database. What is it going to take to fix this deficiency?
Mr. Morton. You are exactly right in that particular case.
And the challenge for us is that the recent fingerprints are
all digital, but going back we have fingerprints, but they are
not digitized. So what we have to do is steadily and
aggressively go back and digitize all of the older print cards
that have the fingerprints and get those into Secure
Communities. Otherwise, you risk missing the identification.
The other thing we have to do is work with our State and
local partners to make sure they understand and we support
clearly those instances in which there is what is called a no-
match, so that even where the fingerprints aren't a perfect
match, if there is evidence of foreign birth or an unclear
status, that they call us and we do a manual search to figure
out what is going on. That didn't happen in this case and, as a
result, the person fell through the cracks and, as you noted,
went out and committed a serious crime.
That case also highlights why it is important that Secure
Communities identify all offenders. We need to have an emphasis
on identifying and removing the serious offenders. But many
people, as in this instance, come into the criminal justice
system for a lower level offense and ultimately commit a more
serious offense. We need to make sure that we are identifying
all of the offenders and then using our resources appropriately
in, as the committee has required, a thoughtful, ranked way.
Mr. Price. What can you tell us about the pace of this
digitization program and is that affected by the low-balling of
your automation budget?
Mr. Morton. I don't know the answer to that, so let me find
out the answer and get back to the Committee with how many of
the old records we go through each year and whether our present
budget is sufficient to allow that or it hurts it in any way. I
will let you know that.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SECURE COMMUNITIES

Mr. Price. Now let me turn to another issue regarding
Secure Communities. Advocates of targeted immigration
enforcement have raised concerns, as you well know, in some
cases that the goal of Secure Communities to identify and
remove serious criminals, has not always resulted in the
prioritization of serious criminals. ICE's own data shows that
27 percent of the individuals removed after being identified
through Secure Communities in fiscal 2010 had never been
convicted of a crime, and in certain individual jurisdictions a
majority of the people apprehended under the program had no
criminal record.
What can you tell us about your efforts to more effectively
target enforcement where it really needs to be targeted, on the
most dangerous people? What kind of management and oversight
are in place to ensure that program outcomes are in line with
the program's stated objectives?
Mr. Morton. All right, let me address those in turn.
First of all, we do prioritize by seriousness of offense,
and we just last year reclassified the Secure Communities
level. So Level 1 are aggravated felonies as defined by the
Congress, Level 2 are all other felonies, and Level 3 are
misdemeanors.
The challenge for us is that we do identify and prioritize
serious offenders. The question becomes what do we do with
lesser offenders who are identified, and our position is,
obviously, Federal law requires us to remove individuals,
provided that resources permit it. So Secure Communities has
allowed us to identify and remove more serious offenders than
we ever have before in the history of the country, and that is
going to continue as Secure Communities rolls out to more and
more places.
It has also identified a large number of lesser offenders,
and that is because the single largest class of individuals
convicted in the United States is, obviously, misdemeanors.
That is the biggest pool that you would expect to be identified
by a fingerprint program. So we do very much prioritize our
efforts, but we also don't look away on other people who are
referred to us. That is true with non-criminals. That is why we
do in fact remove non-criminals through the Secure Communities
program.
But it is important to remember, first of all, you don't
get into Secure Communities unless you are arrested for a
criminal offense, and many of these people had a prior
immigration history. For example, they had been previously
deported, they had an outstanding deportation order, multiple
criminal arrests. So we will receive and process for removal
those individuals. We don't detain everybody, but we will focus
on removal.
Mr. Price. If I could interrupt you, my time is about to
expire here, and I want to make sure that we address the
question of local variation. It is troubling when the numbers
we see in terms of these various categories vary a whole lot
from community to community. Are you really making an adequate
effort, do you think, to make sure that this program is
executed in accordance with guidelines in local jurisdictions?
Mr. Morton. You are absolutely right that that is something
that we need to pay very serious attention to as we now move
beyond the initial implementation where we were in 80 or 90
jurisdictions to where by the end of this fiscal year we are
going to be in 1,500 jurisdictions, half the jurisdictions of
the United States. And we are very cognizant of the
possibilities of local variation, whether benign or more
sinister, and we feel that we have a responsibility to
proactively look for variances that don't make sense.
So what we are doing is we are going to run every quarter
statistical analyses of all of the people who are identified
and removed. We are going to work with civil rights and civil
liberties--as a matter of fact, we are right now--to develop a
program where we look at the results. If we need to go drill
down to a case-by-case approach, we are going to do that. We
are going to work with the Civil Rights Division in the
Department of Justice so that we can be assured as we go out
and roll this program out nationwide that the necessary
oversight is in place. So we are working on that.
I would be happy to lay out the specifics for you and your
staff, if you would like.
Mr. Price. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Frelinghuysen.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director, I note your Scotch roots.
Mr. Morton. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I have some, shall we say, Mexico-
centric questions, and let me preface the questions by saying
Mexico is a great ally. It is among our largest trading
partners.
I would like you to tell the Committee more about our
largest overseas office there. There certainly are parts of
Mexico which seem to be in a fairly chaotic state with drug
cartels dominating the landscape.

U.S.-MEXICO COOPERATION

I would like to hear from you how you interact with your
counterparts in Mexico. I am not unfamiliar with programs like
Operation Phalanx, but, given all the things that we hear about
drug mules, gunrunning, and human trafficking, how do you
interact with your Mexican counterparts? And since this is the
Appropriations Committee, you obviously are concentrating more
resources into Mexico. That must be done at perhaps the expense
of other things.
Mr. Morton. It is without question a challenging
environment from a law enforcement perspective, and there is a
strong correlation between the organized crime cases we
investigate along the Southwest border and what is going on in
Mexico. In practice, most of our investigations along the
Southwest border have a Mexican component to them.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Let me just say for the record, too, we
obviously have a number of U.S. citizens who are very proud of
their Mexican heritage and, obviously, a reputation for hard
work. So I am sure everybody watches what happens with a state
of alarm.
Mr. Morton. So we have agents, special agents, assigned to
Mexico. What they are there to do is to coordinate with Mexican
law enforcement, in particular the Federal police, the Federal
Attorney General's office, and the Customs officials, to pursue
criminal investigations, to help Mexican authorities with
criminal investigations in Mexico and then to assist us with
some on our side and increasingly to explore doing joint
investigations. We also work a lot on capacity building and
training.
It is a work in progress. The one thing that has changed
dramatically is our ability to talk frankly with our Mexican
counterparts. Even our conversations of 5 years ago were very,
very different. You have seen a level of candor in Mexico on
corruption issues, on the need to build up their capacities and
experience. So we are trying very hard to do that.
I don't want to suggest that the light is at the end of the
tunnel. It is a tough row to hoe. But we are making significant
progress in particularly going after a number of the cartel
leaders. We have helped Mexico to bring their first human
trafficking cases ever, and ICE did that with them. We showed
them how to do that, provided some investigative support.
We are going to start working with the Mexicans to identify
the international smuggling organizations that bring people not
just from Mexico but from many other places through Mexico to
the United States. The more we can do to apprehend and
intercept and disrupt in Mexico means far fewer people for the
Border Patrol to have to try to catch at the border. So we are
working hard on that.
We are doubling down in Mexico. We are going to go from 20
people to 40 people, as I mentioned. It will be by far our
largest office. And working very closely with DEA, we are just
going to keep going after it hammer and tong.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Lastly, you share resources with the
DEA, FBI, and other Department of Justice agencies, so it is
not just you. It is a combined effort of a lot of different
agencies.

VETTING OF COUNTERPARTS

Mr. Morton. Very much so. The DEA has a significant
presence. ICE is the next largest. FBI is there. CBP is there.
The one thing about ICE is our jurisdiction is so broad that we
end up partnering with just about all of the law enforcement
agencies down there. So we are doing drug work, we are doing
money work, we are doing JTTF work.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Lastly, since my time is almost up,
there is a vetting issue. Can you talk about that? We can't
assume always that our counterparts, your counterparts are who
they are.
Mr. Morton. That is right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There are some investigations?
Mr. Morton. That is right. So we typically operate, and we
do in Mexico, through what are called vetted units. So we work
with Mexican officials to establish trusted units of Mexican
law enforcement authorities that we work with. We do the same
in Colombia and Ecuador and many of the other Central American
countries. We have eight vetted units, and we are going to try
to add four more. Panama. They are very successful.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Frelinghuysen.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DETENTION BED SPACE: SPECIFICS

Director Morton, this is the first time I have had the
opportunity to serve on this Committee, so my questions will
probably be very rudimentary but also some impressions.
I have been a bit surprised by the sense of body counts as
very important in the comments that have been made by members
of the Subcommittee and by you in your testimony. On the
detention beds, this budget is fully funded for 2012 for 33,400
beds?
Mr. Morton. Per day, on an average, per day.
Mr. Olver. How many are funded in 2011? How much of an
increase is that for 2012?
Mr. Morton. The way it works is that the Committee for the
last few years has directed the agency to maintain a minimum
level of 33,400 beds. For a whole host of reasons, which good
people can agree and disagree on, the agency has been unable to
actually meet that figure.
Mr. Olver. What is it this year?
Mr. Morton. This year, for the first time, we are meeting
through the first two quarters the detention mandate. Last
year, we only maintained an average of a little over 30,000.
Mr. Olver. Last year it was 30,000.
Mr. Morton. That is right.
Mr. Olver. So there is no increase in the proposed budget.
Mr. Morton. We are trying to meet our obligation.
Mr. Olver. That answers something. I was thinking to
myself, are these owned or are these contracted, and are they
1-year or long-term contracts or what?
Mr. Morton. It is a mix. We have over 250 different
facilities that we use. They fall into three categories. There
are government-owned facilities, a very small number; there are
contract facilities run by private contractors; and then there
are facilities that are run by State and local authorities, and
we rent space in those.
The challenge for us is our population is very diverse, so
we have to detain everybody from women, non-criminals, to very,
very serious violent offenders like a penal institution. So we
need a wide variety of facilities, and obviously we have a
national reach. We have to be able to detain people throughout
the United States. We are trying to reduce the number. We have
taken it from over 300 to 250. But we still run a very large
system.
Mr. Olver. You have already told me you are not funding any
more, but you were below, even though this was your sort of
mandated capacities earlier. I was going to say, if you are
opening more, filling--any more are included, then next year
the question is likely to be, well, why didn't you fill them
all? Maybe that is a question that it was thought to be funded
for that full number earlier. Maybe you have already suffered
from that kind of a problem.

REMOVAL OPERATIONS

Let me go on to a slightly different thing then. Your
testimony points out that the two major core operational
programs are enforcement and removal operations, and
``removal'' strikes me as a wonderful euphemism for
deportation, which you have no problem using. And in all of
your testimony you use deportation. It seems like deportation
is the word. Other euphemisms might be termination or re-
termination or something like that. I don't know. Or
extermination, you know.
The two programs--I note that the two core programs,
enforcement and removal operations and the Homeland Security
investigations, I was puzzled, the Homeland Security
investigations in its body count arrests 55,000 individuals,
including 34,000 criminal arrests, and then 20,000
administrative arrests, 21,000 administrative arrests. Now, are
both of these core functions using these detention facilities,
or is it only the removal operations that are using the
detention facilities?
Mr. Morton. They both use them. Our detention power is
limited to the administrative arrests. So all of the ERO
arrests that are administrative----
Mr. Olver. Your detention power is limited?
Mr. Morton. Limited. We only have civil detention power. We
do not have penal power. So, unlike the Bureau of Prisons, we
don't incarcerate people. We detain them.
Mr. Olver. Are criminal arrests then housed in the Bureau
of Prisons?
Mr. Morton. In the Bureau of Prisons or the Marshals
Service. That is right.
Mr. Olver. So what about the administrative arrests? Are
those civil?
Mr. Morton. They are all civil.
Mr. Olver. They would be involved in the detentions?
Mr. Morton. So we do all of the civil detentions. So we run
a uniquely civil detention system. Now, we house a lot of
people with criminal records in them, but the reason they are
in the detention bed is because we are trying to remove them
from the United States, which is a civil not a criminal
process.
Mr. Olver. So what happens to the criminal arrests? So
those are not in your budget? Those are in Federal prison's
budget?
Mr. Morton. The arresting piece. But the budget, no, that
is either the Marshals Service for the pretrial detention or
the Bureau of Prisons for incarceration.
Mr. Olver. Is my time up?
Mr. Aderholt. Yes, it is.
Mr. Olver. I have only started, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

AGENTS KILLED

Mr. Olver. Because I don't know very much.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The two agents that were killed, that made the paper, one
killed and one seriously injured in San Luis Potosi--first, I
would note that San Luis Potosi is not a border town. San Luis
Potosi is probably closer to Mexico City than it is to the
border. They were both unarmed by order of the Mexican
Government. I am very familiar with how harsh the Mexicans are
on bringing guns into their country and I understand that is
their policy.
But it concerns me. You have just told us that you have
added substantially more unarmed agents into the Mexico City
office working with the folks down there. I can understand
Mexico's government, their gun policies, because they date back
to the revolution. But the reality is you are putting people in
a serious harm's way unarmed who come from a country where they
are trained to do the appropriate response when attacked.
And San Luis Potosi is out of the war zone--and I am going
to call the border the war zone--out of the war zone
substantially, and yet the war is continuing south and no
telling where it is going to stop. We all know that. We can see
it moving in that direction, and we are just praying to God in
Texas that it doesn't move north.
So shouldn't you make a risk assessment where you would be
able to argue that agents should be armed and try to negotiate
arms for them? Are other agents of the Federal Government, like
the FBI and the DEA, going into Mexico unarmed? That is my
question.
Then, finally, a story told to me by my friend Mr.
Culberson, who normally sits right next to me, was that there
was an ambush. This may be a Border Patrol question; it may not
be an ICE operation. There was an ambush in Arizona where they
issued shotguns with beanbags in them to the agents. Of course,
the ambush was effective. The officer raised up with his
beanbag gun and fired a round, and all of a sudden all hell
broke loose and the guy shot back with real guns and the result
was that two men were killed.
Now, that seems like a really strange policy to me; and I
would like you to address that policy.
Mr. Morton. Let me start with the last question. That was a
CBP case, not an ICE case. That was Border Patrol Agent Terry
who was killed. I don't know all of the details of that
particular case, but I do know that the Border Patrol's policy
on the use of force is the same as ours, and they were carrying
guns and were authorized to use their firearms if they felt
their lives are in danger. They can skip the beanbags.
But to give you a deeper answer, I would refer you to the
Border Patrol on that one.
On the other one, let me say this, on the question of
security and the doubling of our agents. We have been doing a
very in-depth security assessment. We are very cognizant of the
fact that we are sending people into a place that is dangerous,
and we are taking a number of security steps.
What I would ask, Mr. Carter, is maybe if I could come and
talk to you outside of the hearing room on some of what we are
doing and thinking.
Mr. Carter. I would be glad to.

RE-ENTRIES

If I have still got time, the question about the Virginia
case, do you have any concept of how many re-entries by violent
criminals you are experiencing after they are deported,
resulting in things like the Virginia case? We are a long way
from the border here. We are a lot closer where I live.
Mr. Morton. I don't. Let me see if we can get some hard
numbers for you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Morton. I will tell you, it is a real problem. Re-entry
is a big problem, not just with people that we deport with no
criminal records but, obviously, criminal offenders that we
deport and come back. And given the rate of recidivism in this
country, which is about 60 to 70 percent, you can do the math,
and we are talking about more crimes in communities.
We prosecuted over 7,000 people last year for re-entry,
which is the largest number we have ever done, and the vast
majority of those are criminals. All I can say on it is it is a
big problem. I share your concern on it. We do everything we
can to identify them. And it is why, again, in some instances,
we will learn of somebody who doesn't have a criminal record.
But if they are here after having previously been deported, the
law is very clear on that, that you reinstate the removal
order. You don't get another hearing. You are removed. That is
our obligation, and we are going to do that.
Mr. Carter. Thank you very much.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Chairman, and good morning, Director
Morton.
A couple things. In your written testimony, you said that
ICE has increased the average daily detention population by 40
percent while increasing annual criminal arrest also by 1,200.
Again, I applaud you and your officers for their diligence.

SANCTUARY CITIES

My main concern is about this issue of sanctuary cities.
Last year during a hearing with the Committee on Homeland
Security on which I served at the time, I had a dialogue with
an ICE official on this topic. Mr. James Dinkins acknowledged
that the lack of cooperation by sanctuary cities can be
challenging for Federal agencies and does come at a cost when
ICE experiences difficulties building a criminal case against
an alien. Sir, is it fair to say that there are a variety of
metropolitan areas across the United States that can be labeled
sanctuary cities?
Mr. Morton. First of all, on sanctuary cities, obviously, I
don't support the idea. I will say that there is a wide variety
of cities that are known to have or said to have sanctuary
policies. There is a wide range. There are some that have
official laws or ordinances on the books that restrict
communication with ICE or cooperation with ICE and others it is
more in the area of policy. It can be challenging for us in
some jurisdictions.
I will say that as we have increasingly focused on our
criminal investigative efforts and gang work, we have generally
been able to work through it. But it is something we deal with.

FEDERAL IMMIGRATION LAW ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Dent. I guess I get particularly disturbed by this
because, on the one hand, the Justice Department is suing the
State of Arizona for assisting with the enforcement of Federal
immigration law and, on the other hand, we have communities out
there that are discouraging or dissuading local law enforcement
from cooperating. And that would have to be a real challenge to
your men and women who are trying to enforce the law. You need
their help, do you not?
Mr. Morton. We very much look to State and local
coordination and cooperation as a critical part of what we do.
We don't demand or require of any State and local law
enforcement agency that they actually enforce Federal
immigration law. If they want to work with us, that is welcome
and we try to do that wherever we can. What we don't want is to
have actual interference.
Mr. Dent. You have a 287(g) program where you will train
people.
Mr. Morton. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dent. I just think it is very disturbing to me, though,
as you are trying to do your job, your men and women, you are
not getting the collaboration and cooperation you need from
some communities.
On the issue of removal, the last time I checked, there
were about eight countries that are causing us some problems
with deportation. I think we have valid deportation orders
against, the last I checked, over 150,000 people, but their
home countries will not repatriate their citizens. I think
those countries are China, India, Vietnam, Iran, Somalia,
Jamaica, Eritrea, and I am probably forgetting one.
Have we made any progress with these countries in terms of
repatriating their citizens who have been through due process,
it is time for them to go home?
Mr. Morton. We have made some progress. I don't think I
would call it complete progress. So we have reduced the delays
in some of those instances, but they are still far too long,
from my perspective.
What I can tell you on that is we are really working hard
with the State Department. We have seen demarches to some of
those countries. I am going to be starting to get in the car
and going to visit the ambassadors from those countries here in
the United States, and we are just going to keep ratcheting the
pressure. It is a real challenge. It has afflicted the system
for decades.
Mr. Dent. The only thing that is going to get their
attention is you hold up visas from those countries. That will
help settle it. That is where I think you have to apply the
pressure point, and I have legislation on that subject.
Also, the Federal prison population, what percentage of our
Federal prison population today is criminal aliens? It was a
very high percentage, again last time I checked.
Mr. Morton. I don't know the exact percentage, but there
are about--we estimate there is about 2 million criminal
offenders in the United States who are removable, either
because----
Mr. Dent. Is that Federal and State?
Mr. Morton. That is the entire population, yes, sir. I
could try to break it out for you by Federal and State, but
that is the entire.
Mr. Dent. I had seen numbers as high as 20 percent in some
cases of our State and Federal prison population being criminal
aliens. I am not saying they are all here illegally. But where
do they rank in the pecking order in terms of removal? I
suspect they are near the top.
Mr. Morton. Very high, very high. And it depends on the
State, and it depends on the jurisdiction, the percentage in a
given--you know, California, for example, the percentage will
be much higher than if you are, say, in North Dakota. But we
have that information if you are interested and are happy to
give it to you.
Mr. Dent. My time is expired. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I apologize for being late, but I have another hearing
going on at the same time.

INSPECTOR GENERAL REPORT

Mr. Morton, two recent reports by the DHS Office of the
Inspector General have actually validated concerns raised by
myself and the Congressional Hispanic Caucus and immigration
advocates about the 287(g) program. The IG report found that
the program lacks transparency, effective management controls,
and proper oversight.
The first report in March of 2010 was highly critical of
the program and offered 33 recommendations to improve it. The
October report provided an additional 16 recommendations and
indicated that 28 of the original 33 still have not been
implemented.
What is preventing the agency from implementing the 28
original recommendations that remain and the 16 subsequent
recommendations? And also if you could answer as part of your
question, given the seriousness of the IG finding, shouldn't
you refrain from signing new agreements until these
recommendations are implemented and these safeguards put in
place, especially the proper oversight?
Mr. Morton. You are right. The Inspector General issued two
reports that were critical of our oversight and management of
our 287(g) agreements. Many of the ``open'' recommendations
from the Inspector General actually were agreed on, and it is
just a matter of closing them out, just a few things that we
need to do with the Inspector General.
And so I think if you were to check with the Inspector
General, we are down to about 10 truly outstanding issues that
we are working through, and I don't anticipate those to remain
open for long either. We have accepted many of--in fact, all of
the recommendations. We have created an advisory board. Civil
rights and civil liberties is on our advisory board now for
287(g).
Training, we have a much stronger oversight program, as you
know. The Secretary directed that the program have a narrower
focus for the task force. We have gone to a uniform memorandum
of agreement with all of the 287(g) partners, and we had them
all sign again. All of this has been done since the Inspector
General report as an ongoing effort to improve our training.
Our 287(g) agreements have remained stable, and we have had
about 70 the entire time. There hasn't been an increase since
then.

ALTERNATIVES TO DETENTION

Ms. Roybal-Allard. After years of raising concerns, I was
very pleased that your agency is moving forward to reform our
immigration detention system. However, I remain concerned that
you have made limited progress in implementing the alternatives
to detention, which is a proven supervision and monitoring
program for vulnerable immigrants, such as pregnant women, the
elderly and the sick. As your budget request acknowledges,
alternatives to detention is also cost-effective relative to
traditional detention. What is the timeline for instituting
your planned detention reforms, and what factors have prevented
ICE from implementing alternatives to detention nationwide for
these vulnerable detainees, who pose no threat to society?
Mr. Morton. So our detention reforms are ongoing, and lots
of things have been done. Many of the things that were in your
bill, as a matter of fact, we have been able to address
administratively. We have the online detainee locator system.
We have begun a full overhaul of the medical care that we
provide. We are moving to a new medical record system. We have
two working groups for the advocacy communities. We have
detention monitors in all of our major facilities, and you are
just going to see a steady march to a design that is much more
reflective of the diverse population that we have. There are
some challenges that remain.
Our reforms are subject to negotiation with our union, and
the union has expressed some objections to the new standards
and procedures that we want to implement. And so that is a
matter that we need to negotiate with the union, and we are
trying to do that. And with regard to ATD, as you can see, we
are requesting that the Congress allow us to increase that by
another 2,500 spots, so that would bring us to 19,500 per day,
which is quite a large number.

EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW

The real challenge for us on ATD is that it is cost-
effective on a daily basis. But because the Executive Office
for Immigration Review does not have an expedited docket right
now for ATD, they treat it as if they were a nondetained case.
The cases take a long, long time, and it actually ends up being
cheaper when people are in detention because they will move
much more quickly. We have two pilot programs, one in Baltimore
and one in Miami, with EOIR.
I think if we can prove that that works and expand it, you
will see ATD really work the way I think we all intend it to.
We are not quite there, but we are getting there.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. This Subcommittee recognizes that court
dockets and availability of judges to hear cases can slow
deportation proceedings in progress. Does the Administration's
fiscal year 2012 request provide for enough immigration law
judges to hear the case, the cases ICE is bringing forward?
Mr. Morton. I do not know the specifics of EOIR's 2012
budget request. There are 270 immigration judges on average.
You are right that EOIR resources is a critical factor on how
quickly we can hear cases and remove them.
I would need to go back, Mr. Chairman, and see what it
includes. I am a strong supporter of additional resources for
EOIR. But as you have just noted, it is one of the most central
factors in whether or not we can move cases quickly. The
nondetained docket in particular has an enormous number of
cases on it for a very few number of judges to handle. It has
been a problem for many, many decades. But I can't comment on
the specifics yet because I just don't know them.
Mr. Aderholt. Do you know, and this is I think just as
equally important, do you coordinate your operations with the
Department of Justice to prevent these blockages in the
systems?
Mr. Morton. We work very closely with EOIR. They are very
supportive of a number of our efforts. We have done much better
in the last 2 years with them than we had traditionally done.
We have encouraged them to place a greater focus on the
detained docket, which is the one docket that does move quite
quickly. And they have agreed to work with us on that. They do
do video teleconferencing with us. We have explored stipulated
removals in having quicker dockets for cases that really aren't
contested. The nondetained docket remains a challenge. It is
just the sheer volume of cases in the system is enormous. And
then when you couple that with people who can appeal their case
all the way to the Supreme Court, the nondetained docket can
take many years for an individual case to become final.
Mr. Aderholt. So there would be some indication there
probably could be some more administrative law judges, but you
are going to get with us on that and get the information to us.
Mr. Morton. Yes. Let me see how many the Department of
Justice is requesting.
[The information follows:]

Response. In FY 2012, DOJ is requesting $11,039,000 for EOIR to
support DHS enforcement programs, most notably a high priority
enforcement initiative currently expanding nationwide by ICE/DHS:
Secure Communities. EOIR's 125-position increase includes 21
immigration judges, 10 BIA staff attorneys and related immigration
court and BIA legal support staff.

ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS AND REMOVAL

Mr. Aderholt. The administration has very publicly asserted
its immigration enforcement focus on criminal alien
identification and removal. I strongly support this priority,
but of course, many members of this Committee and many
Americans, including myself, have concerns about ignored
administrative violations.
My understanding, the past 2 years, administrative arrests
associated with just worksite enforcement have dropped by 80
percent. In a worksite enforcement context, processing illegal
aliens has uncovered fraudulent document rings and organized
crime.
And we cannot forget that several of the 9/11 hijackers
were visa overstays, which were, of course, merely
administrative violations. Finally, these individuals are
taking jobs and breaking the law. How does letting them go
impact the morale of immigration enforcement personnel and
Americans in search of jobs in this current economy?
Mr. Morton. A couple of things on that, Mr. Chairman.
We don't let people go, and we did remove over 1,200 people
that we encountered in worksite enforcement operations. What
you have seen there is we did have a shift from the very large
worksite enforcement operations that were focused on
identifying and removing unauthorized workers at say large
meat-packing plants to a focus on our part to really trying to
create a culture of compliance in the employer community, and
it is just a different approach.
With regard to the overall or to the question of whether or
not we are removing noncriminals, we are. We have, last year,
removed 197,000 noncriminals. And while we have increased the
percentage of criminals and our emphasis on criminals, we
continue to remove noncriminals. We are, and as the numbers
suggest, at quite a significant rate. The Committee for the
last few years, and I completely support this, has directed
that, you know, in the context of limited resources that we
focus first and foremost on criminal offenders.
I like to look at it this way, we are appropriated enough
resources to remove about 380,000 people, and the question for
all of us is, who are those people going to be in a world of
limited resources? And so we start with criminal offenders,
border cases that CBP brings us and people who game the system.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, I think we agree that when employers
violate the law, they need to be held accountable, but
employees, I think, need to be held accountable as well. And I
think the Subcommittee believes it is very important and would
like to see a focus on that.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I apologize for having to run back and forth
between two hearings this morning, but I understand in my
absence you began to get into the subject of alternatives to
detention, and I want to probe that further. We know it is a
very economical and effective alternative to holding a low-risk
individual in detention. The absconder rate is quite low, and
the per-day costs are as low as $7 a day, compared to $122 a
day in detention.
Now, I understand that you have begun to explain how the
courts treat these cases, are more likely to delay these cases,
so those cost differences are somewhat obscure, but
nonetheless, that is a very striking difference.

ALTERNATIVES TO DETENTION

I wonder if alternatives to detention is being used
optimally. I know you are proposing 2,500 new participants;
that is good. But there may be another issue at play here.
Beginning in 2010, Congress included statutory language in the
Homeland Security Appropriations Act requiring ICE to maintain
an average daily detention capacity of at least 33,400 beds.
Now, I have never been a big proponent of this provision. And
in an environment of fiscal restraint, I wonder more and more
if we should be telling a Federal agency that they are not
permitted to spend less than a certain amount. In this case, we
are talking about $2 billion annually for immigration detention
beds. That is a third of your budget. Your budget assumes
continuing this level of detention. So I am wondering if in
blindly adhering to keeping over 33,000 people daily in costly
penal detention, whether we are missing a real opportunity to
make wider use of alternatives to detention, to save some
money, to engage in better enforcement practice. After all, of
the 197,000 noncriminals deported by ICE in 2010, only 8.6
percent were placed in alternatives to detention. That is
17,000 people out of 197,000. Does that figure suggest we are
fully utilizing alternatives to detention among noncriminal
aliens? That is what we are talking about.
It just stands to reason, I think, that more than the 8.6
percent of noncriminals in custody would be eligible based on
ICE's own criteria for alternatives to detention. How would you
respond to that and also how do you feel about this statutory
provision. Is it really wise to maintain a statute requiring
you to keep 33,400 beds in play?
Mr. Morton. On alternatives to detention, I will tell you
that I don't think the agency has met the full promise of ATD
for a variety of reasons, many of them are out of the control
of the agency. But just to start by saying, I agree with you
that there is a promise of ATD that has yet to be fully
realized. A couple of challenges. In the past, we were using
ATD not unreasonably to monitor some serious offenders who
weren't otherwise removable.
And that was a reasonable, but not the originally, intended
use of ATD in many instances, and so we have shifted that to
the original intent. The big challenge we face with ATD is
that, as you note, it is cost effective on a per-day basis, and
in many instances, it leads to a high rate of compliance. And
again, we are talking noncriminals. It doesn't help with the
public safety issue, but it does help with the risk of flight
issue.
The challenge for us is that right now, those cases go on
the nondetained docket, and over time, the cost greatly
exceeds. And we have two pilots, as I mentioned earlier, in
Miami and in Baltimore, where EOIR is going to treat the ATD
docket on an expedited basis, similar to the detained docket.
If we can move to that model more nationally, I think we will
start to see the savings that you recognize, the promise of ATD
being realized in full.
As you can tell from this budget, we are not waiting on
that; we are asking for $2,500 more, and this is, you know, we
are $19,500 per day. This is, again, not for the year. So we
are moving in the right direction. There is no question that we
can do more and make it more efficient. It holds great promise.
We are going to do that.
With regard to the detention mandate, of course, I never
want to quibble with the wisdom of the Appropriations
Committees in past years, and there has been generous
appropriation. We are not in a situation where obviously the
Committee has appropriated more money to us in the detention
world than we can spend. For reasons that we mentioned before,
the agency didn't provide the Committee with a particularly
honest assessment of what it cost.
You know, our focus here this year is just trying to meet,
once and for all, in an honest way, the mandate that the
Committee has put on us, and that is what we are trying to do.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.

RE-ENTRIES

Director Morton, I really appreciate your job. I have a
bunch of questions, but I will ask as fast as I can. On the
situation of the Virginia scripture we had from Mr. Price,
where a convicted offender, who had been deported from our
country, reentered our country and committed another offense.
Would you support enhanced punishment for those convicted
offenders who reenter and commit another crime? As a former
prosecutor at the Federal level, if they commit a Federal
crime, would potential punishment be enhanced with the second
conviction?
Mr. Morton. I would certainly support, both in terms of
repeat offenders, that the guidelines, the sentencing
guidelines, recognizing that if you are back again and
committing crimes, it is time for a more serious sentence.
Federal law does provide for a separate offense now,
Federal offense, that is independent of the second crime of
illegal reentry. And that is why we are really trying to
prosecute those aggressively with regard to criminal offenders
that we remove and come back. And gang members is a big
problem. We have a lot of gang members that we remove, they
come back, and they don't go to a life of pursuing further
education and honest work, but back to a life of crime, and so
we really try to focus on them. And you know, my view is, if
you are back again and you are committing more felonies, it is
time for a little more serious sentence.

INTENSIVE SUPERVISION APPEARANCE PROGRAM

Mr. Carter. With regard to the discussion of the Intensive
Supervision Appearance Program that you have given, from my
experience, I support the use of monitors and so forth. I think
it is a good use of money, and the appropriate people have been
placed on those things as appropriate. I would argue it may not
be appropriate for a violent offender. I think that should be a
decision that should be made by a judge or somebody that makes
those decisions.

JURISDICTION

And that brings up another question. I was visiting with a
Federal judge down on the border down at Del Rio about the
issue that some courts are so overwhelmed and other courts
actually have space to do these things. I tried to write a
venue law, but she explained to me it is not a venue law, but
rather a jurisdictional issue. It is not a jurisdictional
issue; it is a venue issue, because being in the United States
is not against the law, being in the United States without
papers is not against the law, but crossing the border is
against the law. So unless you catch them crossing, it is not a
crime. And once you catch them inside the country, they are
locked into that venue. And we would have to--that would have
to become a crime in order to change venues.
Do you have any comment on that particular issue to meet
what the chairman was talking about, the fact that we have
overloaded courts in one place and have other courts that could
help?
Mr. Morton. I think you have accurately identified the
problem. The way the illegal entry and crime is written, you
know, oftentimes the government has to bring the case in the
place where the illegal entry occurred, which of course is
going to be over and over again four States along the Southwest
border. And those states----
Mr. Carter. And a smart criminal defendant can say, ``oh, I
crossed in Laredo, knowing that that court is so backlogged''
that it could be literally years and years before he ever gets
reached.
Mr. Morton. Or even in the instance where there is no
evidence of how the person, where they came in, and the
government--you know, I came in the country illegally. Well,
where? And the government has to try to figure out where to
cross the border and where to bring the case. It is a
challenge.
Mr. Carter. I would like to work on that. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am still stuck on page 1 of your testimony. I am still
thinking about the 34,000 criminal arrests. Is my understanding
now from what has been said earlier and then from what Mr. Dent
talked with you about correct, that these criminal arrests must
be detained in your operations until there is a conviction, I
take it, and a sentencing? Or do they immediately go into some
sort of holding pattern that is under the Department of Justice
under the Federal prisons arrangement?
Mr. Morton. It is very complicated. So the first thing I
would say is I would be happy to come by and help you better
understand who we are, what we do and how we do it and what the
law is, because the Immigration and Nationality Act is a little
bit like the Tax Code.
Mr. Olver. All right. I will accept that. The end of that
question was, I was wondering whether those people who go
through Federal prisons end up being disproportionately the
people who some of these countries that don't want to take back
their citizens, do they fall into that category?
Mr. Morton. So for the people that go through Federal
prison for a Federal offense, first, they are detained by the
Marshals.
Mr. Olver. They have to go back to you for deportation?
Mr. Morton. Absolutely right. And so they come back.
Mr. Olver. But when you are trying to deport them, the
country of origin knows that they were criminally detained?
Mr. Morton. Sometimes they know, sometimes they don't. It
is more a problem of just general recalcitrants to take their
people back. And there are a number of countries that just drag
their feet with regard to taking their people back.

REMOVAL OPERATIONS

Mr. Olver. Okay. Well, let me just go to another question.
I think I still have about 3 minutes. I have three offices, and
I have case workers in each of those offices. And I have more
than a handful, there are probably fewer than 500 handfuls, or
100 handfuls, 500 cases each year, of families who have been
caught up in the so-called removal process. And it often
involves a man or a woman with a U.S. citizen who is a spouse
and maybe some children who are U.S. citizens in the process,
maybe not, where the U.S. citizen is trying to adjust for the
spouse. And I get cases where it is very easy that that gets
arranged and then, at the other end, where there is an almost
summary deportation. And it ultimately often leads then to a
divorce because they can't get back together again easily,
particularly if there are some children involved.
Could you give me some idea why it is that there is such a
disparity? This is an anecdotal finding. I would have to go
through all my cases and actually total up this sort of
situation, what it is that makes some of them get that
adjustment easily and some become a summary deportation.
Mr. Morton. The answer is it is going to depend on the
person's background and the relationship that they are seeking
to use to adjust their status, whether it is an employment-
based, a family-based relationship.
Mr. Olver. I have defined all persons who are married to an
American U.S. spouse.
Mr. Morton. If they are immediate relatives, then it really
is, do they have a criminal [record] or not, those kind of
things; are there going to be any adverse factors? If your
question is really about whether or not--because the actual
adjustment is handled either by the immigration courts or the
citizenship and immigration services. We don't do benefits. We
are the enforcement arm. We do grant deferred action on a case-
by-case basis. And it may be that some of the cases you are
referring to we deferred action on; we agreed to exercise
administrative grace. And others, based on the circumstances,
we proceeded to removal.
Mr. Olver. Do you have to wait, for instance, after a
wedding, a marriage, if there are no children involved, yes,
there may already be, but do you have to wait some particular
period before the U.S. citizen can then vouch for the spouse
for a green card that leads to citizenship?
Mr. Morton. No. If you are married, you apply for the
benefit. And I will say, we have a policy, and I should follow
up with you and your staff. Our policy is if you are in removal
proceedings and you have a pending application for which you
are eligible, you will ultimately receive adjustment. We
terminate proceedings in those cases.
Mr. Olver. There is really one case where we had
documentation for the application for the green card, and they
were summarily departed.
Mr. Morton. If you have cases like that, I would like to
follow up with you on them. Because our policy is if you are
going to be granted a benefit and you are going to become a
lawful permanent resident, we terminate proceedings.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. I just want to point out, I have had
similar concerns.

SECURE COMMUNITIES: PROFILING

Mr. Morton, I understand that Secure Communities, which is
the program intended to identify and report felons and
dangerous individuals in our country illegally, has been
addressed earlier in a question. But I do want to highlight one
concern, and that is that there are many who are concerned
about the fact that the program is resulting in racial
profiling and contributing to individuals not reporting crimes
or helping law enforcement. And I know that that is a big
concern of the Los Angeles Police Department and other
departments in my area.
But I want to give one example of victims of crimes not
reporting these crimes because of this program. It is my
understanding that Safe Horizons, which is New York's largest
provider of services to battered women, has begun advising its
undocumented clients not to report abuse to police for fear
that they will be deported through the Secure Communities
program. Because sometimes--there was one instance where a
woman called because she was being beaten, and because they
needed her to help translate, they took them both in. And they
booked both the victim and the person who was committing the
crime.
So my question is, what are you doing or what can be done
to address the concern, not only about racial profiling but
with regards to victims that are afraid to report crimes,
particularly those who are victims of domestic violence?
Mr. Morton. So, two things, and I will reiterate a few
things that I said before. I totally recognize the concern on
racial profiling. We are instituting a whole series of
analytical steps working with the Office of Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties, the CRCL at DHS, inviting them to literally be
part of the analysis with us so that we can root out and
identify any jurisdictions that are misusing Secure
Communities.
With regard to the DV issue, it is again a concern we are
very much aware of. I will in the coming weeks be working on a
policy to address exactly this issue, particularly in those
States that do what is called dual arrest; they arrest
everybody first without trying to identify who is the victim
and who is the perpetrator, and so they both come in to our
custody. And we are going to try to address that specifically
with a policy to make sure that we are not scooping up victims
inappropriately. The challenge for us is, obviously, we have
got to be careful not to ignore the perpetrators, because
often, if they are let go, very bad things happen, as you know,
in some of these domestic violence cases, serious violent
crimes, even death.
We have a fine line to walk there, but we have zero
interest obviously in a victim who reports a crime suddenly
getting scooped up because the local police just say, well, we
will arrest both people and figure it out later. It is a
problem, and we are going to have a specific policy on it.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. I look forward to that. Thank you.

BIOMETRIC EXIT

Mr. Aderholt. As you are aware, the fiscal year 2012
request proposes to rescind $25 million that had been for
biometric exit. The remaining $25 million is proposed to reduce
the analysis backlog of potential overstays so more cases can
be referred to ICE. Is this something you support?
Mr. Morton. The biometric exit function is not at ICE,
although we depend on the references from it. I need to look, I
think it must be in the US-VISIT part of the budget that that
happens. I will tell you right now I don't think that, as I
understand it, the rescission would be for the future vision of
having mandatory exit control. I don't think if that were
rescinded, it would affect our immediate operations. We would
continue to get referrals from US-VISIT based on the passenger
data from the airlines as to who is not showing up for their
return flight. It, obviously, would have some, will have an
effect on whether or not we have entry and exit controls in
this country.
Again, it is not my particular area of expertise, so I will
just say that the creation of a full exit program for every
port of entry, including the land borders, is obviously a very
challenging one, and it is not easy. But let me--I don't know
enough about the specific rescission at US-VISIT to answer that
properly, and I don't want to steer you wrong.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, it would leave no money to actually do
biometric exit, and that is the point I want to make. Let me
quickly, we have got a vote on the floor, but let me go ahead
and call on Mr. Price.

VISA SECURITY UNITS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be quick, and you may want to elaborate for the
record, but I signaled in my opening statement that I do want
to talk with you about visa security units. They are located at
U.S. consulates overseas. They vet the background of people
applying for U.S. Visas. ICE/VSUs use a broader range of
databases than the State Department uses or perhaps can use to
review the backgrounds of visa applicants.
Currently, there are 19 of the 46 high-risk countries with
VSUs. This figure increased by four after the attempted
Christmas Day bombing a year ago. But there is no additional
funding in the 2012 budget request for more VSUs. The $30
million requested only funds those that are already
established.
You also, I am sure, recall that in the past, ICE has had
difficulty in establishing additional VSUs at some embassies.
For example, London told ICE that DHS already had ``too many
people at the embassy to justify a VSU there.'' We remember
that episode with some puzzlement.
So, Mr. Secretary, in the time we have here, can you just
summarize the value added by these visa security units that
State Department employees cannot provide? I am not sure I
understand that precisely. What is it that these units are
adding that the State Department cannot provide? And then given
this edge, aren't you concerned that we have these units only
in 40 percent of the countries that your own agency has labeled
high risk?
Mr. Morton. So I am a big supporter of the VSU program.
That there isn't additional money in this budget is simply a
reflection of the hard calls we had to make, and so it
shouldn't be taken as any indication of a lack of support on my
part for the basic concept.
The reason they are effective, as you note, Mr. Price, we
have access to certain databases that the State Department
doesn't have access, so we are able to do a much fuller run.
Plus, a lot of these cases really dig down, it is not just a
question of running the computer, you have got to get out of
the office and go down to the local courthouse in these foreign
countries and see, is this person really married? Does this
relationship really exist? Or we send an agent out to--they are
going to go and claim that they are going to visit this
particular address in the United States that doesn't seem to
exist. You know, send an agent out and check on that place;
take a picture. We are able to do that in a way that obviously
the consular officers are not. They are under a lot of pressure
to move, for very good reason, the visa process along and not
have unnecessary delays in getting lawful visitors to the
United States. So that is where I am. I would love to see, as
future budgets allow, continued expansion. I think it is a good
program.
Mr. Price. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Director Morton, thank you for your attendance here today
and for discussing the fiscal year 2012 request. We look
forward to working with you and look forward to you getting
back with us on some of the requests that we mentioned in the
questioning this morning. Thank you.
Mr. Morton. I thank you very much. I will just say a big
thank you to your staff. You know, I deal with lots of
committees. The professionalism and just sort of straight
shooting that we have had from the staff over the years has
been great; not to say that you always agree with us and don't
beat up on us sometimes, but that is part of the process.
And I also want to note that when Mr. Price was the
Chairman, he was an absolute gentleman with us. Again, not that
he didn't disagree sometimes with what we were doing.
And you know, Mr. Aderholt, you seem to be very much in the
same vein and so I appreciate that.
We will try to be open and direct with you. If you have
concerns, please let us know earlier on rather than later. We
want to try to get this right. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you very much.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, March 15, 2011.

TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

JOHN PISTOLE, ADMINISTRATOR, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Opening Statement: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. Good morning. Today we welcome John Pistole,
Administrator of the Transportation Security Administration,
for his first appearance before this Subcommittee.
Today we will examine the President's fiscal year 2012
budget to fund TSA in its mission to protect our transportation
systems from threat, sabotage, and other acts of violence, and
help ensure the free flow of travelers and commerce. Mr.
Administrator, we thank you for being here today, and we look
forward to hearing your testimony.
This year, TSA will observe its tenth anniversary, a decade
marked by rapid change, a measure of success, and a few false
starts. Additionally, driven by the need to close gaps in
aviation security following the 9/11 attacks, TSA grew rapidly
into an organization of over 60,000 personnel, most of them
performing screening at airport security checkpoints,
previously a job for airports and airlines.
Today, TSA's large and diverse workforce includes
inspectors and Federal Air Marshals, who travel extensively to
ensure security of flights and aviation and the aviation
systems, and specialists dedicated to surface transportation
security. I know TSA's workforce strives to be conscientious
and enterprising, and we acknowledge their hard work and
commitment to keeping traveling safe and secure.
However, the other side of the workforce is to ensure the
right mix of staff and technology at checkpoints and throughout
the travel environment. TSA must restrain its appetite for
solving problems by adding personnel and increasing operation
cost. Instead, TSA's challenge in the foreseeable future is to
recognize the highest degree of security at the lowest possible
cost. It is a duty each Federal agency, even those with vital
security missions, must embrace.
New security threats from overseas pushed TSA and its
sister agencies into the headlines last year to include
explosives concealed in a traveler's underwear and in printer
cartridges intended to blow up an aircraft over Chicago.
Regrettably, TSA's progress in addressing these daunting
challenges is undercut by budgetary sleight of hand of the
Fiscal Year 2012 budget request.
Once again, TSA is proposing a hypothetical offset, $590
million, through a proposed, but not enacted, increase in
passenger fees that the authorizing committee has unequivocally
rejected.
We are eager to hear you explain how TSA can keep programs
whole, let alone take on new initiatives with such a large
budgetary albatross, over 10 percent of your budget.
Administrator Pistole, in this time of fiscal crisis, the
first thing we need from the Administration is truth in
budgeting. Budget gimmicks do not cut it. In addition to
discussing your options under this budgetary handicap, we
expect to learn about the progress in TSA's major efforts to
streamline and reinvent the security process for aviation
security in the wake of new threats.
You shared with the American Bar Association recently your
vision of a more risk-based approach to screening passengers
rather than the current one-size-fits-all. As TSA, like all
other government agencies, faces leaner times, should
reinventing the passenger security model be given more
immediate consideration?
Your major acquisition of a passenger screening system
depends on having automated target recognition technology in
place, which in turn will affect the size and mix of TSA's
screening workforce. But this technology is still undergoing
testing.
Mr. Administrator, we expect to hear today how your
investment plan will get results. We need to know how to make
TSA systems more efficient and more reliable, with a better mix
of technology and manpower. I look forward to a productive
relationship as we work together to get the balance right, to
have the right number of transportation security professionals,
the right tools and technology, helping to keep Americans and
all others who use our system safe and secure.
Your written statement will be placed in the record, so I
would ask you to take five minutes or so and just summarize
your comments to the subcommittee. But before we go to you, I
would like to recognize Mr. Price, who is the distinguished
ranking member of this subcommittee, for any opening comments
he would like to make.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Opening Statement: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Administrator
Pistole, to your first appearance before this Subcommittee to
present your budget request for fiscal year 2012. You have been
serving as Administrator now for about nine months, at a time
when the aviation sector continues to be a prize target for Al
Qaeda and other extremists.
The Christmas Day 2009 and Times Square attempted bombings
occurred before you were head of TSA, but you had recently
taken the helm when the attempted bombings of cargo aircraft
occurred last October. So I know you had felt firsthand the
pressure of these ever-evolving threats. Your agency is the
last line of defense for our aviation sector, and while
significant improvements have been made, the high threat
environment we face makes very plain the need to close any
critical gaps that remain.
I know you share the view that effective security is smart
security, and that we should be in the business of managing
risk rather than trying to do the impossible by seeking to
eliminate risk or holding out the illusion that we can do so.
Our aviation security model has improved over the years, but it
remains very cumbersome, and in the view of many, rather
invasive. There are few signs of that system changing based on
the 2012 budget, but I am encouraged by the willingness you
have expressed on numerous occasions to consider ways to reform
the system to be more risk-based in the future.
The 2012 request, which totals $8.1 billion overall,
includes $460 million above the fiscal year 2010 level to
secure our nation's airports and flights and to protect other
modes of transportation. This request continues activities that
were ramped up after the Christmas Day bombing attempt.
I am pleased to see additional funding to detect non-
metallic threats with advanced imaging technology machines,
which we anticipate will include a new feature to automatically
recognize threats instead of relying on screeners to look at a
person's body outline. This should enhance privacy and
hopefully speed up the time passengers spend at the checkpoint.
I am also pleased to note additional funding for other
technologies at the checkpoint, such as portable explosive
trace machines, so that we can more rapidly detect potential
threats. The budget request also includes funds to expand watch
list vetting to make sure that we are catching persons who may
want to do us harm before they board an airplane.
And finally, I am pleased to note an expansion of the
visible intermodal protection and response systems called VIPR,
which supplement security on local passenger rail and mass
transit systems, and also support special events.
I also want to register some concerns about your request.
For example, funding for air cargo security declines in 2012,
even though TSA has been asked to take on greater
responsibilities after the attempted air cargo bombing plot out
of Yemen last fall, and indeed to expedite the deadline by two
years for screening all international cargo carried on
passenger aircraft. And I understand you intend to do just
that, to move that deadline ahead two years. Where is the
budget match-up for that? We need to understand that.
The budget request also appears to rehash a substantial
request first proposed in 2011 for additional behavior
detection officers. Until we can understand what changes you
have made to address critical vulnerabilities raised by the
National Academy of Sciences and the GAO about the behavior
detection program, it may be premature to grow this program by
roughly 10 percent.
And finally, while the budget request increases funding for
the Federal Air Marshals, your agency has still not addressed
questions this Subcommittee posed almost 18 months ago about
what the appropriate staffing levels are. What is the rationale
for this or that staffing level? We received a report on this
mandate, but it was simply inadequate.
Mr. Administrator, I want to thank you for your service to
the country. We look forward to continuing to work with you to
ensure our transportation security professionals are equipped
with the resources they need to keep the American people safe.
As we begin to more closely examine your fiscal year 2012
budget, it is important to note that no program or account will
be off limits to scrutiny. Our obligation is to take a
balanced, realistic approach, to weigh risks carefully, and to
make prudent investments. I know you share that point of view,
and I look forward to your testimony. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price. At this time,
Administrator Pistole, we look forward to your comments before
the subcommittee.

Opening Statement: Administrator Pistole

Mr. Pistole. Well, thank you, Chairman Aderholt and Ranking
Member Price, and distinguished members of the committee. There
have been a couple of references made to the threats that we
are dealing with, and I would just like to start my opening
statement with a context for that threat environment, given my
background in the FBI and now at TSA.
I start every day with a threat briefing and intelligence
briefing as to what foreign intelligence and law enforcement
services are collecting in terms of information and
intelligence that may be actionable for us here in the U.S. or
for all those last points of departure for passengers or cargo
coming to the U.S. So it is within that context that I present
this Fiscal Year 2012 budget request.
A couple of references have been made to the Christmas Day
attack, the Yemen cargo plot. The one I would add is the
assassination attempt against Muhammad bin Nayef, the Saudi
Minister of Interior, Deputy Minister of Interior, basically
the equivalent of the Homeland Security Secretary and FBI
Director in one.
The common theme is the same bomb maker in each of these
three instances, as you know from your classified briefs. What
we are facing is a determined, creative, innovative enemy who
is always trying to come up with the next type of improvised
explosive device that will defeat our current security measures
because we have not forecast or done enough in that regard to
try to identify what those threats are.
Obviously, the Yemen cargo plot was one of the best
examples I have ever seen in terms of intelligence that is
tactical, not just strategic. The strategic intelligence we
know is that Al Qaeda, particularly in the Arabian peninsula,
wants to hurt us. But when we have tactical intelligence, where
we have tracking numbers of packages identified, that is
exactly the type of information we are looking for as one part
of the U.S. Government's continuum of national security.
So again, that is the context that we are looking at. So
our Fiscal Year 2012 budget request is for $8.1 billion, and it
is, as you mentioned, some $460 million above our 2010 enacted
level. Of that increase, $301 million supports critical
security enhancements that we intend to implement this year,
which enjoyed bipartisan support of the subcommittee and our
Senate Approps Subcommittee last year. And I want to thank the
committee for your strong support, for giving us the
opportunity to pursue those initiatives, which include
expanding our AIT passenger screening capability, 100
additional canine teams for screening passengers for
explosives, build greater international security program and
intelligence sharing, and sustaining our FAMS international and
domestic flight coverage.
So new initiatives in Fiscal Year 2012 total $166 million,
and these new initiatives basically allow us to continue to
build upon the existing programs by adding capacity or new
capabilities. I also ask for your support for our $82 million
request for the addition of 275 AIT, advanced imaging
technology, units. This will continue to add to our capability
to screen passengers with those non-metallic devices, as we saw
on 12/25. I believe the AIT has been proven safe, and that the
steps we are taking now with automated target recognition
completely address the privacy issues that have been raised.
Our request also includes a requested increase of $21.9
million to add 350 behavior detection officers to improve the
coverage of our tech points as we try to expand to more of a
risk-based intelligence-driven process. And to improve our
visible intermodal prevention response program, we are asking
for an additional $26.8 million to add 12 new teams to operate
across the transportation systems and increase our partnership
efforts.
Our secure flight program has been successfully implemented
and forms part of the daily intel brief that I receive, helping
inform judgments and operational decisions as to what we need
to be doing with flights that are departing from our 453
airports, and particularly as it relates to FAM coverage on
those flights.
I am also requesting an additional $12.3 million to sustain
our expanded enhanced terrorist watch list vetting, which also
figures in to the newer risk-based intelligence driven
processes that I mentioned. These new enhancements represent a
modest increase in the resources we have programmed for our
mission, and I am looking to apply the resources we have to
best achieve that mission, recognizing the budget constraints
and issues that we all are dealing with, particularly in these
weeks right now.
So we need to protect against the tactics that the
terrorists have used in the past, but shame on us if we do not
do some forecasting, some intelligence predictions about what
types of devices the terrorists may use in the future. And so
that is why we are working with our partners throughout the
intelligence and law enforcement communities, both here in the
U.S. and overseas to try to make sure we have the latest
intelligence, that we can inform our judgments as we take steps
to mitigate risk. And that word mitigate is important because,
as has been mentioned, we are not in the process or the
business of eliminating risk. We will never eliminate risk
unless we stop air travel or train travel, just like we do not
eliminate car accidents unless you stop driving.
So we are in the risk mitigation business, and I think we
can do a number of things that are even budget neutral, even
this year, that will advance that risk-based intelligence
driven process of mitigating risk. So we are always looking for
ways to improve, and I appreciate the subcommittee's support
for what we have done thus far and as we move forward.
Let me just touch briefly, before I close then, on things
that we will look at doing in terms of this risk-based
approach. One is we have a great number of passengers who would
be willing to share additional information about themselves in
exchange for the possibility of streamlined screening. And so
just as we have done with pilots who we do more of an identity-
based screening for them now, because they are in charge of the
aircraft, that type of approach I believe can also apply to
those very frequent travelers who we know a lot about.
And so there are a number of iterations of this, but I
would refer to it as a known traveler program, people who are
willing to share information with us so that we can make a
better assessment of what type of risk they may pose. And so
benefits they may receive as a result of that sharing of
information may result in streamlined processing and screening,
such as not having to take shoes off. Maybe you do not have to
take your jacket off. Maybe you do not have to take your laptop
off.
Additional information that we can use also using
information we already have about what the aircraft is, the
type of aircraft, the wide body, the regional jet. Do we have
FAM coverage? All those things can go into an assessment of
what type of screening we should do. And that is on the
passenger side.
We are also working very closely with our international
partners and domestically here on the whole cargo issue,
particularly following the Yemen cargo plot. So with the
support of this committee between 2005 and 2010, we have been
able to field new security technology, introduce new procedures
of protocols, and eliminate over 7,000 people from mechanical
checkpoint operations, and invested in behavior detection,
violent appraisal officers, document checkers, and targeted
security operations.
So I would like to take that type of thinking along with
the risk-based intelligence thinking that I outlined to work
with the committee as we move forward. So with that, thank you.
I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Administrator. Again, we
appreciate you are willing to come today and to speak before
our subcommittee. I am going to go out of order. Ms. Lowey, I
understand, has a subcommittee hearing shortly. So I am willing
to take her out of order. So, Ms. Lowey, let me call on you for
the first round of questions.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member
for your indulgence, and thank you, Mr. Administrator. I am
sorry. There are three hearings at the same time this morning.
First, I want to commend you for recognizing the benefits
of giving the TSA workforce a seat at the table by providing
limited collective bargaining rights for transportation
security officers. With your 26-year record with the FBI, I
think anyone who opposes this decision will be hard pressed to
question you on the grounds of security, given your
credentials.
I would also ask for unanimous consent to enter into the
record a statement from NTEU regarding workplace rights at TSA.
Mrs. Lowey. What are the security benefits, Mr.
Administrator, associated with collective bargaining rights at
TSA? Do you believe travelers will encounter a more
professional workforce as a result? And when do you expect to
implement this initiative?
Mr. Pistole. To answer your first question, Madame, the
decision that I made, the determination on collective
bargaining, the vote on that started last week and runs through
April 19th. And, of course, it is simply giving them the
option, the ability to vote on whether they want collective
bargaining. So some of the benefits I see from that are because
the enabling legislation, the Aviation 2nd Transportation
Security Act, gave the Administrator broad discretion as to
those issues that would be subject to collective bargaining--
you are right in describing this as a limited type--it focuses
primarily on those workplace issues that I have heard
frustration from TSOs, transportation security officers, around
the country, things like bidding on shifts and uniform issues,
and some inconsistency across the country in those regards.
And so what I want to see is not being distracted by those
issues, but being able to focus on the security issue that the
TSA was created for. And so by doing that, if the security
officers vote to have a collective bargaining unit, just at the
national level, not all the different local units and things, I
believe we can achieve some greater professionalism and greater
consistency in how we go about doing our jobs.

SECURE FLIGHT

Mrs. Lowey. Well, thank you. And your testimony discusses
Secure Flight program, which since Fiscal Year 2002 has cost
taxpayers more than $437 million. With Secure Flight now
operational, are you confident that both CBP and TSA are in a
position to prevent another Abdul Mutallab-like incident, in
which a flagged individual was successful in boarding a U.S.
bound flight?
Mr. Pistole. So one of the keys to the Secure Flight
construct is that somebody is nominated to be on the terrorist
watch list. And, of course, with Abdulmutallab, even though
there are different pieces of information, he was not nominated
until after the fact. And so even though CBP was planning to
interview him when he landed in Detroit, it was an after-the-
fact approach.
So under Secure Flight, if somebody has been identified by
an intelligence or law enforcement agency, is nominated and put
on the watch list properly, then Secure Flight will definitely
address that issue, as long as there is a positive
identification made. And because it requires name, date of
birth, and gender, there should be a positive identification
made, assuming the person is not traveling under a false name,
documents, and that has not been identified.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you. And lastly, I just want to say I
strongly support TSA's increased deployment of advanced imaging
technology machines, and frankly think the Administration
needed to be more publicly supportive of your efforts in the
last part of 2010. And your testimony discusses providing AIT
machines at more than half the checkpoints nationwide.
While high-volume airports such as Kennedy, Laguardia, and
National have AIT machines, they are not at every checkpoint,
or in the case of Kennedy at every terminal. So I hope during
this hearing, although unfortunately I have to go, you could
share with us your progress to ensure that every terminal, if
not every checkpoint, at our most-traveled airports operate
with the latest technology. I think I have about 30 seconds, if
you can answer quickly. Thank you.
Mr. Pistole. Yes. [Laughter].
Mrs. Lowey. That is so generous.
Mr. Pistole. I was looking for a clock.
Mr. Aderholt. You have still got 40 seconds.
Mrs. Lowey. Forty seconds? Okay.
Mr. Pistole. So obviously, the goal is to use AIT in those
most heavily trafficked areas that can identify those who would
pose a risk, either those who are here and going home, or those
who are here and just traveling, but those who may pose a
threat. So the goal is to put it in the category X, the largest
airports, and then those that have the configuration and the
space available without significant cost of reconfiguring. So
it is a risk-based approach.
Mrs. Lowey. Well, thank you very much for your leadership.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

AVIATION SECURITY FEES

Mr. Aderholt. Your budget request: same proposal, new
passenger fees. I alluded to that in my opening remarks. Of
course, that has been rejected by previous Congresses,
Republican, Democrat alike. Enactment of these fees is in the
jurisdiction of authorizing subcommittees and committees. And
Homeland Security Committee Chairman King from New York has
publicly stated he opposes the fee.
How will TSA make up for the $590 million fee revenue gap
if it is not enacted?
Mr. Pistole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Obviously, we are
hopeful that it will be, and I know the Secretary is engaged
with the authorizers in looking for that support from the
standpoint of recognizing that there has not been a fee
increase since 2002. And as part of the budget issues that
Congress is dealing with now and the American people, it makes
sense from my perspective to have those using the service help
pay for the benefits of that.
So using that as a starting point, I think it is an
important objective to try to pursue. And again, I am very
hopeful.
Now, to your question, obviously, if that is not enacted,
then it will be a significant challenge for TSA, if it all came
from TSA, to do many of the things that I think the American
people hope and expect us to do in terms of providing the best
possible security on a daily basis for those who are traveling,
particularly by air. I think there would be a broader
discussion, obviously within the department and probably within
the Administration, as to where those funds should come from to
address what are the highest priorities.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Aderholt. Your budget proposes $76 million for 510 new
TSA screens and 200 additional AIT systems that Mrs. Lowey
referred to with automated targeting recognition. But just one
system is now being tested. These will put you on track to cut
in half the number of screeners needed to operate AIT. Will TSA
certify and deploy these new AIT systems this year, and will
this reduce the number of TSOs required for checkpoint
screening?
Mr. Pistole. So we have either completed or are nearing
completion of three tests in airports in Las Vegas, Atlanta,
and Reagan National for the automatic target recognition
software that is being used. The hope and belief is that given
the success of those trials that we have seen thus far, that we
would convert all the existing AIT machines under that
construct to the ATR still this year.
That being said, we would also hope that the other
manufacturer--and I believe the other manufacturer of the AIT,
which has not yet finished their conversion, and we have not
yet lab tested or field tested, that that would also happen for
deployment next year as we go into 2012.
So as it gets to your question, we would still need the
TSOs to address what we believe will be the conversion this
year, and the additional 500 AITs that we would hope to still
obtain this year, and the additional 275 that we would look for
in the fiscal year 2012 budget.
Mr. Aderholt. Given the current tight budget assumptions,
and going back again to that $590 million in proposed fee
revenues, will you have to delay the acquisition and deployment
of these new screening systems, and will this reduce your
ability to meet savings and performance targeting expected in
the automated screening process?
Mr. Pistole. So again we would hope to still not only
convert the existing 240 or so AITs that would have the ATR
capability this year, but also acquire some of the additional
AITs as soon as possible, and then at the end of the fiscal
year to acquire the additional ones that we would deploy then
in 2012.

TRUSTED TRAVELER PROGRAM

Mr. Aderholt. You had mentioned in your opening statement,
and also you have made public statements, to talk a little bit
about more of a risk-based approach. In one interview, and then
you referred to it this morning, that ideally you could set up
three different lanes for travelers at checkpoints by risk
categories, ranging from trusted travelers, frequent travelers,
and infrequent travelers.
Talk a little bit about that design process and how you are
including and blending human technology in the process elements
all together.
Mr. Pistole. Okay. So there are really two aspects. One is
using information already available to us, such as Secure
Flight, or information that frequent travelers--I like to refer
to them as known travelers, those who would be willing to share
additional information about themselves, perhaps what is in
their frequent flyer account, if they are willing to share that
with us. That gives us a much better understanding of who the
traveler is. And the more we know about the traveler, the
better judgment and assessment we can make as to whether they
pose a high, medium, low, or almost no risk to that particular
flight.
That coupled with information we know about the aircraft,
whether it is a wide body, a regional jet, is there Federal Air
Marshal coverage, a number of things like that--are there
people on the terrorist watch list who are selectees on those
flights? Those are all things that we can use to help make
better judgments as to what type of screening each individual
should receive.
That being said, it becomes a question then of if there
are, for example, the three lanes that you mentioned, that
becomes the implementation phase, if you will. So we may have a
lot of information about a person. Depending on what airport
that person is traveling through, there may or may not be an
option for that, just based on the physical layout of the
checkpoints and the real estate available that the airport has
to provide. So the smaller the airport, the more of a challenge
that becomes.
So we are looking at several different options in that
regard. But the bottom line is, it would not necessarily be a
fee-based program. In fact, it would likely not be a fee-based
program in its final iteration. There are programs such as
Global Entry that Customs and Border Protection uses to
facilitate people reentering the U.S., and that can be a
baseline that could be used. They have already shared
information with the U.S. Government. They want some benefit.
But under this construct, it would not be a right that would be
afforded an individual. It would be a likelihood, perhaps even
a high likelihood, that they would receive some type of
streamlined processing screening at a checkpoint.
So whether there is a dedicated lane or not would really
depend on the airport configuration.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY: SAFETY

Mr. Aderholt. Before I go on to Mr. Price, let me just ask
you about the safety of the AIT screening technology and
confirm to the subcommittee about that, there is no threat that
these pose. And could you talk a little bit about that?
Mr. Pistole. Sure. There have been a number of issues
raised with the advanced imaging technology, in particular the
type that is called the backscatter machine, because it does
emit radiation. There have been a number of tests that have
been done and studies done over the years, whether it is the
Food and Drug Administration, the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, the Johns Hopkins School of Applied
Physics, just to name three, that have done assessments that
have found the AIT to be not only safe, but very safe, and even
the equivalent of traveling for approximately 3 minutes at
altitude on a commercial aircraft.
And so they have said that--different analogies, but you
would have to travel thousands of times in a year just to meet
the minimum dosage that these different studies assess as being
of any concern. So not even pilots travel that much, thousands
of times in a year's time.
That being said, I am concerned by what I have learned
recently within TSA in terms of our handling of reports that
were done by the contractor, the manufacturer, in terms of
their assessments. And what I have found is that we did not
handle those--the paperwork from those properly, that we did
not immediately review and assess and verify that those
documents were done properly. And so what we have found, and we
have posted most of these, all of them that we have reviewed,
to our Web site, and we will continue to do that as we go
through these thousands and thousands of reports, is that there
were some errors made in these reports. There were math
calculations done wrong. One was done that said that the
radiation was 10 times what it actually was. That was not the
case, but that is the way the technician filled out the report
and said that.
So there was some sloppy paperwork. On the one side, there
was a failure, frankly, on our part to review that, as opposed
to filing away in a file cabinet and not doing follow-up. So we
have changed the procedures on how we review. We have re-
engaged with the manufacturer. They have gone back out to do
additional studies. We are engaging two other entities, the
U.S. Army Public Health Command, which has done a number of
studies also, and then the NIOSH, the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health, NIOSH, to further assess. And
they have done some prior assessment, but to update that.
And then lastly, I am going to commission a new independent
study beyond all these things that have already been done, just
to reassure the American people that these machines are safe,
that there are no issues with them, and given the highest level
of confidence that not only are they traveling securely because
of proper screening, but safely because of the equipment.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. I know there have been some
members of Congress that have voiced concerns about that, and,
of course, I know that you have probably gotten feedback as
well from travelers as well. But at this point, Mr. Price.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY: PROCUREMENTS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Administrator, you
have addressed already your plans with regard to the advanced
imaging technology units. I want to ask a follow-up on that
then I will turn to the question of air cargo and particularly
the screening of air cargo on passenger flights.
Now, on the AIT units, you plan to have 1,000 of these
units procured. To date, 500 have been purchased, as I
understand, and installed. The remaining 500 are to be procured
once the final appropriation for fiscal year 2011 is resolved.
They may not be installed until next year.
Meanwhile, you are testing this automated target
recognition software. It has been relatively successful, as I
understand, the testing with regard to the millimeter wave
machines; less so with the backscatter machines. But in any
case, that testing is continuing.
So it is clearly your intention to augment the technique of
the AIT equipment with this ATR capability. And the reasons for
that being desirable, I think, are pretty clear. I wonder,
though, to what extent it is a condition, or you see it as a
condition, for putting these additional units in place. Is it
your intention not to procure any further AITs without ATR
capability? What if the tests do not move forward on all of
these machines?
You are testing one vendor's ATR capabilities right now.
You are going to test two others, assuming they move along,
later this month possibly, and then on into the spring and
summer. So how do you weigh the benefits of ensuring that this
capability is present on all machines versus the possible
sacrifice of some competition in these procurements?
Mr. Pistole. Thank you, Congressman Price. The goal is to
deploy the AIT with ATR capabilities from here out. And that
being said, if the manufacturer for the backscatter does not
develop in such a way that we believe they will at this point,
we have every confidence that they will be able to not only
develop and manufacture, but will be able to test this summer
and deploy in the fall. That is the plan.
So your question, if they do not--or if they are not
successful in that, it is problematic because the goal is to do
ATR, automatic target recognition. It is not an issue of
security because we are getting, we believe, the same level of
security. It is just an improved process, particularly as it
relates to privacy. If they are not able to do that, then we
will have to make some hard choices, which I cannot say today
what those would be because there are so many variables
involved. But we would obviously want to work with the
committee to look at the best options.
We believe that competition is important to keep driving
private enterprise to the best technology at the best price and
the best deployment on the best timetable. So we do not want to
be in the situation of having only one vendor providing that,
if we can avoid that.
That being said, we do want to move forward with the ATR,
as it is being proven successful.
Mr. Price. And you do intend eventually to retrofit the
already-procured machines. Is that right?
Mr. Pistole. Yes.
Mr. Price. Whatever the technology----
Mr. Pistole. Yes.
Mr. Price [continuing]. That they utilize.
Mr. Pistole. Yes.

AIR CARGO SECURITY

Mr. Price. All right. Thank you. That is helpful. Now, to
the air cargo requirement. The 9/11 Act required DHS to
establish a system to screen 100 percent of air cargo on
passenger flights by August of 2010. TSA met this requirement
by the established deadline for domestic air cargo, but
testified last year that it would not be able to screen 100
percent of international air cargo until 2013.
After the attempted bombing of an all-cargo aircraft
occurred, TSA expedited the deadline for industry to screen 100
percent of air cargo on international inbound passenger
aircraft to December 31, 2011, two years earlier than
previously anticipated.
So I congratulate you on that. I want to know exactly how
you did it. At this point, what is your estimate for how much
of this international air cargo we are screening now, and how
are you going to get to 100 percent by the end of the year? And
then I want to know about the budget implications.
After the Yemen incident, TSA, along with CBF, briefed this
Subcommittee multiple times on the efforts it was undertaking
to enhance air cargo security. For example, TSA has been
working with Yemen and other countries to enhance their airport
and air cargo security measures and has enhanced its own
vetting capabilities. Yet your fiscal year 2012 budget request
decreases the amount of funding you request for air cargo from
$122.9 million in 2010 to $114.7 million in 2012.
So that raises an obvious question. Does your budget
request fully encompass your air cargo needs? And how is this
budget going to grow your abilities to know what is flying into
and through our country?
Mr. Pistole. Thank you, Congressman. So a couple of points.
And thank you for your support for what we have done
domestically. We did achieve that milestone last summer. That
100 percent of all cargo on U.S. passenger planes is being
screened, and we have done that primarily through a partnership
with private industry where we have over 1,160 certified cargo
screening facilities, entities that do the screening pursuant
to our standards, away from the airports so it does not create
a choke on the airport.
And that accounts for about half of all the cargo that is
issued to our passenger planes in the U.S. And it is through
that partnership with private industry that we are able to do
that.
Looking internationally, it becomes much more of a
challenge. Last year, there were, as I recall, almost 9--
between 8 and 9 billion pounds of cargo coming into the U.S.,
and it breaks down roughly one-third on passenger flights, so
almost 3 billion pounds, versus two-thirds on all-cargo
flights.
Because we at TSA do not do the screening overseas, we had
to work with our partners both in civil aviation, law
enforcement, depending on what country you are in; and as you
mentioned in Yemen, worked with the entire government. I was in
Yemen five days after the cargo plot was identified to assess
what was going on there and what we could do to assist.
So it is really through a partnership with the host
governments and the carriers that are in the business of
transporting cargo. And I could get into more detail if you
would like on that. So it is that same type of partnership we
use domestically that we are hoping to replicate overseas. And
as we have found, all, most all, of the cargo carriers have a
strong interest in doing additional security, perhaps even
beyond what we would require for any cargo coming from the last
point of departure to the U.S.
So we set a standard, and many carriers, such as the two
biggest here in the U.S., the cargo carriers and freight
carriers, take steps beyond that. They do their own risk
modeling. They do their own assessment of whether they want to
pick up what they assess as being a high-risk piece of cargo.
So if somebody in Sana'a, Yemen, walks in and is not known to
the person there at the freight forwarder they will not accept
that, if it is destined for the U.S.
So the situation that we had in Yemen for the two toner
cartridge packages would not be picked up now. So it is through
that partnership. It is also through a partnership with the
governments to establish a national cargo security program. So
we have just recognized France as the first to come in with a
program that we assess as being consistent with U.S. standards.
And so what the French government then actually certifies is
their cargo carriers. We have eight or nine other countries
that we are working with that do the same thing.
So it is through that partnership. It is leveraging those
things as opposed to us footing the bill for it, is the reason
we have had a slight decrease in 2012. But the other part is
the comments that we asked for from industry about updating the
mandate to the end of 2011, that was simply requesting their
comments, and we are not there. So is there a vote we need to
talk about?
So the issue becomes are they capable of complying with 100
percent, and the bottom line is probably not, not by the end of
this year. So we will be looking for additional funds in 2013
to help augment that because it gets down to trust, but verify.
So a cargo carrier or a foreign government carrier, passenger
or otherwise, can say they are doing all these things. But if
we cannot verify that independently, then we do not have a very
high level of confidence, unless we know a lot about the
carrier, and just some places we do not have that level of
confidence.
So we will not--in my estimation, we will probably not be
at that 100 percent by the end of this year, but more into
2012.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY: TRAINING & REQUIREMENTS

Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Administrator, great
to see you again.
Mr. Pistole. Nice to see you, sir.
Mr. Dent. I am excited about the 100-percent screening
capabilities. I think that screening certainly represents a
deterrent effect on our adversaries. I sometimes worry about
our detection capabilities. I am not really here to talk today
about so much the technology of, say, AIT. I am more concerned
about the TSO training and personnel.
You know, can you describe for us the training regimen for
the TSOs to qualify for operating an AIT unit? My fear is the
technology is good, but I am not sure that all of our TSOs
always understand what they are viewing.
Mr. Pistole. Yes. Thank you, Congressman. So every TSO goes
through the basic TSO training, just on what their job
involves, regardless of their position. Before they would have
any type of responsibility for using the AIT, they go through
additional training, both on the job and then obviously
separate training without passengers around.
So they go through this training. But to your point, I
think we can always improve upon that. We can do additional
training. For example, what we found in Las Vegas with the
automatic target recognition is that somebody with a ponytail,
when they went through the ATR, the ponytail would show up as
an anomaly. So it is through some basic retraining to say,
okay, even though that is showing up on this generic outline of
a person as an anomaly, with a quick physical inspection, just
looking at it, you can probably assess whether there is any
type of explosives or anything in that ponytail.
So that is where we try to do immediate retraining and just
say, look, take a quick look and do that. So I can give you the
specifics, if you would like, in terms of all of the training.
Mr. Dent. How many second chances does a TSO receive? How
many second chances would they receive in the event that they
keep misidentifying?
Mr. Pistole. Well, so they go--every TSO has an annual
requirement of being tested and passing that test. So if you
are talking about that, that is one, and if they do not pass
that test, they are given another opportunity. If they do not
pass, then they are fired or let go.
But if it is something on the job, if they miss something,
it would be difficult to know that it has been missed unless it
was an inspector general or a government accountability office
testing our own TSA office and inspection testing, and so they
are given feedback. And that factors into whether they keep
their jobs or not.

TRANSIT SECURITY GRANTS

Mr. Dent. If I could just quickly change subjects. Since
Fiscal Year 2006, I think there is about 1.5 billion in transit
security grants that have been appropriated and awarded,
obligated, I guess, but only about 122 million has been drawn
down. So that is about 92 percent of funds, I think, that
remain unspent.
So it is not much of an improvement from last year. What
are we doing to help unclog this pipeline?
Mr. Pistole. So there are two aspects of that. One is the
processing time it has taken between TSA and FEMA, and that has
been problematic in the past, but it is improving. So I can
give you the specific figures, but it has gone from months and
months of delays down to weeks or perhaps a month in general
terms.
That is one aspect. On the budget side of it, what we have
found is that most of these grants, they have actually--the
funds have actually been expended and the projects completed,
but they have not invoiced those back to TSA and FEMA. And so
it is simply a matter of them doing that within the five-year
period to make sure that those funds are accounted for
properly.
So the 92-percent figure is a little bit misleading from
the standpoint that many of those projects have either been
started, or some have actually been completed.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

Mr. Dent. And one other quick question. Earlier this year,
you announced that the TSOs are going to have the opportunity
to vote for or against union representation. I understand the
authority is pursuant to the Aviation Transportation Security
Act. That was the basis of the decision, I guess.
Can you describe what led you to this final decision and
this assessment?
Mr. Pistole. As you mentioned, ATSA, the Aviation
Transportation Security Act, gave the Administrator the
authority and discretion to decide whether the security
officers should be afforded the right to vote on whether they
want collective bargaining or not.
In the course of doing town hall meetings around the
country with TSOs, and then mid-level management, and then
executives, there are a couple common themes. One was low pay
that the TSOs were receiving. The second was a frustration over
some of the mid-management practices that seemed inconsistent,
contrary to what I would want to see as a national program. And
I learned that 13,000 of the security officers were already
paying union dues without collective bargaining. So there was a
lot of frustration about just some of these issues.
Under ATSA, because of the broad discretions that it gave
me, I was allowed to say what I would include in collective
bargaining or not, if I went that way. So, for example, just
like going through a cafeteria, I would say, okay, this could
be subject to collective bargaining. But because this relates
to security, I am not going to allow anything involving
security to be subject to collective bargaining. Only at the
national level, so we would not have local bargaining units, to
have a streamlined process that could perhaps address some of
the issues over frustration of what is the uniform of the day.
What shifts can I bid on? Things like that.
Mr. Dent. Is election going to take place this spring?
Mr. Pistole. The election started last Wednesday and runs
through April 19th. And that is the good point. The Federal
Labor Relations Authority ordered an election be held this
spring.
Mr. Dent. Secret ballots, too?
Mr. Pistole. Yes, secret ballots, sure, electronic, yes. So
they ordered an election be held. So my determination was
simply a matter of informing them of what they would be voting
on. So it is not a traditional collective bargaining agreement
by any means. And it is unique within the Federal government,
if not labor-management relations.
Mr. Dent. I yield back then. I think my time has expired.

TRUSTED TRAVELER PROGRAM: EXPEDITED SCREENING

Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. You said that expedited screening at
checkpoints makes sense because it is select security and it is
an efficient use of our resources. And you are going to be
introducing this new expedited screening system for commercial
pilots.
The 9/11 Commission recommended that both pilots and flight
attendants have equal access to expedited screening. Now,
flight attendants, as I understand it, go through the same
background checks as pilots. And there are many more flight
attendants that are going through the airport than there are
pilots. So if efficiency is one of the criteria, my question is
why were they not included, and when will they be?
Mr. Pistole. So I wanted to make sure that the system for
the more identity-based screening for pilots was working well
before we extended that to the flight attendants, recognizing
the critical role the flight attendants play. But it really
came down to the two factors of the pilots being in charge of
the aircraft and being the ones with the ability to cause most
harm if they chose to do that, as we saw in the Egypt Air 990
crash off the coast of Rhode Island on Halloween night, 1999,
when the copilot put the aircraft down.
So I want to make sure it is working well with the pilots
group. We have met with the Flight Attendants Association and
heard their views, and looking at that as part of this risk-
based approach. So it is a matter of getting it right for the
pilots, and then assuming we can work through some of those
issues, I am considering extending that to the flight
attendants.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. So once you get it right, then it will
be extended?
Mr. Pistole. I have not made that final decision. There are
a lot of other issues involved there. But I can see the
benefits in that.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Well, maybe we do not have the time now,
but find out what those issues are----
Mr. Pistole. Sure.
Ms. Roybal-Allard [continuing]. Again given the fact that
they go through the same background checks, and if there is
some kind of an attack, they are the first line of defense on
the plane.
Mr. Pistole. Yes.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. So it really does not make any sense, at
least from my perspective. There seems to be this double
standard. I know that right after 9/11, pilots were given
certain types of training. We had to fight to get flight
attendants training in those kinds of incidents.
So I would like to follow up with you on this.
Mr. Pistole. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Just to have a better understanding of
what is going on there.
Mr. Pistole. Okay.

PRIVATE SCREENING: PERSONNEL

Ms. Roybal-Allard. There are an increasing number of U.S.
airports considering switching from TSA screening to private
contractors. And as I understand it, already 16 U.S. airports,
including San Francisco and Kansas City International, use
private screening personnel.
However, according to The Washington Post, some experts
have raised concerns about this arrangement, arguing that a
uniform government system makes more sense. Federal officials
also say the expertise and training offered at the 457 TSA-
regulated airports are unparalleled, and many security and
airline industry officials say the switch to a network of
privately run screeners could hinder much of the government's
progress since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack.
Do you agree with the statements that have been made? And
what criteria does TSA use to evaluate contractors and their
employees? And do they have to meet the same level of training
as TSA employees do? And do you also make sure that those
employees go through the same kind of security background
checks, and what kind of oversight procedures do you have in
place to ensure that these companies are operating as they
should?
Mr. Pistole. So there are the 16 privatized airports, and
there have been for several years. ATSA was passed, and there
was an option given to private airports to come in and apply
for private screening. And the 16 and a handful of others have
applied. I announced the decision in January that I was not
planning to expand the program, absent some compelling reason
to do so.
Fundamentally, I believe that the security officers for
baggage, for passengers, should be a federalized work force. I
see TSA as one component of the U.S. Government's national
security mission and counter-terrorism focus.
So that being said, I am also open to those who can provide
either the same level of security, because as you correctly
noted, they have to follow all the TSA rules and mandates for
how they are screened, whether it is using AIT or pat-downs or
whatever it is, with TSA oversight, management, and follow-up.
But if an airport authority has a business model, a
security model that is new, innovative, more cost-efficient,
then I am open to reviewing that. We have one pending right now
that I have not made a decision on, but some of the options
were to terminate the 16. I did not feel like that was
appropriate, because I think there can be some innovation and
best practices that can come from those. And perhaps another
one that we have not seen.
I am also changing the process, the application process,
because basically a one-page form saying yes, we are interested
in being considered; I want to give airports the opportunity to
demonstrate in their proposal or the application what new and
innovative issues they may have.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Administrator, I appreciate you
being here. And I have questions about the collective
bargaining rights that are being voted on right now.
I am curious. I hear you say that the collective bargaining
would include their uniform and their scheduling. Would it also
include their salary?
Mr. Pistole. No.
Mr. Carter. Would they be able to collective-bargain for
instance on the issue of private security. Can they bargain
against that?
Mr. Pistole. No.
Mr. Carter. What tools do they have if the things they ask
for are refused? Can they strike? Slowdown?
Mr. Pistole. No, absolutely not. Yes, it is like all
Federal employees. They would not be able to strike or
slowdown. If they did that, they would be let go.
Mr. Carter. On the issue of scheduling, and how we
schedule. My brother-in-law was a pilot. Pilots schedule by
seniority. Senior people get the first choice and so forth.
Quite honestly, they always choose to avoid having to work on
the holidays, if they can help it.
I would expect if you do that same system, that would be
the same system. But then, I would also argue with my brother-
in-law that that means if I am flying on Christmas, I am flying
with the least-experienced pilot, which does not make me rest
well.
But more importantly, I am what you call a frequent flyer,
not by choice, but by the occupation I have chosen. And I can
tell you that I have experienced, on multiple occasions, more
than I can count on both hands, a situation where you are
training a person to operate the screen as the belt goes by.
And they, by definition, are slow. They are calling over their
people to check, double-check their work all the time.
And if they are making the choices as to who works on the
holidays, is that not going to be of great inconvenience to the
traveler? But more importantly, our enemies seem to have, at
least recently, chosen those crowded holiday times to try to
get their weapons on board. I am talking about the underwear
bomber and some of those others, so that they can do damage at
a prime time.
How does this collective bargaining enhance the safety, in
light of the fact that you are probably going to be collective
bargaining for the least experienced to be working on the most
crowded days?
Mr. Pistole. So a lot of that comes down to individual
situations and preferences. Because some want to work the
holidays, nights, weekends, for the differential on pay.
Because we do have that built in.
So with seniority, some, I believe, would choose to work
those times simply for the additional pay, because they are not
the best-paid employees in the Federal Government to start
with. So that is one issue.
On the terrorist side, even though the Christmas Day
bomber, Abdulmutallab, flew on Christmas Day, it was not
designed as a Christmas Day attack. It was more his convenience
of coming here, as you are aware. Of course, all the
controversy over Thanksgiving; there was no specific plot.
To your point, when we do have holidays, we actually have a
significant surge capability, which will continue whether there
is collective bargaining or not. And that is one of the things
I was talking about. As it relates to security, my
determination was that there would be no negotiating, no
bargaining over security issues. So that means that if we need
people working on Thanksgiving, then that is when they will
work.
And as you saw hopefully if you were traveling over
Thanksgiving, you found limited wait times. And I think that
over two million people traveled each day around the
Thanksgiving holidays, and there are very few wait times over
30 minutes around all 453 airports around the country. So that
is because we had that surge capability.
So what I see the collective-bargaining doing is being able
to address some of these underlying issues internal to TSA
administrative issues, if you will, as to work conditions,
uniforms, things like that, shifts. We have got almost 25
percent of our employees are part time, before cost
efficiencies. Because as in rush hours in most major cities, we
have, in most airports we have a morning rush and an afternoon
rush. So during the middle of the day, we do not need all those
people there.
So again, almost 25 percent of our employees are part-time,
from a cost efficiency standpoint. Some of them do a split
shift, where they work in the morning 4 hours, and then be off
for 2 or 3 hours. For those we try to afford training or
additional educational opportunities. We have community
colleges come in and do classes, and some people working toward
Associate's degrees, and then they will go back to their second
shift.
So the whole construct is to provide the best security at
the best price, if you will, in the most efficient way. And
keep it going so people do get through.
Mr. Carter. The fact that you are using part-time would not
be something that the union could collective-bargain about?
Mr. Pistole. So no, as it relates to which shift they would
be working on, that would be subject to it. But not whether
they are part-time or full-time, or things like that.
And again, that is one of the unique authorities under
ATSA. If it was a traditional collective bargaining agreement,
there would have been a whole different discussion and
decision.
Mr. Carter. Do you feel confident that you can assure us
that the most qualified people will be in the place? I am
looking at this GAO report, where the guy got through Houston
security--which is important to me since I fly through there
with a loaded handgun. And that does not build the confidence
in the people that fly on that airplane. I learned the hard way
when I first came up here that even having a broken-apart
handgun and three bags is not allowed in baggage storage. I am
still trying to figure out how I would be able to use that gun.
Anyway, but this guy gets through with a loaded handgun. I
am worried about the most experienced people being there,
especially at the most heavily traveled times in America.
Mr. Pistole. I appreciate your concern.
Mr. Carter. If you can assure me that is going to happen.
Mr. Pistole. It has, obviously. We have been successful
over the time since 9/11.
Mr. Carter. Collective bargaining will not interfere with
that in any way?
Mr. Pistole. Will not interfere with that. No, sir.

PASSENGER SCREENING: IDENTIFYING HIGH-RISK TRAVELERS

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Mr. Culberson.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Administrator,
I wanted to ask initially about the, on a cargo screening, as I
recall from our discussion last year I think, and the TSA has
implemented procedures and policies after the Yemeni bombing,
the attempted bombing, using toner cartridges on a printer. And
look at the way the GAO described your cargo screening.
You require additional screening for high-risk cargo. And
as I recall, one of the obvious ways you identify high-risk
cargo is country of origin; if it has got characteristics of
not only from the country of origin, if it is a country with a
history of either they do not have adequate security for
screening their own cargo that is coming to the U.S., or they
have got a history of harboring terrorists, right?
So you have objective criteria for identifying high-risk
cargo based on those characteristics. Yet I also discovered--I
am delighted to have Chairman Mica here, and I appreciate very
much Chairman Aderholt letting Mr. Mica sit in on this--you
have no such criteria for passengers.
I discovered the reason that the U.S. Army, that terrible
tragedy occurred at Fort Hood, is because the Army can spot,
had policies in place to spot Communists, they had policies in
place to spot white supremacists, like Aryan Nation or other,
you know, psychos. But they had no policy in place to spot
Muslim radical extremists.
And similarly, last year I asked your predecessor to
identify for me, tell me the statute, show me the policy, show
me the statutory prohibition that prevents the TSA from using
objective common-sense law enforcement criteria to provide
additional screening to the individuals who, you know, you have
got young Middle Eastern males that are responsible for 100
percent of the terrorist attacks in the United States. We know
that they are pounding on airport security. I think the Navy or
the Pentagon told me they have got millions of cyber-attacks
every day on the Pentagon.
These guys are obsessed with getting on another aircraft. I
mean, this is their top priority. So we know they are pounding
on us. And we know who is doing it: It is young Muslim men.
Obviously extremists, psycho criminals. But they are all 100
percent young Muslim males.
Yet you have a policy that prohibits your employees from
providing additional screening to individuals that meet that
objective criteria. Yet you inspect cargo. You give additional
inspection to a box that meets those criteria, but you will not
provide additional screening to an individual that meets those
objective criteria.
Do you see the inconsistency and the danger that you expose
the country to by refusing to give additional screening to
individuals who clearly fall within the category of potentially
posing a threat to airport security? The inconsistency there is
extremely dangerous.
Mr. Pistole. Yes, so a number of issues. During my two and
a half decades with the FBI, I saw a number of non-Muslims
commit terrorist actions in the U.S., whether it was Timothy
McVeigh in Oklahoma City; Eric Rudolph, the Atlanta bomber; Ted
Kaczynski, the Unabomber.
Mr. Culberson. Sure, right.
Mr. Pistole. So one of the things we try to do is not just
look for who the person may be, but what are they, what do we
know about them from an intelligence standpoint.
Every last point of departure to the U.S. from overseas, we
do have enhanced screening for everybody. So they actually go
beyond what their own requirements are, for example, within the
European Union. So we do have that higher level of screening.
Mr. Culberson. For everybody.
Mr. Pistole. Right.

PASSENGER SCREENING: PROFILING

Mr. Culberson. But my point is you have a policy that
prohibits singling out any individual based on their race or
ethnicity, and based on--I mean, these are just common-sense
law enforcement techniques.
If you have got 100 percent of these attacks that have been
made on the United States by terrorists since 9/11, and even
before that, have been conducted by--I mean, if you are in the
FBI, the FBI, I mean, this is just common-sense law
enforcement. It has nothing to do with racial profiling; this
is just common-sense law enforcement.
Mr. Pistole. And that is what we did in the Bureau, and
that is what we do in TSA, in terms of trying to identify who
may be a threat based on the intelligence. Not because of their
religion, their ethnicity, their age. There have been two 64-
year-old grandparents, one woman, one man, who blew themselves
up in the last 10 years, one in Tunisia, one in the West Bank.
So people say well, why do you screen grandmothers? Well,
because we do not know who is going to be a threat.
Mr. Culberson. In wheelchairs and other things, you know
they are going to try to hide things in?
Mr. Pistole. A 77-year-old woman in a wheelchair who would
not give up her bag at screening. And she was blind,
supposedly. And finally they said look, you have got to have
the bag go through screening. She took her handbag and got up
and ran away. So it turned out yes, she was a 77-year-old
grandmother, but she did not need a wheelchair and she was not
blind. She was smuggling drugs.
Mr. Culberson. Sure, and I understand that.
Mr. Pistole. So that is the difficulty of profiling, if you
will, because we do not know who the terrorists will be. And
like I say, McVeigh, Kaczynski, Rudolph. Who is not to say the
next person to get on a flight may be a white male born and
bred here, born and raised here?
Mr. Culberson. But my concern is you have got a policy like
the U.S. Army did, where you have got a deliberate blind spot
where you will not give additional screening to individuals who
meet these objective, absolutely objective criteria, where 100
percent of these folks fall within.
You have got, for example, this new spot program you are
implementing, where you are focusing on behaviors and
appearances that deviate from an established base line. What I
am trying to understand is, why do you have a policy in place
that prohibits you from providing additional screening to young
Muslim males?
Mr. Pistole. I guess I will use Abdulmutallab as an
example. Here he was, he is the son of a very wealthy Nigerian
banker who used to be the head of their, basically the Treasury
Secretary. Multi-millionaire. Yes, he was Muslim, but he is
African. He would not necessarily have met that profile that
you are describing as a Middle Eastern male.
Mr. Culberson. Young Muslim males.
Mr. Pistole. Okay. So then if we start doing additional
screening for all Muslims, I do not think that is a proper
approach to use. So we just fundamentally disagree on how we
should be going about doing it.
I am looking for a person who poses a problem, regardless
of the ethnicity, race, sex, or age. So I am looking for the
person who is going to be a putative terrorist because of what
is in their head, and I am trying to use intelligence in an
informed fashion to do more identity-based screening before the
person ever gets to the airport. So that is part of this risk-
based approach I am trying to use, in a way that does not
profile because the person is a certain fill-in-the-blank, but
because of who they are, and their background, and what the
intelligence community and law enforcement community tells us
about the person.
Mr. Culberson. I understand, and that is fine. What I am
trying to get at is what policy, what statute or policy
prohibits you from profiling?
Mr. Pistole. I would not cite a specific statute, just
based on the U.S. Government's approach for particular U.S.
persons, many of whom, as you say, are here, regardless of
ethnicity.
Mr. Aderholt. Time has expired. We are honored to have the
Chairman of the full Committee of Transportation before us
today. And he has joined us. And we have unanimous consent for
him to join us in this first round of questioning.
So Mr. Mica, we would turn to you.

TSO SALARIES

Mr. Mica. Well, thank you. And I had planned to sit quietly
by the side and observe, but I appreciate your hospitality. I
would extend the same courtesy to members of our committee, but
appreciate the fine work you are doing, and the important
responsibility you have in properly funding our transportation
security activities.
As I walked in, I heard the TSA Administrator talking. I
guess the question must have been around granting some of the,
oh, collective bargaining rights. And I think he spoke to low
TSO salaries. What is the beginning salary for a TSO officer,
Mr. Administrator?
Mr. Pistole. So the average for a full-time security
officer is around $28,000.
Mr. Mica. Twenty-eight thousand, okay. And we have how many
TSO officers? Now, I see there are approximately 58,000 non-
headquarters personnel to total in the sixty thousand-something
range. How many of those are TSOs?
Mr. Pistole. There are approximately 47,000 who are
security officers, out of the approximately--the Federal Air
Marshall figure, as you know, is classified, so I will not
reveal that.
Mr. Mica. But those are TSOs?
Mr. Pistole. The TSOs who may be behavior protection
officers, bomb appraisal, document checkers, and things like
that.
Mr. Mica. I raise that because the information I had is
3,770, personnel in Washington, D.C., making an average of
$105,000 a year.
So then in addition we have--and the committee should look
into that, if they would verify those figures. Then we have
another 9,300 administrative personnel out in the field.
Now, having set this system up, as the Chairman of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, we started out
with 16,500 private screeners. Never in my wildest imagination
would we get to 60,000, and that number of bureaucrats.
Now, to give you a better idea, we have how many commercial
airports, about 430?
Mr. Pistole. 453, some seasonal, maybe 457.
Mr. Mica. And for the committee's edification, 29 airports
handle 75 percent of the passengers. So most of the rest of the
airports are relatively small.
If you take 13,000 people, including 9,337 odd
administrative personnel, that is an average about 30
administrators for every airport out there. Administrative
personnel.
I met with the administrator, and I asked him, and I will
ask him again. He needs to get someone who knows how to manage
people, some sort of efficiency study. There should not be more
than 1,000 administrative personnel in Washington, D.C., and
there should be a dramatically reduced number out in the field.
I would urge the committee to look at what is going on. I
challenge any of you to talk to a couple of administrative
personnel who work at any airport. Get their card. And you do
not have to get their name, but their position, and see how
much they are making. There are countless positions that were
never anticipated.

PRIVATE SCREENING

But I would also ask the Administrator for information on
the 16 private screening operations. We received some of that
information. I would love to put in the record what we received
as the number of personnel.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mica. For example, here is Kansas City. I asked for how
many TSA personnel over and above the private screening
personnel they had. In Kansas City they gave me 26. We found a
total of 51 personnel. I asked them to recalculate that, and
they came back with 43. We have a list of the positions that
they have at that airport. Totally unnecessary.
And what I maintain, Mr. Administrator, if this is done,
GAO uncovered part of this, is that TSA is cooking the books to
make it look like the private screening, under Federal
supervision, costs more.
GAO's initial response, after I had them look at it, said
that there was a 3 percent cost differential as opposed to 17
percent. And I submit for the record, here is Rochester and we
have other airports, I would request your committee, since they
have been reluctant in giving us the accurate information, on
getting that information to see the mass of unneeded positions,
particularly at these private screening airports.

BEHAVIOR DETECTION PROGRAM

I do not have much time, but if this committee funds the
SPOT program for 350 more positions, you all need to have some
serious counseling. Go back and look at the GAO review of this
program.
I helped initiate the SPOT-type program. And I can tell you
that it was not implemented in the fashion it should be
implemented in. The person that gets the ticket is the person
who should be asking a question, if necessary. They have people
standing around at a distance in a distorted version of any
type of a behavior protection program. And asking for more, it
is almost an insult.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY

If you look at the advanced imaging technology, to deploy
that equipment in the manner in which it is deployed, in the
way it is used, is an absolute joke. Any of you can defy that
system. I defy it every time, because I try to refuse to go
through their equipment.
And if you have not had a briefing on the results of the
testing of the equipment, which I had done in December--
everyone should be required, who is a Member of Congress, to
see the results of that advanced imaging detection. The results
are classified. But it is not acceptable.
And to give them more personnel to operate equipment which
was not properly vetted before it was deployed in the first
place, and then the deployment of it. It could be used. But you
see the performance of it.
The deployment is a joke. You can thwart it nationally, you
can thwart it at Orlando, any airport. Just pick your lane,
because even with the equipment that they have bought, it is
not properly deployed to be used as secondary screening, or
even primary screening for that matter.
So this is all about the budget. We have not gotten into,
and we do not have time to get into, personnel and attrition
rates. They have trained probably a total of what, 120,000
personnel? They have twice as many people that they have
trained than they have working. They spent a billion dollars in
that training. So they come back and say all we need is more
training.
I am telling you, this agency cries out for some oversight
from this committee. I do not have legislative jurisdiction.
And then the 3,700 people that are in Washington, D.C., spend
their time providing information to the Administrator, to allow
him to make him decisions. Which I do not think, if he had all
the facts, he would make in that fashion.

BIOMETRIC IDENTIFICATION

So that is just the opening. I did not get into the ID
fiasco. Not having a biometric ID, which we have ordered in
Congress at least four times for a pilot 6 years ago. They
spent $10 million on that. Now the FAA blames TSA, and TSA
blames Homeland Security.
Incidentally, I met with the Coast Guard the other day.
They have, they showed it to me, an ID, with a biometric
measure. They use it to access any of their computers, from any
place.
Here we have, after asking for a durable ID with a pilot's
picture on it, with a biometric measure, a card that is a joke.
When I tell people the only pilot photo on the ID produced is
Wilbur and Orville Wright, they think I am kidding, but that is
the truth. This biometric measure does not work.
So there is a lot of staff work here. I challenge the staff
to work with our staff. I thank you for giving me a couple
minutes. But we have a serious situation on our hands, and it
demands your attention.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, thank you, Chairman Mica. I think you
raise some issues that certainly we want to look at, that we
need to look at, and will look into. And our staff here on the
Subcommittee of Appropriations on Homeland Security will be
happy to work with your staff on transportation to try to work
on some of these issues.
And if you have got a segment that you want to enter into
the record, I would ask unanimous consent that it would be put
into the record.
So again, thank you for being here.
Mr. Mica. No, sir. I might say, those are just some of the
conflicting statistics on personnel that we received from TSA,
and that we actually have in place. We will give you more if
you like.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Again, we thank you for being here, and
we will definitely work with you on this to see how we can
make--I think our goal for everyone here would be that TSA,
whether it be the subcommittee or the Congress in general, is
to make TSA more effective and more cost-effective. And we want
to work together to make sure that happens on all accounts.
So we, again, thank you for your presence here this
morning.

VIPR TEAMS

Let me switch gears just a minute, and talk about the VIPR,
the Visible Intermodal Prevention and Response teams. Your
budget proposes $26.8 million for 12 new Visible Intermodal
Prevention and Response teams, and I will refer to it as VIPR
after this, which will bring the total number of teams to 37
nationwide.
I understand you plan to assign these to new locations
based on an assessment of the impact on terrorist risk
reduction. While there is clearly a need for the skills that
VIPR teams have, it is also true that there are similar
capabilities in State, local, and Transportation Authority
agencies.
Could you talk a minute, a little bit about the unique
value offered by the VIPR approach to prevention and response,
rather than relying on other agencies?
Mr. Pistole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And obviously, we
work in partnership with State and local law enforcement
agencies in terms of trying to do something that would be a
deterrent to terrorists, that may be a way of being both
unpredictable, because of a show of force, but also something
that is cost-effective from the standpoint of using State and
local law enforcement officers as part of these VIPRs, or
``vipers,'' as we call them.
Using two case studies as an example, the July 7 bombers in
the London subway, the tube there. We know that they had the
backpacks on, they are going into the subway, or the one got on
the bus. And one of them even looked at the closed-circuit
television camera as he was going in, because he knew in 10
minutes he would be dead, and as many people with him could be.
But from de-briefings of people who have cooperated with
the U.S. Government, we have learned that there are several
things that are a deterrent. One is the CCTV, as long as you
are not a suicide bomber. But the other two key ones are
uniformed officers or K-9s.
So what we try to do with the VIPR teams is be random and
unpredictable. We break them into surface and then multimodal,
so there may be opportunities at airports. And we did about
7,500 last year almost equally between surface and aviation
multimodal.
So for example, Union Station here in Washington. We may
have a VIPR team that is there Tuesday at 10:00 as a visible
presence of police, armed police, and K-9s. And so if we have
an individual, such as Abdul mutallah, with a bomb on his
person, well concealed, if he sees that presence, there is a
good possibility that he may return and try it another time.
And hopefully he would be picked up through intelligence or
otherwise before he has another attempt.
The recent Moscow Airport bombing is another type of
terrorist activity, where they do not get on the aircraft, but
the individual goes in with luggage and blows up himself in the
luggage retrieval area.
So the VIPR teams would also be effective from that type of
visible preventive response, or prevention. To say if an
individual like that walks into an airport or a train station
and sees this visible presence, that the hope is, and the whole
theory behind this is, that any time we can push away a
possible terrorist to make him come back another day, you get
this multiple, more opportunities to identify and intercept
that person.
So we augment what we do with the State and local law
enforcement. We do some grants, in terms of training. We are
also very excited by Vapor Wake dogs, those that are trained in
the detection of explosives after they have gone past.
So for example, the individuals in London on July 7, 2005,
they walk past, they are walking to the subway, to the tube.
And they have got their backpacks with explosives. A dog would
not necessarily have to hit on that bag or identify that bag at
the point where most bomb-sniffing dogs are, but would be able
to pick up on the vapor wake left behind by the explosives, and
then be able to follow that.
And we have tested that here in Union Station with good
results. So Auburn University does that, that type of training.
And so that is why we are interested in doing more training in
that regard. And that is why we are looking to try to work with
State and locals, recognizing their budget limitations in most
instances, across the country this year, to try to be a force
multiplier in partnership with them.
Mr. Aderholt. It is my understanding in 2010, that TSA
funded some cooperative agreements with State and with local
law enforcement to partially reimburse airports for cost of
security at checkpoints.
Is this funding allocated according to risk? And how much
State and local support meshes with TSA operations?
Mr. Pistole. And just for context, is this within the
Transportation Grant Program?
Mr. Aderholt. With the VIPR.
Mr. Pistole. Oh, with the VIPRs? So I am not quite sure
what you are asking, with the VIPRs.
Mr. Aderholt. I understand back, like I say, in 2010, that
there were several cooperative agreements with State and local
law enforcements to partially reimburse airports in this
regard, at the checkpoints.
Is the funding allocated according to risk? And how much
does the State and local support mesh with TSA?
Mr. Pistole. Okay. So the funding is, I mean, the whole
deployment is using a risk-based approach. So there is a risk
assessment that has been conducted of the transportation
security, TSSRA, Transportation Sector Security, Risk
Assessment, which identifies higher risk areas and things. So
that is one part of it.
And if it is particularly related to K-9s, we have two
parts, one that we provide the, we train the dogs and provide
those to State and local law enforcement. And I would have to
go back and look at whether that was 9 or 10 that we actually
provided additional incidental costs with that, which we do not
have in the 2012 budget, I do not believe. So I would have to
get more information to be more precise in the answer. If I
could follow up on that.
Mr. Aderholt. Yes, sure, you can submit that for the
record. That would be great.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SCREENING OPERATIONS

Mr. Aderholt. Before I go on to Mr. Price, let me follow up
on one issue that was mentioned earlier. In your opening
testimony you talked about it, and we discussed the fact that
there would be different categories and different, as the, I
think, frequent travelers, infrequent travelers.
Is there a timetable to try to move forward with these
changes? Or what is your, give us some idea of what you expect
in that.
Mr. Pistole. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have had
several groups within TSA working on different risk-based and
intelligence-driven strategies. And my hope is that we will be
able to pilot some of these still this year, in cooperation
with airlines and airports, and travelers obviously. So I do
not want to commit too much more beyond that, because there are
some details that we have to take care of.
But clearly, the intent is to move in that direction with
deliberate speed, and to make sure that the American people are
open to it and willing to do that in a risk-based fashion.
So some time this year, and I would be glad to follow up
with the committee later on as things develop.
Mr. Aderholt. This calendar year, you expect it.
Mr. Pistole. That is my hope, yes.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Mr. Price.

AIR CARGO SECURITY

Mr. Price. I want to first go back briefly to your earlier
answer on the 100 percent air cargo screening. That is, with
respect to cargo stowed in passenger aircraft.
You gave a rather detailed account of the challenges of
this internationally, and some of the cooperative work you have
underway. But I want to make sure that we do understand the
budgetary implications of this. And you may want to furnish
some further information for the record along those lines.
As I understand it, you are still saying that three months
into Fiscal Year 2012--namely, by December 31 of this year--you
do anticipate having that 100 percent capacity in place.
Mr. Pistole. That is clearly the goal. But I do want to
manage expectations.
There are two aspects to it, and I apologize if I was
confusing earlier. The air carriers could self-certify that
they are at 100 percent. We do not have a way of verifying or
validating that by the end of this year. So it would be an
assertion, a statement by the carriers around the world to say
yes, anything coming into the U.S. has been properly screened.
But we do not have a way of independently validating that by
the end of this year.
Mr. Price. Well, it is very important, obviously, to have
that capacity to validate. Well then, the question about what
kind of actual timeframe we are looking at here is relevant. Do
you expect 100 percent of those carriers to make that claim, or
express that intent by December 31? And then what about the
follow-on effort at validation? What are we realistically
looking at? And obviously there is a question about the money
and personnel this will require, particularly with that
validation aspect.
Mr. Pistole. Right. And you are right on point,
Congressman. So the issue for us becomes how can we work with
foreign governments and carriers, such as through this National
Cargo Security Program that I mentioned, that France has been
accepted as meeting the same standards.
So we recognize we cannot be all things, all places, all
people, all times. And so as we can leverage those
relationships, that is the way that I believe we will get to
100 percent.
To answer your question about by the end of the year, I
think the carriers would say they would be close, and that they
would be at 100 percent for all, what has been referred to as
high-risk cargo, on passenger planes. The challenge becomes,
and we are actually changing the language a little bit, going
from high-risk to known shippers and known shipments.
And so as the carriers focus more on the customer
relationship and the actual cargo freight packages that they
are picking up, they will do a lot beyond what we could verify,
simply because it is good business practice.
The bottom line is, in discussions with industry, nobody
wants a plane to blow up. So what steps are they taking beyond
what we can validate or verify? And we have very good success
in that regard.
But I want to be realistic. I do not think that December
31, 2011, is a date that we can say with the highest level of
confidence that there will be 100 percent of cargo screening
coming into the U.S.
Mr. Price. We obviously need to stay abreast of this, and
to understand exactly what we are talking about when we receive
assurances that this screening will be comprehensive. In our
discussions with you and last week regarding the Container
Security Initiative overseas, what it takes to validate that
system are complicated matters. These agreements with overseas
partners clearly require a high level of continuing scrutiny.
And they almost become diplomatic efforts sometimes. So I am
not satisfied that this budget fully incorporates what this
program is going to require.
Mr. Pistole. Thank you, Congressman, both for your support
and your appreciation for some of the complexities and
subtleties and nuances. Because you are right; there is a lot
of diplomacy involved in these discussions.
And we have the strong support of the State Department in
doing those with host governments. Because there is a cost,
obviously, involved on their end, and not everybody is willing
to take on additional costs voluntarily. So that is why we have
to work through the host governments to either enhance
capacity--I will just use Yemen as an example.
So when I went there in early November last year to assess
what was needed, they have their cargo facility in their main
airport. And so now they had one X-ray machine to screen small
pieces of cargo, nothing big. You know, freight or anything
like that. They had no explosive trace detection, they had no
K-9. They are lacking a lot of things that we would say are
basics here.
So we actually sent a team in and trained almost 300 of
their officers in enhanced physical inspection. And we loaned
them some explosive trace detection equipment, handheld
devices, and provided two additional, two State Department
additional X-ray machines.
Mr. Price. All right, so the State Department is the
critical phrase there. Insofar as there is equipment offered,
it is through the State Department.
However, your budget should reflect training, oversight,
what you regard as validation, properly speaking.
Mr. Pistole. Yes, the State paid for a good part of that.
But you are absolutely right; we will be looking for that, I
believe, in 2013. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to go back to
trying to figure this out. I am from Texas; I am from a right-
to-work state. I do not have a lot of experience with unions
and collective bargaining.
You made a statement that there are how many members of the
TSA that have already joined the union?
Mr. Pistole. There are 13,000 security officers who are
paying union dues, without collective bargaining.
Mr. Carter. First, I do not understand why somebody would
do that. Just because they like unions?
Mr. Pistole. So if they have----
Mr. Carter. You give money to them, but they do not give
any services?
Mr. Pistole. Well, so yes, they could be represented, in a
disciplinary proceeding, for example, individually. But there
is no collective bargaining for the union.
Mr. Carter. That kind of leads to my question. Let us
assume that some of what Chairman Mica had to say has validity;
that you are a little bit heavy in the employment area. You
have maybe some dead-weight people in the TSA.
Let us assume that you did your own investigation, and you
discovered what Chairman Mica said had a lot of truth to it.
And as a good manager, you decide that you need to lay off,
pick a number, 13,000 people from the TSA. Would you have to
negotiate with the union and collective bargaining to do that?
Mr. Pistole. Absolutely not, no. And that is one of the
beauties of this, this hybrid, if you will, because that would
not be subject to.
So the number of employees, their pay, benefits, anything
related to security would not be implicated in that.
And if I may, even though I did not hear Chairman Mica
actually ask a question, the one thing----
Mr. Carter. That is true.
Mr. Pistole. The one suggestion he made, I am taking him up
on that, in terms of doing an efficiency review of
headquarters, of TSA headquarters.
So the best number I have, as opposed to the 4,000 that he
mentioned at one point, and another number at a different
point, is around 2,700 for the whole D.C. area. But that
includes more than just our headquarters. There other parts of
that.
And just doing a quick comparison of ratios of other
Federal agencies, we are much below some other Federal
agencies. Not to say we are efficient, but just in comparison.
So as my dad, who was a preacher and a seminary professor,
he would say text without context is pretext. So I think
something could be pulled out of context, and you can prove
about anything you want. You know, I practiced law a couple
years and was able to do that a few times.
But my point being, I agree an efficiency review should be
done, and I am planning to do that. And if I find
inefficiencies, then absolutely, I want to move forward with
that to make us the leanest, the best agency we can be. So I am
completely committed to that.
Mr. Carter. That would be commendable. If they have paid
union dues, then on disciplinary matters the union would
intervene on their behalf and be able to negotiate for them.
Mr. Pistole. So they could, on an individual basis, yes.
Mr. Carter. The fact that they are getting laid off because
we do not need the job any more----
Mr. Pistole. That is not subject.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. You could not negotiate on those
things.
Mr. Pistole. Right, right.

SECURE FLIGHT PROGRAM

Mr. Carter. One last question, if I have time. Right now
you have an established TRIP program to process appeals for
people that have been, oh, if it is a no-fly list, or if they
have been misidentified for some reason as people who cannot
fly.
Mr. Pistole. Right.
Mr. Carter. How successful have you found the TSA TRIP
program to be? Were there lessons learned from the first few
years of the program? And does the fiscal year 2012 budget
provide for these lessons learned and continued improvement in
this program?
Mr. Pistole. So the Redress program has had fits and
starts, and I guess I would say it is on the improvement
trajectory overall.
That being said, the implementation of secure flight last
year has reduced the number of misidentifications, because now
we have the name, date of birth, and gender. Which if any one
of those three--you would hope gender would not be off--but if
those would be off, that has led to a number of
misidentifications. And some of the horror stories we have
heard from the years since implementation of Secure Flight, I
do not have the numbers off the top of my head, but I will get
those, in terms of those misidentifications, how those have
significantly decreased.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Carter. Please provide the budget for DHS Traveler Redress
Inquiry Program (TRIP) for FY 2012 as compared to FY 2011, and the
number of redresses for both years.
Response: The budget for DHS TRIP, which provides redress services
for inaccurate matches against the Watchlists, for FY 2011 is $1.157
million. The Administration's budget request for FY 2012 anticipates
operating the program at the same level as the previous year.
In FY 2010, the total number of redress inquiries received was
41,344; the average monthly volume was 3,445. In the first 6 months of
FY 2011, the total number of redress inquiries received was 15,925;
with an average monthly volume of 2,654. Secure Flight was fully
implemented by the end of Calendar Year 2010.

So that is the first episode.
There should be fewer people needing redress through TRIP
at the outset, so that is the good news. And I will have to get
back to you on the, for the 2012 budget in terms of what we
have for that, in terms of whether it is sufficient or not. I
believe it is, I just do not know the figure off the top of my
head.
Mr. Carter. I know you hear all kinds of horror stories.
But our District Attorney was informed that he was on a no-
flight list on dozens of occasions. And finally he called our
office, and said can you do anything to help us out. And we
worked with your office and got that fixed.
And you know, he was an expert witness that flew up here to
deal with the FBI on multiple things. He is a pretty good
criminologist. And it was very embarrassing for him to be
pulled out and said he was on a no-flight list. So you fixed
it.
Mr. Pistole. Glad to hear that.
Mr. Carter. But I think we have to be able to get an
accurate list there, because it really----
Mr. Pistole. Agreed.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. Offends some people. It offended
John Bradley pretty badly.
Mr. Pistole. You are absolutely right, Congressman, and
that is our goal, to have no misidentifications.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you.
Mr. Pistole. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, thank you, Mr. Administrator. And as I
made in my opening remarks, I know TSA's work force strives to
be conscientious and enterprising. And we acknowledge the hard
work of your agency, and the commitment to keeping travel safe
and secure in this country.
On the other side of the work force issue, is to ensure
there is the right mix between technology at checkpoints, and
make sure that the staffing levels are appropriate.
So we look forward to working with you and making sure that
TSA does not have a continued appetite of adding more personnel
and increasing operating costs. But like I say, I know that is
the goal of all of us.
We look forward to working with you in the days to come, as
we work on the Fiscal Year 2012 budget request as it goes
through this Subcommittee. And again, we thank you for your
presence here today. And we wish you all the best at TSA.
The Subcommittee is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, March 16, 2011.

SOUTHWEST BORDER ENFORCEMENT

WITNESSES

MICHAEL J. FISHER, CHIEF, U.S. BORDER PATROL
THOMAS S. WINKOWSKI, ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER, OFFICE OF FIELD
OPERATIONS, U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION
JAMES A. DINKINS, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY INVESTIGATIONS, U.S.
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT
REAR ADMIRAL PAUL F. ZUKUNFT, ASSISTANT COMMANDANT FOR MARINE SAFETY,
SECURITY, AND STEWARDSHIP, U.S. COAST GUARD

Opening Statement: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The hearing is called to order.
Good morning.
This morning, we welcome witnesses from the Department of
Homeland Security to talk about our progress in securing the
Southwest border. They are Chief Michael Fisher, U.S. Customs
and Border Protection, Office of Border Patrol; Assistant
Commissioner Thomas Winkowski, CBP, Office of Field Operations;
Associate Director Jim Dinkins, U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations; and Rear Admiral
Paul Zukunft, Assistant Commandant for Marine Safety, Security
and Stewardship of the U.S. Coast Guard.
Gentlemen, we thank you for being here today, and thank you
for your service. Each of you represents officers and agents
who risk their lives every day in the interest of our Nation's
safety and security. And all of your agencies have experienced
losses in the line of duty over the past year. And let me
express our condolences to you for the lives you have lost in
your particular agencies and our sincere gratitude for all of
you who carry on.
With the 5,500 miles of border with Canada, the 1,993 miles
of border with Mexico, and the 2,627 miles of shoreline,
securing the borders of the United States is a daunting task.
Since its inception, this Subcommittee has closely examined
security efforts and conditions along our borders, particularly
along the Southwest border. Our focus today is not merely to
recite where we have been. We know well the significant
resources and dramatic strides that have been made since 2003.
Rather, we want to talk about the goals for border security.
We want to hear three things directly from you, the
officers and agents who work on the front lines. Number one,
what is the current assessment of border security? Number two,
when will the border be secure? What does that mean? What
resources are needed? And, number three, how do we measure
progress toward a secure and economically vibrant border?
Let me elaborate on each of these points.
First, what is the current assessment of border security?
After investing billions of dollars in Southwest border
security efforts in the past 8 years, where are we in relation
to where we need to go?
On the U.S. side of the border, we have invested in
Federal, State, and local law enforcement personnel and
capabilities. We have built 649 miles of physical fencing and
tactical infrastructure to enhance detection and deterrence,
and deployed and tested a variety of technologies. We have also
invested in bringing the fight to the cartels, stepping up
interdiction efforts away from the border, using air and
maritime assets to support investigations in Latin America and
in Mexico.
At the same time, despite our efforts, conditions in Mexico
remain dire. Drug production is up and meeting demand, and
drug-related violence has resulted in 35,000 deaths since the
year 2005. With President Calderon's term coming to an end in
just a year, how much progress do we expect to make?
Second, the most important, how much further do we have to
go? What are the end goals, and how much will it cost to reach
them?
Commissioner Bersin gave us some insight before this
Subcommittee into what he thinks the end goals are, in his
appearance last week, the standard being that, if you try to
come in illegally, you will be detected and you will be
arrested. It means reducing the flow of illegal traffic in the
United States from Mexico to a point that both assures public
safety and is perceived by the people who live on the border
and the people who live in Arizona as being safe and secure.
I want to dig into the Commissioner's comments. How will we
achieve the level of detection and interdiction? What resources
will it take? How long will it take?
Last, we do need to measure progress. How do we measure
progress along the way? The Administration has touted the
decrease in apprehensions along the Southwest border as an
indication of fewer illegal crossings and, therefore,
successful deterrence. How do we really know that is the case?
For our entire history, this so-called denominator has been
evasive. We know how many we detect and interdict. The core
question is, how many illegal aliens actually successfully
cross into the United States and with what volume of contraband
and drugs? How are we seeking to measure that?
Director Morton and Admiral Papp indicated that their
roles, in part, were to interdict individuals and drugs away
from the land border to reduce the pressure on our borders. How
has that contribution been measured?
This is truly a daunting task, as I mentioned. And you face
significant challenges every day in meeting our Nation's border
security needs. I appreciate you appearing before us today, and
thank you in advance for your candor and your insight on the
Southwest border security operations.
At this point, I would like to recognize the Ranking member
of this Subcommittee, Mr. Price from North Carolina.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Opening Statement: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want first to join the Chairman in welcoming this
multi-agency panel here today and thanking all of you for your
service and the guidance you afford to those who are working in
your agencies.
Mexico and the United States are friends and allies of long
standing, with deep historical and cultural and political ties.
Consider, also, the economic ties. The United States is
Mexico's largest trading partner. We buy 85 percent of Mexican
exports. Mexico also buys large quantities of U.S. goods and
services, surpassed only by Canada and China. So it behooves
each of our countries to facilitate commerce across the
Southwest border--commerce that is responsible for many
American and Mexican jobs.
However, this same border also experiences a substantial
amount of illegal trade crossing between the two countries,
with narcotics and illegal immigrants coming north and money
and weapons headed south. Mexican drug cartels now dominate the
wholesale illicit drug market in the United States, earning
from $13.6 billion to $48.4 billion annually.
Since President Calderon took office in 2006 and began
directly confronting the drug cartels, Mexico and its border
regions have been wracked by violence. The cartels control
large swaths of Mexican territory and dozens of municipalities,
and they are waging violent turf battles over control of key
smuggling corridors from Nuevo Laredo to San Diego. Over the
past 4 years, the death toll in Mexico exceeded 35,000, with
each year setting a record higher than the previous one.
The United States has been aggressively working with Mexico
to stop this violence, because what happens south of the border
is more than just Mexico's problem. Recognizing our shared
responsibility has led to enhanced cooperation between our
governments. The DHS agencies before us today have had
unprecedented cooperation with Mexican law enforcement and the
military on information-sharing, joint training, cross-border
communications, and the exchange personnel. You have also
implemented unprecedented initiatives to interdict illicit
shipments flowing north and south across the border. We are
going hear today about those efforts and the funding for the
Southwest Border Initiative.
But as we take stock of the challenges we face related to
the Mexican cartels, it is also important for us to step back
and consider all of the forces at play in the drug trade. I
have often thought and said that the strength and security of
our country are not just about the budget accounts explicitly
labeled ``Homeland Security'' and ``Defense.'' Success or
failure in the war on cartels is no different. We can't expect
to solve our drug problems if we put more and more resources
into interdiction at the border while doing very little to
curtail the demand for drugs on our own streets, or, even
worse, if we actually diminish our demand-side efforts. But I
am afraid that is exactly what we are confronting in this
current-year budget discussion.
The House majority's funding bill for the remainder of
fiscal year 2011, H.R. 1, takes a serious bite out of our
efforts to prevent and treat drug abuse and, thereby, reduce
demand for the cartels' poisonous commodities. H.R. 1 would
implement a massive $581 million cut to State and local law
enforcement assistance funds, which include a variety of
programs linked to drug-abuse treatment like Byrne grants, the
residential substance abuse treatment program, drug courts, and
Second Chance re-entry programs for ex-offenders.
H.R. 1 also takes $191 million from Juvenile Justice
Grants, which are also used to treat drug abuse among youth in
our communities. H.R. 1 takes an indiscriminate $229 million
cut from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration at the Department of HHS. It cuts the Office of
National Drug Control Policy by nearly $70 million and
completely eliminates an initiative to get ex-offenders into
the legitimate workforce.
To put it simply, H.R. 1 would set our national drug-
control efforts back by over a billion dollars. It would rob
Peter to pay Paul. Cutting programs that reduce the demand for
drugs, while maintaining those targeted at the supply of
drugs--that simply does not make sense.
Now, I realize that none of our witnesses here today can
address the programs that fall outside the Department of
Homeland Security, and I am not going to ask you do so. But I
think it is extremely important to raise this issue because the
work we do on this Subcommittee does not occur in a vacuum, and
neither does the work that your agencies do along our borders
and coastlines occur in a vacuum. Your agencies' objectives are
significantly affected by forces related to the drug trade that
are outside your direct control.
So I believe it is important for all of us with
responsibilities in this area to bear in mind the full scope of
the problem and the full scope of the likely remedies as we
continue to grapple with our fiscal challenges, trying to
preserve the strength and security of our country.
So, gentlemen, I look forward to your testimony here today
and to a frank discussion. The men and women under your
leadership should be commended for all their hard work, their
record seizures to date, the great sacrifices they make on
behalf of the safety and security of the American people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
And let me just say that, certainly, the demand aspect
needs to be considered, and we should never overlook that as a
country. But the supply side of drugs coming into this Nation
is really what our focus is today. And the individuals before
us can help us assess that.
Thank you for your opening comments.
What I would like to do at this point is to start with the
panel and your opening statements before I start into my
questions. I will recognize Chief Fisher, and then we will go
on down the table with Assistant Commissioner Winkowski,
Associate Director Dinkins, and rear Admiral Zukunft.
So, Chief Fisher.

Opening Statement: Chief Fisher

Chief Fisher. Thank you, Chairman Aderholt and Ranking
Member Price, distinguished members of the Committee.
It is a privilege and an honor to appear before you today
to share with you the efforts being undertaken by U.S. Customs
and Border Protection to secure our borders generally and, in
particular, the Southwest border. I also look forward to the
opportunity to discuss our current assessment of the border,
and the timelines of our security efforts and resources
dedicated to that, and certainly metrics and measures and the
extent to which we are going to measure that throughout the
next few years.
By way of current status, we are on pace to hire, train,
and deploy 21,370 Border Patrol agents by September of this
year. We have completed more than 649 of the 650 miles of
fencing and added significantly more technology, including
infrared and seismic sensors, video surveillance and mobile
systems. We have added aerial platforms, to include unmanned
aerial systems, which complement our ground effort.
Furthermore, we have gained a greater appreciation for the
differentiation between mere collaboration and operational
integration with our Federal, State, local, tribal, and
international partners, moving forward and realizing the
strength of joint planning and implementation in a targeted and
focused manner.
As we have realized increased capacity and capability over
the last few years, attributed in large part to the increase in
resources, we have seen a transformation along our southern
border. Activity levels are down to historic levels across the
Southwest. Staffing levels at our high-risk sectors are up. And
we are becoming more proficient with technology to respond to
all threats.
But, in similar cases, when law enforcement agencies learn
to prioritize and focus their efforts and mitigate crime, the
criminal element also learns and adjusts. As we are currently
witnessing, transnational criminal organizations change their
techniques, tactics, and procedures. They no longer try to
overwhelm our agents in the urban environments, choosing
instead to operate predominantly in extremely remote locations.
In some cases, violence against our agents has increased,
as the transnational criminal organizations try to intimidate
our agents and attempt to influence our forward deployments
away from areas previously exploited. And, in most cases, the
cost of doing business for the transnational criminal
organizations continues to increase, shrinking the
organizations' profits.
Over the past year, we have reviewed our strategy in light
of the changing border environment. Our way forward and the
strategy that will be applied will be risk-based. Accordingly,
we will increasingly depend on information and intelligence to
describe the intent and capability of our adversaries, thus
defining the threat while continuously assessing our border
vulnerabilities. And, in doing so, we must be more mobile,
agile, and flexible than our adversaries.
Finally, we will define the doctrine through nontraditional
and unconventional approaches heretofore unexplored.
I witnessed the evolution of the border over the past 24
years as a Border Patrol agent, both in terms of additional
resources applied against the threat as well as the change in
the adversaries' ability to exploit border vulnerabilities.
Although we have seen positive indicators of a secure border,
our work continues and will not end as long as there are those
who seek to enter this country illegally.
In closing, I want to again thank you for this opportunity
to testify today. I remain committed to the mission and
confident in our collective ability to secure our borders, due
in large part to the brave men and women of CBP [U.S. Customs
and Border Protection], who each and every day provide a level
of security to our citizens, who deserve no less. I am proud of
our agents' and officers' dedication to duty and commitment to
excellence. I also want to acknowledge and thank all of you on
the committee for your support.
As you are well aware, the border is a dynamic environment,
and we will continue to strive to meet the demands of today as
well as the challenges of tomorrow.
I thank you again and look forward to your questions.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Chief Fisher.
Assistant Commissioner Winkowski?

Opening Statement: Assistant Commissioner Winkowski

Mr. Winkowski. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Price, and members of the Subcommittee.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today
and continue our ongoing dialogue regarding border enforcement
on the Southwest border. Without your full support and
partnership, we would not have been able to accomplish the many
successes that we have had, to date. However, we still have
many, many challenges.
I want to assure the Subcommittee that we work closely with
everybody on this panel--Chief Fisher, being my counterpart in
Customs and Border Protection, and working between the ports of
entry and Field Operations at the ports of entry. We have
integrated and knitted, I think, a great strategic plan from
the standpoint of bringing the skill sets that our Customs and
Border Protection Officers [CBPOs] bring as well as the Border
Patrol agents.
Certainly, from the standpoint of ICE [Immigration and
Customs Enforcement], our investigative arm, the executive
director, James Dinkins, here to my left, there is a true
partnership of taking seizures, taking arrests, and having a
seamless transition from field operations over to the
investigators. And, certainly, Rear Admiral Paul Zukunft of the
Coast Guard, and working on a homeland security enterprise on
our borders, particularly in the area of small boats and things
of that nature.
Given the limited time that I have, I thought I would just
take a few minutes to talk about some of the work that we have
been able to do.
In the area of outbound operations, at the direction of
Secretary Napolitano and Commissioner Bersin, CBP has reengaged
in outbound operations over the past 2 years and has had
success. We have seen an increase in our currency seizures
across the Southwest border when you look at fiscal years 2009
and 2010. We have implemented 100-percent rail inspection along
the eight crossings on the Southwest border, using our
technology that you all have supported for us over the years.
And, by the end of the year, we are going to have handheld
License Plate Reader capability at the 111 outbound lanes along
the Southwest border, with the plan of putting fixed-site
License Plate Readers in the outbound lanes in the out-years.
And, furthermore, as we create new facilities, we are
keenly aware of the need to ensure the capability of outbound
inspections in our design and construction. Many of our
facilities are old, either don't have a footprint for outbound
inspections or have a very limited footprint.
Another important initiative has been the Alliance to
Combat Transnational Threats, or what we call ACTT, in Arizona.
Since ACTT began on September 5th, 2009, we have made
significant enforcement actions at our Arizona ports of entry,
seized more than $13 million in outbound currency and over
129,000 pounds of marijuana and 3,600 pounds of cocaine.
Our success can be measured in many ways. Raw numbers tell
us something about the smugglers' reactions and help validate
our activities. And since we have increased our efforts and
continue to evolve our methods, the cartels continue to move to
more unique and deeper concealment methods, which makes it much
more difficult for our CBP officers to detect, ranging from in
transmissions, manifolds of automobiles, and gas tanks; the use
of commercial buses; commingling drugs in legitimate produce.
You know, critically important to our mission and related
to the violence seen on the Mexican side of the border is our
effort to give our officers the training and resources they
need to ensure the security of the ports. We have conducted
very, very comprehensive infrastructure surveys to improve the
physical security of our ports. We have surveyed every single
port and have made security enhancements in order to harden our
ports of entry.
We continue to deploy our tactical enforcement officers on
our Southwest border, at our ports of entry. These are
specially trained officers that have the long guns and the
correct body armor. We also continue to enhance our Special
Response Team program.
I would also like to mention the much-needed infrastructure
projects that we have undertaken and continue to pursue on the
Southwest border. You know, over the past year, we have opened
two new ports of entry in Texas: Anzalduas and Donna. And I
have had the opportunity to go to each one of those ports. And
those ports, the designs of those ports have taken into
consideration the situation that we have down on the Southwest
border from the standpoint of making sure that our ports are
hardened and have a comprehensive outbound footprint for our
officers to conduct outbound inspections.
Just recently, I was in San Ysidro and had the opportunity
to break ground on the new facility in San Ysidro. And that
facility also, at a cost of $600 million, not only enhances our
inbound capability, going from 24 lanes to 63 lanes inbound,
but also has an outbound footprint. And there are enhancements
that we are making in San Luis, you know, with the help of this
committee, the GSA [General Services Administration], and other
partnerships. These are just a few examples of needed facility
improvements that will require additional resources.
Also, as you know, our fiscal year 2012 budget request
contains money for 300 CBPOs for new and existing
infrastructure. And I look forward to working with the
committee to ensure that we have the essential personnel and
resources going forward, not to mention the 250 officers that
we received last year in the supplemental for the Southwest
border; those officers are coming on board.
So I wanted to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Associate Director Dinkins, thank you for being here today.

Opening Statement: Associate Director Dinkins

Mr. Dinkins. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Price and members of the subcommittee. I appear before you
today to discuss ICE's role in securing our Southwest border
and specifically the efforts that we have made in recent years.
I would like to begin by thanking you for noting the recent
unprovoked attack against our special agents in Mexico. Our
prayers remain with the Zapata family for their loss and for
Special Agent Avila's speedy recovery.
Out of this tragedy, I am reminded, first and foremost, of
the great courage our special agents and Federal law
enforcement partners demonstrate each and every day, combating
the activities of transnational criminal organizations and the
challenges we face along the Southwest border.
As the second-largest investigative agency in the Federal
Government, ICE special agents focus their investigative
activities to identify, disrupt, and dismantle transnational
criminal organizations and the illicit pathways they exploit in
the unlawful movement of people, contraband, weapons, and money
across our international borders. This reoccurring global cycle
of criminal activity, known as the criminal continuum, is a
threat to our security, not only at the border but in our
communities.
This investigative effort of ICE's nearly 7,000 special
agents aims to attack the entire continuum. First, there are
ICE attache located in 46 countries. We work with our foreign
law enforcement partners to push our borders out and address
the threats before they arrive in the U.S.
Second, at the border we work, in partnership with CBP and
the Coast Guard, to detect narcotics and contraband, prevent
the unlawful entry of individuals into the country, and deter
the illegal exportation of weapons and currency from the United
States.
And, third, with 200 offices located throughout the U.S.,
ICE engages in proactive investigations with our Federal,
State, local, and tribal law enforcement partners to
investigate transnational criminal organizations operating and
residing within our communities. Here, these individuals often
engage in the most profitable stage of transnational crime--
notably, the distribution and sale of illegal narcotics and the
trafficking of aliens and contraband. In turn, these criminal
organizations generate huge profits that are then smuggled out
of the U.S. to fuel their ongoing criminal enterprises.
I can assure you, combating these criminal organizations
and attacking their financial infrastructure is a priority for
ICE as well as the Department. We have taken significant steps
to do so. And, as we move forward, we must continue to push our
borders out and address the greatest national security and
public safety threats before they arrive in the U.S.
When they do arrive, we must be prepared to interdict,
investigate, and prosecute the criminals for their actions.
And, finally, if we are going to be successful, we have to
continue to pursue the transnational criminal organization
members who reside in big and small cities throughout the
United States.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to be here today
and discuss this very important issue with you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Admiral Zukunft.

Opening Statement: Admiral Zukunft

Admiral Zukunft. Good morning, Chairman Aderholt and
Ranking Member Price. It is my pleasure to be here before the
distinguished committee as a member of the Coast Guard. And I
will just say, I am the Assistant Commandant for Maritime
Security, Safety, and Stewardship here in Washington, D.C. And,
certainly, the Southwest border is very first and foremost on
my mind.
As the lead U.S. agency for maritime security, the Coast
Guard employs a three-layered maritime approach to the
Southwest border. And that begins at the departure and transit
zones well south of Mexico. It then reaches into the approaches
of Mexico, and finally culminates in our customs waters, along
our U.S.-Mexico maritime border.
To complement the strategy, the Coast Guard leverages its
role within the national intelligence community to bolster
situational awareness as well as our inter-service,
interagency, and international partnerships to advance the
interdiction continuum against drug-trafficking organizations.
That is, intelligence drives interdictions, the follow-on
forensics and prosecutions and then, working through the
interagency process, such as Panama Express, leads to more
interdictions. And then it just perpetuates that intelligence-
interdiction cycle. But we do it internationally and,
certainly, with our DHS partners here at the table.
Our unambiguous goal is to meet these threats far from the
U.S. border. And the first layer of attack is in these transit
and source zones, where transnational criminal organizations
are most vulnerable. To this end, our Coast Guard area
commanders work with NORTHCOM and SOUTHCOM and with the Joint
Interagency Task Force-South to detect, monitor, and interdict
and apprehend threats well beyond our U.S. waters, both in the
Caribbean and in the Eastern Pacific.
Coast Guard cutters and aircraft provide the necessary
range, speed, command and control, and authorities to effect
success in this transit zone. And, in addition to that, our
Coast Guard law enforcement detachments that are employed on
allied ships and our U.S. naval platforms are able to leverage
our 37 bilateral agreements with signatory nations from these
source and transit zone countries that have had a marked impact
on drug-trafficking destined for the United States.
During 2010, the Coast Guard removed over 200,000 pounds of
cocaine and over 36,000 pounds of marijuana bound for the U.S.
This represents 45 percent of the National Drug Control
Strategy's annual target for 2010, which is a 30-percent
removal rate and equates to 445,000 pounds of cocaine.
Our second layer of attack is the approach to Mexican
coastal waters, where the Coast Guard works with the Mexican
Navy and other interagency partners from Mexico. And through
our North American Maritime Security Initiative, or NAMSI, we
have established tactical-operations-center-to-operations-
center agreements and information-sharing with SEMAR [the
Mexican Navy] in Mexico that has also had a marked effect on
trafficking.
Since this inception of NAMSI in 2008, we have had 21
cases, totaling 47,000 pounds of contraband seized as a result
of this relationship, fairly nascent at that, with our
counterparts in Mexico.
The final and third layer of our attack is in the U.S.
customs waters, to include our maritime border with Mexico.
And, to that end, we work very closely with CBP, ICE, our State
and local partners.
And you need not look any further than our Joint Harbor
Operations Command, which is an interagency operations center
in San Diego, where we have 20 representative agencies,
including DOD [the Department of Defense], that monitor, at the
tactical level, activity approaching our Southwest border. And
since the stand-up of this center, we have interdicted, just in
the last year alone, over 800 migrants at sea. And that is
twice the number that we have seen in previous years. So we are
seeing an increasing trend in migrant trafficking by sea via
the Southwest border.
Finally, I will mention, we do surge operation on Falcon
Lake and Lake Amistad. Even though it is not seawater, it is
maritime border with Mexico, and certainly events in the last
year have drawn increased attention to that particular threat.
So we do transport, on a quarterly basis, forces that do
interdiction operations there, as well. It is more of a
presence right now that will hopefully deter further activity
in that region.
Chairman Aderholt, Ranking Member Price, we are proud to
take great strides with the Department to enhance security on
our Southwest border. The United States Coast Guard has a clear
strategy of layered attack that leverages joint services,
interagency, and international partnerships. We are actively
pursuing acquisition strategies that will deliver more capable
and operational assets and systems for the Coast Guard in the
years to come.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I am
pleased to entertain your questions. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BORDER SECURITY: MEASURES OF PROGRESS

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Admiral.
The Administration has noted time and again that the border
is as secure as it has ever been. The question today is, how do
we measure the level of security we have achieved?
Let me walk you through the measures we have frequently
heard. Border Patrol apprehensions of illegal aliens are down
36 percent in the past 2 years and are less than one-third of
what they were at their peak. Is a decrease in apprehensions
truly an indication that fewer illegals are crossing, or there
are fewer job seekers or fewer drug mules or both?
The year 2010 saw more than 15,000 drug-related deaths in
Mexico. Is an increase in violence an indication of greater
pressure on the cartels or just more examples of their brazen
and brutal tactics?
While seizures of drugs, bulk cash, and other contraband
are up, that can probably be attributed largely to having more
officers and agents on the front lines. What aren't we
catching? Have our efforts actually squeezed and reduced the
flow northbound into the United States or southbound in Mexico?
Have drug use, availability, purity, and street value been
affected at all as a result of our investments?
And, lastly, I would like each of you to tell the
Subcommittee, from your agency's perspective, what are the best
measures of the effectiveness of the Southwest border
operations? Where are we today? Where do we need to go? And
what tools and resources are needed to get there?
And I will start with you, Chief Fisher.
Chief Fisher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think in posing those series of questions, interestingly
enough, myself and the staff and others within CBP have been
looking at this really heartily over the last few years. And,
in particular, over this last year, what we realized as part of
our strategy and the method by which we had recently been
reporting out, in terms of levels of security, really were, in
fact, what we would describe as operational control levels,
really for the deployments of those resources over the years
and how we would measure those; how we would ask the field
commanders, ``To what extent has that level of resources been a
benefit, added value to your operations, and, from a cost
standpoint, did that actually work?''
And as we have been having these discussions with the field
commanders, it became clear to a lot of us that levels of
operational control measured in a linear fashion do not
translate into border security, because border security is much
broader than linear miles of operational control even under our
own limited definitions.
For instance, we started looking a year ago at not just the
line in the sand, if you will, the juridical line that
separates the jurisdictions between the United States and
Mexico; we have been looking at the border in terms of
corridors. And those corridors--as we start looking along, for
instance, the Southwest border, what is it that the criminal
organizations, smuggling organizations, transnational criminal
organizations, anybody seeking entry into this country, what do
they require to do that?
And so, when I mentioned earlier about the information and
intelligence being a key indicator to identify the intent and
capability defining the threat, that is exactly what we are
trying to do.
Just because we have an area along the Southwest border,
for instance, that is extremely remote, absent any fence,
absent periodic deployments of Border Patrol agents, that area
may be, in and of itself, vulnerable because of the lack of
those resources. It doesn't necessarily indicate that that is
an area of high risk.
And we will give you a quick example. Some of the areas in
the Big Bend National Park, for instance, vast expanse, don't
have a lot of resources there. But in those particular areas,
criminal organizations, in order to bring narcotics and people
through, need the same things that local populations need to be
able to bring it through a country into another country and
immediately into the interior of the United States. That
requires infrastructure in terms of road systems,
transportation systems, to easily do that.
Now, in some of the other remote areas where they do
operate, where it takes them 2 to 3 days, they do that at a
higher risk, not necessarily because of the terrain, but
because their exposure to our detection and interdiction
efforts are higher. And so, when we look at the border and we
want to focus those resources in those areas, we want to do it
in a smart fashion.
In the absence of infrastructure and technology in some of
those extremely remote areas, what we are moving toward is
identifying other technologies. And I will give you a quick
example: the Intelligence Community and our UAS [unmanned
aerial systems], for instance. We don't want to just
automatically assume because the infrastructure does not exist
that the risk will always be low. The risk is going to be
dependent, again, on the threat and if they decide to move for
whatever reason. And we want to be able to know about it, have
that situational awareness, and be able to detect, identify,
and classify that threat: Are they just people? Are they people
coming in with narcotics? Are they armed? Are they not armed?
We also have the requirement to then be able to respond to
it, either on the ground or in the air, and ultimately be able
to make and effect the arrest. We had mentioned the
denominator. What we need to be able to do--in a broad
definition of border security, it is not just the
apprehensions, and I would agree with you. More importantly, it
is the proportion of individuals that we arrest subsequent to
the detected entry.
And so, then the question is, well, in those areas where we
don't have persistent detection capability, ``What is the
answer?'' There are a few things. We would use the UAS and
other national resources to be able to do periodic flyovers and
utilizing change-detection capability to then go back and
periodically check and see if, in fact, there is any change to
the terrain.
If, in fact, we identify and the analysts dictate that
something is moving through there, we would send reconnaissance
patrols out there, and we would identify what is coming through
that area. If it is determined to be individuals, we can then
start putting sensor arrays, we can put mobile technology there
to figure out what that threat is and to be able to mitigate it
so it doesn't become entrenched in some of these places that we
have seen across the Southwest border.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you, Chief.
And just because there are four witnesses, what we will do
is try to keep answers just as brief as possible, but, of
course, take the time that you need to answer the questions,
but we will try to keep mindful of the time. I know the other
Members here want to ask questions, as well.
So, Assistant Commissioner Winkowski.
Mr. Winkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just to kind of build off of what the Chief just testified
to, in the area of ports of entry, unlike between the ports of
entry, we have this dual responsibility. You know, we have a
responsibility to make sure that dangerous people and dangerous
things don't come into the country, but we also have a
responsibility to make sure that we are doing everything
possible to facilitate the legitimate trade and travel. So we
have this dual mission that is very, very complicated, that is
very, very time-sensitive.
We have been fortunate, in many respects, from the
standpoint of support from this committee in putting out
detection equipment, what we call Non-Intrusive Inspection
equipment, that we have throughout the Southwest border. And
that has given us the ability to focus in and target high-risk
shipments, for example, and do quick inspections and make a
determination and find contraband or to actually release the
freight.
So our measures are a number of things. Certainly, one
measure is the activity, the illegal activity that we have
coming through the ports. And, for example, inadmissible
aliens, when you look at percentage change from fiscal year
2009 to fiscal year 2010, we are up 4 percent; false claims up
15 percent; and fraudulent documents up 11 percent.
So the question starts becoming what the Chief and I talk
about oftentimes as the Border Patrol continues to harden
between the ports of entry, with technology and fence, the
impact on the ports of entry--so if you can't come through, if
it is more difficult to come through between the ports of
entry, the next, I think, natural point is at our ports of
entry. And we have seen some increase in that rate, in that
regard.
The other measure we have is applying consequences. You
know, we have gotten away from just doing simple voluntary
returns, from the standpoint of someone comes in, doesn't have
the proper documents, fraudulent, at times we would give a
voluntary return. Today, we give larger consequences, coming in
as well as going out.
And I think that is an important point here. I testified
about our outbound strategy, and I talked a little bit about
currency. But as we focus in on the outbound side (the number
of illegal, undocumented aliens going back into Mexico), we
didn't focus in on that over the years. And we have focused in
on it and have been able to apply consequences.
So you have individuals, particularly in the pedestrian
lane, walking into Mexico. And part of our outbound CONOPS
[Concept of Operations] is detecting those individuals and
applying consequences. So, you know, recidivism rates are
something that we measure.
I agree that just finding more drugs day-in and day-out is
not the only measure. It is how you are changing behavior, how
will you--you know, we see in Arizona, with ACTT [the Alliance
to Combat Transnational Threats] putting in 163 TDY [temporary
duty] officers, an increase in enforcement activities.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Dinkins.
Mr. Dinkins. Just to carry on, some of the indicators and
specific things that we have noticed that really are indicators
that we are making a difference with our collective efforts
here--and I will keep it short--are the number of stash houses,
for example, in Arizona, that we are finding with illegal
aliens is fewer. The number of aliens in those stash houses are
down. As well as the number of hostage situations where they
have taken hostages of the illegal aliens and are demanding
higher fees, those are also down from last year.
And I think that we have seen a shift in the pressure that
we are putting on these organizations, from alien smuggling
fees going up, specifically in Arizona, over the last year, as
well as we are seeing that, because they can't get through the
ports of entry as easily and they can't make it between the
ports of entry, they are forced to resort to more
sophisticated, costly measures--dig tunnels, which could take
months. And we have seen the number of tunnels that we have
been able to interdict going up over the last 2 years
drastically from previous years.
So I think it really has changed. We have changed our
pattern, and we are forcing them to do things differently, more
costly. And it is making a difference.
Now, as far as the investigations go, one of the key
measures that we are using, which will start in fiscal year
2012, which really has changed the way that we focus away from
just specifically arrests, indictments, and convictions and the
number of seizers, is the disruptions and dismantlements of
transnational criminal organizations.
Because when you disrupt them, you are, you know, setting
them back more than just necessarily taking their drugs or
money away from them. And when you actually disrupt them and
dismantle them, now you are actually eliminating the threat
that that organization posed to the ongoing criminal and
smuggling activity that they are involved in.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Admiral.
Admiral Zukunft. I will probably start a little more
strategic. When I look at my current assessment, it really
first starts with the relationships, then it is awareness, and
then it is authorities.
I have been in this business for 34 years, chasing drugs. I
have commanded three ships, I have directed a joint interagency
task force, and also dealt with this border problem when I was
commander of the 11th Coast Guard District. Our relationships
on an international scale are paramount. The United States
cannot do this alone.
Within our interagency relationships, we do not have
Goldwater-Nichols. Our Department of Homeland Security, we are
8 years old, but I am here to say, you know, the law
enforcement officers that join me here at the table, this is a
one team, one fight. And it is very focused, and it is
strategic. So the relationships, both internationally,
interagency, and joint, are better than I have seen at any
point in my career.
When you look at awareness, this really comes down to
information. Eighty percent of our interdictions were driven by
intelligence. So when we have that information, there is a good
likelihood at sea we are going to interdict. Now, as we are
getting better systems for awareness, it is also imperative
that we have the platforms to go out and do the interdictions.
So those two really need to be held in balance.
But we did see a net reduction last year of about 40
percent of cocaine moving by sea. At the same time, we are
seeing different modes of conveyance. First, it was semi-
submersible vessels, and now we are seeing fully submersible
vessels. And then in the go-fast, the vessels transiting
cocaine, they are breaking these loads down into smaller
volumes. In the past, our average interdiction was about five
metric tons; now we are looking at just about under a metric
ton. So the bad guys are spreading the risk.
And the fact that they have not returned fire against our
interdiction forces tells me that this is a risk that they can
take, a business expense they can write off because there is
still more coming. So that would be my assessment there, at
least on the awareness piece.
And then, finally, it is the authorities. We do have a
number of bilateral agreements. And then our relationships with
Mexico--I have been down to meet with the commander of the
Second Naval Zone. We initially would talk about oil pollution
protocols, and we said, ``Let's look at the real threat; you
know, it is the violence on the border.'' And we were able to
take that where now, if we see an event off Mexico, our
operations center in Alameda calls theirs immediately. And we
have actually done exercises and interdictions with Mexico,
which was really--would have been unheard of 10 years ago.
So I see the trend in our relationships, awareness, and our
authorities all moving in the right direction.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Admiral.

STOPGAP FUNDING, IMPACT OF

Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would also like to address a question to the entire panel
to respond, as you perceive relevance in what I am asking,
which has to do with the effects of not having, at this moment,
long-term funding in place for Southwest border and drug-
interdiction activities.
Yesterday, the House passed yet another short-term
continuing resolution, this one to keep the government
operating for 3 weeks, until April 8th. I have said repeatedly,
and many others have as well, this is no way to run a
government. We need, once and for all, to finish funding what
remains of fiscal year 2011. I think that was quite evident in
December. It certainly is evident now.
Now, I recognize the CRs have given you some flexibility.
They have given some of your agencies the ability to shift
money around to cover 2011 needs not funded in 2010. H.R. 1,
for that matter, provided additional resources specifically for
Southwest border and drug-interdiction activities. However, we
are almost halfway through the fiscal year, and I question
whether these flexibilities alone will cover your needs.
And, in any case, I want to ask the question. I would like
for each of you to highlight what have been the impacts of
living under short-term CRs for an extended period of time, the
impact specifically on Southwest border and drug-interdiction
activities. When does this type of funding stream truly affect
your ability to operate effectively in these areas? And then,
finally, what kind of adjustments are you going to need as we
finally, hopefully, pass a full-year CR and/or the 2012 bill?
What kind of adjustments are going to be required by virtue of
the funding arrangement under which you have lived thus far?
Chief Fisher. Mr. Price, one specific area that is impacted
is our inability to project and continue deployments in high-
risk areas, not knowing what the allocation is going to be so
that we can fiscally and----
Mr. Aderholt. Chief, if you could pull the mike a little
closer? It is not picking up real well.
Chief Fisher. I am sorry.
Mr. Aderholt. That is better.
Chief Fisher. Is the current deployments that we have right
now in high-risk areas, in particular, Tucson, Arizona. Our
inability to know between now and the end of fiscal year what
the appropriation, what that dollar amount would be, to be able
to scale that, either surge it up and move it into that area,
because of the CR right now, that is probably the first and
foremost operational impact that we are seeing.
Mr. Winkowski. From a field operations standpoint, you
know, 37 percent of my staff, of the CBPOs, of which I have
22,000, 37 percent are funded by user fees. So we have a little
different situation there.
But from the standpoint of staffing the ports of entry and
paying the bills, we have not seen an impact in that regard. As
a matter of fact, we are hiring the 250 officers that were
approved in the supplemental as well as some additional
officers.
You know, to your point, Mr. Price, I mean, it does make it
difficult from the standpoint of that long-term planning, but,
nevertheless, not to the point that we have had to step back
from our responsibilities of protecting the homeland, whether
it is the Southwest border or northern border or airports or
seaports.

BORDER SECURITY: BORDER PATROL AGENTS AND CBP OFFICERS

Mr. Price. Well, this anticipates something I want to talk
about later this morning. But, as to the new positions, I
understand that, as of February 1st, none of these new Border
Patrol agents are on board, and only 46 of the new CBP officers
are on board that were funded through the supplemental. Now,
that seems slow, to put it bluntly. And that may or may not be
related to the uncertainties connected with stopgap funding. Do
you have any quick observation on that? I do want to return to
it in more detail.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir.
I don't know specifically about the supplemental funding as
it relates to the authorized levels for Border Patrol agents.
We have currently, right now, over 20,000 Border Patrol agents.
And we are on pace--we have been hiring Border Patrol agents
since October 1st, the beginning of the fiscal year--both in
terms of getting us to that 21,370 level at the end, which
includes the 1,000 additional Border Patrol agents included in
the summer supplemental, and it also includes attrition to keep
us at that current level.
Mr. Winkowski. And from the standpoint of the CBPOs, it
was--we have our academy dates. We have two classes down there
now that are bringing on board the 250. And we have other
classes scheduled.

STOPGAP FUNDING, IMPACT OF

Mr. Price. So, quickly, if we could move to other agencies
on the stopgap funding question.
Mr. Dinkins. Yes, sir. I mean, it is a challenge from
management perspective. Fortunately, it has been at a level
which we have been able to continue on with our hiring as
needed. It is the long-term effects, if we don't actually get
annualization of the funding for the people that we are
bringing on, which will--the out-years will have the challenge.
Versus, right now we are carrying on and doing our hiring. We
have classes running continuously to bring on the special
agents that we need to do the job and that have been funded.
Admiral Zukunft. For the Coast Guard, we are on life
support. We can maintain the status quo, but we don't operate
in a status-quo requirement.
I was the Federal on-scene coordinator for the BP oil
spill, where we surged 3,000 people, 22 cutters from as far
away as Alaska and Hawaii. So, God forbid, we have a disaster
of that magnitude. But where that really hits us is if we have
that requirement to surge.
In addition, we are keeping a watchful eye on the price of
fuel, which is the one discretionary item we have in our
budget. But, as those dollars go up, you know, when the final
budget comes in, that may be an area we have to reconcile by
diminishing operations. We are not there yet, but I will say it
does put us on life support.
Mr. Price. That is a pretty alarming term, Admiral. Let me
just, in the time I have remaining, ask you to elaborate.
Are we talking here about the impact of the mere fact of
stopgap funding and the uncertainty that that carries with it?
Or are we talking about some adjustments, that whatever the
full-year CR eventually looks like, and maybe even what the
2012 bill looks like, some adjustments that are going to be
required to get the Coast Guard where it needs to be?
Admiral Zukunft. Yeah, well, certainly, in the past, we
have looked at supplemental measures to offset some of our
surge requirements. But, certainly, we would like that to be
more predictive. Because, you know, we looked at last year, we
had Haiti, and we also had the BP oil spill. We are entering
into what could be a devastating hurricane season; it is still
unknown.
But it really becomes more of a readiness issue. And the
posture of the Coast Guard is to be always ready. And so, maybe
it is a little bit melodramatic to say ``life support,'' but it
is not the posture where the Coast Guard normally stands
squarely on its two feet.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Let me just add that I think the question you
asked is important. And on resources, we need to maintain
operations. This Subcommittee has made operations a priority,
both in H.R. 1 and under the short-term CRs. And supplemental
funds are available to continue hiring, as needed. So I just
want to make that point.
And I will turn to Mr. Carter.

BORDER SECURITY: TUCSON SECTOR

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have an awful lot of questions, but, first, I would like
to point out the failure of the Democratic Party to create a
budget last year and the failure to appropriate any money last
year. We have had a 4-month CR, created by the Democrats, and
two 5-week CRs by the Republicans. And it is time for all us to
come to the table and start getting this thing done.
I have some questions that I am very concerned about, and I
think you have before you something Mr. Culberson prepared. I
am going to start with this. Looking at that document you have
there, and I look at 2007, it has gotten better in the Tucson
sector, but the Tucson sector looks like, to me, a
superhighway.
It starts at 800,000 in 2007 and comes down to 200-and-
something thousand today. I believe that there is a reason for
that, and that is that the Border Patrol is prevented from
going on several government lands, U.S. Government lands, that
happen to dominate the Tucson sector. And it is my
understanding, from talking to Members--Rob Bishop on the
Resources Committee that many of the vehicle barricades that we
created with some of the money we did on the Southwest border
were to keep the Border Patrol out of certain areas, of
conservation land and other things that are on the border.
Is it a major factor that the Tucson corridor, with all of
its public lands that border on Mexico, that prevents you from
using vehicles to chase down these people inside U.S. lands?
And there is a House bill that is being proposed, of which
I am a cosponsor, H.R. 5016, which would resolve that matter
and allow the Border Patrol to pursue those areas. Would that
be something that would help you?
Chief Fisher. Well, sir, my understanding--and I actually
had an opportunity, about a month or so ago, to go down into
the Tucson area, along with representatives from the Department
of Interior and others. We currently have, and have had for the
last few years, a memorandum of understanding [MOU] that allows
us to go onto public lands in situations where we have to
effect an arrest.
So, to my knowledge, and even in that particular area, the
Organ Pipe, where those vehicle barriers were put up over the
years, Department of Interior told me at the time it has
drastically reduced the amount of vehicle entries that were
coming through there.
There are a whole host of factors that we believe
contributed to the high numbers in Arizona over the last 10
years or so, and I would be more than welcome to talk about
those in particular.
Mr. Carter. Well, I am going to take the worst-case
scenario here. In 2007, 800,000 crossed in the Tucson sector,
and the next highest is 152,000 in San Diego. They turned loose
98.6 percent of the people that were apprehended, of the
800,000 apprehended.
So, there is something pretty badly wrong in Tucson, in the
Tucson sector, as it compares to the rest of the Southwest
border. It is like the 800-pound gorilla in the room. If it is
not the fact that it is public land, if we are wrong on that,
then I would like to know what it is.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir. And, again, there are many factors.
One thing, in particular, with our strategy--matter of fact,
the Commissioner talks about Tucson in particular, that sector
and that State as being the last stand for the smugglers.
It is so because, since 1993, when we started in El Paso,
we saw the majority of traffic there in El Paso. And then we
moved it over to San Diego back in the 1990s, where they were
seeing an increase of over 500,000 apprehensions during that
time. And it moved over, hit a little bit in south Texas, but
it stayed in Arizona for the last 10 years.
When I was there, at the high-water mark, for instance, of
the 1.6 million apprehensions the United States Border Patrol
agents made that year, 616,000 were in that sector. Last year,
it was 212,000.
There are two factors, predominantly, why they are still
there. One is because there are very few other areas with that
legitimate infrastructure I talked about that they can go back
to. They can't go back to San Diego. They tried in 2007 and
2008. They tried going back in El Paso in small numbers.
The other thing is, because of what is happening in Mexico,
the lateral movement in Mexico between these smuggling
organizations is not what it used to be. It used to be they
could move across in Mexico, pay the plaza, get their people
and the narcotics through, and do business that way. Until that
settles, a lot of times they are not able to move out of those
areas.
Mr. Carter. So you are saying to me that a bill that would
open up those public lands would be of no benefit to you at
all?
Chief Fisher. I think when we look at our current MOU, some
of the changes that we are working with Department of the
Interior would include positioning mobile technology, not
permanently, necessarily, but in areas. Because the current MOU
right now suggests that we are able to go in in what is called
``hot pursuit.'' When we make a detection and we are trying to
go through public lands, to include wilderness area, that
allows for us to be able to do that.
What the current MOU does not, at this point, allow for is
for us to go in and move, for instance, a mobile surveillance
system. And we are currently working that with DOI [Department
of Interior] in specific areas to be able to do so.

BORDER SECURITY: BORDER PATROL AGENT DEATH IN ARIZONA

Mr. Carter. I think I have time for one more question. It
is reported to me that, in Arizona, an ambush was set up. I
don't know what sector it was in--in the Tucson sector, I have
been told, and that one of our agents was armed with a weapon
that fires beanbags. When the fighting started, he was shooting
beanbags and they were shooting live ammunition, AK-47s, and he
got killed.
Now, what in the world are we sending a Border Patrolman
out for an ambush with a beanbag gun? It was a SWAT team, I am
told by Mr. Culberson.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir, I believe you are referring to the
incident back in mid-December that involved the tragic death of
Agent Brian Terry, who was a member of the Border Patrol
Tactical Unit. That occurred in the mountains west of Nogales,
Arizona.
What I can tell you, sir, because it is still an ongoing
investigation, all of the Border Patrol agents that were
deployed in there had deadly force.
Mr. Carter. Except him?
Chief Fisher. No, sir. He did have deadly force.
Mr. Carter. Well, the report is the gun was loaded with
beanbags. That is not deadly force, is it?
Chief Fisher. Well, the team deployed with a variety of
weapons, sir. And I----
Mr. Carter. So he just grabbed the wrong gun?
Chief Fisher [continuing]. No, sir, that is not the case.
Mr. Carter. You are investigating that?
Chief Fisher. Actually, the FBI is the lead investigative
agency. And the United States Attorney's Office in Arizona is
still working that case, sir, so I can't go into further levels
of detail. I think you would understand that.
Mr. Carter. Well, I will let you ask that question. Am I
through?
Mr. Aderholt. Yes, forgive me. Time is up.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.

BORDER SECURITY: UNIFIED COMMAND STRUCTURE

Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a few quick questions. Chief Fisher and Commissioner
Winkowski, we understand that CBP has been establishing a
unified command structure for the Southwest border, similar to
efforts undertaken by the Coast Guard. In addition, we know DHS
has been looking at a more unified interagency approach to
border security, looking to models such as the Joint
Interagency Task Force-South. They combat narcotics, as you
know, from South America and the Caribbean.
What progress has been made in implementing this unified
approach at CBP? And what difference is it making, if any at
all?
Chief Fisher. Sir, I can tell you, at the beginning of
December, in Arizona, CBP stood up what is called the Joint
Field Command. And we are just starting to set here in
Washington, D.C., the Joint Operations Directorate.
As most joint commands go, it was an area, one, as the
lines to combat transnational threats started up in September
of 2009. As that matured, we started with a unified effort, we
moved toward unified command, and now we are matured to a joint
command construct.
It is still relatively early to ascertain the extent to
which it has increased, but I can tell you--and I will
certainly ask Mr. Winkowski to comment, as well, if he so
chooses--we have one person that speaks for the commissioner
from a strategic level in the field, being able to look at
Border Patrol operations, look at field operations--because
they aren't separate, as Mr. Winkowski indicated, at and
between the ports of entry. And we have currently invested over
6,000 Border Patrol agents and officers in that State. Having a
joint command helps us set a construct to be able to make sure
that the implementation of that strategy is reaching the
objectives and goals as previously stipulated.
Mr. Winkowski. Congressman Dent, the only thing I would add
is, you know, prior to the creation of DHS, down in, for
example, at a port of entry, you had, really, three government
agencies running the port of entry. You know, you had the
Customs Service, where I came from, under the Treasury
Department; you had the Immigration and Naturalization Service
under the Justice Department; and you had USDA under the
Department of Agriculture. We made it work.
The creation of DHS and CBP, 8 years ago this month,
brought a whole new level of one agency, one department owning
the borders, us being, you know, CBP owning the ports of entry,
between the ports of entry, and the air-marine side.
And we have matured in 8 years. And I think we have matured
to a point where we needed to look at, ``Is there a better way
from the standpoint of managing our mission?'' And we did a lot
of research on this and took a lot of pieces from the
Department of Defense with Goldwater-Nichols.
I have had the opportunity, as Chief Fisher has, to spend a
lot of time down in Tucson. And having one commander that is
responsible for what is happening in that particular sector, to
me, makes a great deal of sense. And what that means for my
position for that particular area, as we continue to grow in
there, is that I am going to organize, train, and equip, versus
the operational side because the commander is responsible for
the operational side.
So, as the chief indicated, we have a ways to go. It is
maturing. You know, we have, in this particular case, a Border
Patrol agent that is in charge of the joint command. But, as
the deputy, the joint commander is a field operations leader.
So I think it is a good thing. I think it is innovative. I
think we have matured to a point where we need to begin the
process of re-looking at how we manage the borders.
Mr. Dent. What are your results and goals of the joint
unified efforts, and what are the cost savings?
Mr. Winkowski. From the standpoint of the Joint Field
Command?
Mr. Dent. Uh-huh.
Mr. Winkowski. We are not there yet. I could not sit here
and give you a dollar savings. From the standpoint of
streamlining the process, I think, again, having one individual
in charge of that particular sector, which includes ports of
entry and between the ports of entry, certainly streamlines the
management reporting, because the commander reports directly to
the Deputy Commissioner of CBP.
Mr. Dent. Through a consolidation, do you see a better use
of existing resources?
Mr. Winkowski. Yeah, I believe so. And, again, time will
tell here, but that commander has the full authority of
shuffling resources. So if that particular commander wanted to
take positions from the Customs and Border Protection officer
position and place them someplace else in that particular AOR
[area of responsibility], he has the full authority to do that.
Typically, what would happen is, in order to do things like
that, there is, you know, a reporting process that the director
would have to come through and the headquarters. And we have
streamlined that.
So, for example, we see on the Southwest border with our
outbound operations at the ports of entry; we see Border Patrol
agents at the ports of entry working outbound operations with
our border protection officers. We see border protection
officers up at checkpoints, which traditionally was just
handled by Border Patrol.
So, you know, we are seeing this knitting; we are seeing
this integration of personnel. And, as I mentioned in my oral
reply, we all bring different skill sets to the table, Field
Operations and Border Patrol. Now it is time--we have done a
great job merging. Now it is time to really integrate.

AIR INTERDICTION

Mr. Dent. And if I can just quickly go to the Admiral, just
to talk about your aviation assets and capabilities for a
moment. The Coast Guard has experienced a number of aviation
casualties over the past few years, as you know.
Do you have a plan to replace the two C-130Hs and two of
the HH-60s that were recently lost? It appears that you have no
plan under way to replace the two HH-65s that were also lost in
mishaps. How are you mitigating the gap created by the absence
of these aircraft, and what is your plan and timeline to
replace these assets?
Admiral Zukunft. Yeah, for the H-65 gap in particular, we
are able to cover that with the remainder of our fleet. And
these are short-range helicopters. They, you know, do the
lion's share of our coastal search and rescue, and then they
also embark at sea. They are the same helicopters that carry
our HITRON. These are our precision marksmen that shoot
outboards of go-fast vessels.
So we are not missing any opportunities to send cutters
doing counter-drug missions that don't have a helicopter. So we
are able to work within our mix. Clearly, the critical pieces
are the C-130s that provide that long-range surveillance, and
the H-60s provide a longer-range capability, as well.
Mr. Dent. What is your best tool for air interdiction?
Helicopters? Fixed-wing?
Admiral Zukunft. Helicopter, by far.
Mr. Dent. Is that true for the rest of you on interdiction?
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir, the helicopter. Either the UH-60 or
the--the Black Hawk or the Huey.
Mr. Dent. Okay. Thanks.
I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Culberson.

BORDER SECURITY: APPREHENSIONS AND PROSECUTIONS

Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We deeply appreciate the work that you do and are really
committed to help you in any way that we can.
Chief Winkowski, you really zeroed in on it, and that is
the key, as all of you know as law enforcement officers, is to
impose consequences and change behavior, and what do we do as a
country, what do you all do as law enforcement officers to
change behavior. And the key is imposing consequences. Criminal
consequences is the most successful.
And, if I could, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to ask if I could
enter into the record, if I could, Mr. Chairman, without--
without objection, can I enter this into the record?
Mr. Aderholt. Absolutely. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
I gave everybody a copy of this. This is numbers that I
collected with you all's help, Chief Fisher. And I really,
really appreciate you all's help in putting this together.
This is the first time that I have ever been able to see
these numbers all put together. And I have gave it to each one
of the members of the committee.
Because you can pretty quickly see what the problem is in
Tucson. And noticed, when I first started bringing this to the
Subcommittee's attention, as Mr. Carter says, in the Tucson
sector in fiscal year 2007, if you were picked up by the Border
Patrol, you had a 98.6 percent chance of being home in time for
dinner. And you were basically out about 3 hours in the lode,
which is just, you know, terrible. And, as a result, they are
just pouring through in Tucson. In 2008, you had a 99.6 percent
chance of never being prosecuted.
And I can't get numbers--Chief, could you help me get
numbers for 2009? I am not sure why we couldn't get good
numbers for 2009.
[The information follows:]

Representative Culberson: And I can't get numbers--Chief, could you
help me get the numbers for 2009: I am not sure why we couldn't get
good numbers for 2009.
Response: In Fiscal Year 2009, CBP's Border Patrol apprehended
556,041 aliens between the Ports of Entry nationwide, 540,865 of those
on the Southwest border. During the same time period, CBP's Border
Patrol had 60,603 Accepted Prosecutions nationwide, 60,064 of those on
the Southwest border.
Additional information regarding this question has been provided
separtely to the Committees since it is for Official Use Only/Law
Enforcement Sensitive.

But notice in 2010, I mean, after a result--and you all
have put in a lot of hard work, and this committee has put in
the resources--deeply appreciate Chairman Price's and Chairman
Aderholt's commitment to this. And, Chairman Price, in the time
you worked on this, sir, you were able to put resources into
the Southwest border, and it has made a big difference.
In those sectors, Chief Fisher, where there are
consequences being imposed and the--kind of the gold standard,
in my opinion--and I have looked at this carefully and worked
on it for many years, as everybody knows on the Committee. And
you all know this has been near and dear to my heart, something
I have worked on for many years. The gold standard is Judge
Alia Ludlum in the Del Rio sector.
Your sector chief there, sir, tells me that they have the
lowest level of crossings they have ever seen, that things are
very quiet. You know, you can hear the crickets chirping in Del
Rio. The streets are safe. The community is thrilled. There is
strong support among the local community, which is 96 percent
Hispanic, for enforcing existing law, with primarily existing
resources, with the close cooperation of the Border Patrol or
the marshals or the judges or the prosecutors or the sheriffs,
of CBP and ICE. There is a great cooperative relationship
there, and that is sort of where Streamline started. And Judge
Ludlum has had great success with it.
I believe, Chief Randy Hill who was in El Paso, was just
moved to Tucson. God bless him, you sent him under Niagara
Falls. He is out there standing under Niagara Falls.
And if I could, Members, bring your attention to what
happened in El Paso. Chief Randy Hill was the chief in Del Rio,
working with Judge Ludlum. And that is why you see, Members,
the prosecution rate in Del Rio is so high in 2007, in 2008.
And we are going to get numbers for 2009. And it is still high,
but you moved Randy to El Paso, I guess, over the last 2 years,
Chief? And he is just doing a magnificent job. And because of
the problems there in Nogales--excuse me, in Juarez and his
work with the local folks, he got the prosecution rate in El
Paso up to 65 percent.
And I just want to confirm for the record, gentlemen, that
this is the key. If we enforce existing law, impose real
consequences--and the existing law is up to 6 months in jail.
It is a criminal prosecution. And the consequence they are
imposing, I want to make clear for the record, Members, is--for
example, Judge Ludlum has given them a week, 2 weeks, a month,
a couple of months, depending on the circumstances.
Obviously, if it is an aggravated offense, if the
individual has assaulted the officer, if they are carrying
drugs, if they are carrying a weapon, they are in a special
category, and they get zapped with a really serious criminal
penalty. But if they are an economic migrant, if they are
crossing, they have no other aggravating circumstances, that is
what we are looking at here. They are being given a few weeks,
a few days, a month maybe if they aggravate the judge, you
know, bad attitude, fail the attitude test.
And, as a result, they are just not crossing. You don't see
them crossing in Del Rio. The crossings in El Paso are down. In
Yuma, where you have the Streamline program in effect, the
illegal crossings are down. The local community supports this.
Enforcing existing law with largely existing resources
truly works. Is that all an accurate summation of what we see
with these numbers and the work that is being done in these
sectors where the law is being enforced?
Chief Fisher. Mr. Culberson, there are two areas where I
first want to start; I do want to agree that consequences, and,
in particular, prosecution, is a key. I don't necessarily think
it is the key, and let me explain why.
One, when you look at comparing and contrasting data like
this--and this is something we were taking a hard look at over
this past year--there are a lot of other variables to take into
consideration. Places like Del Rio and others, when they
instituted the Operation Streamline, the levels of activity and
apprehensions were much lower than they were in Arizona. So you
are looking at different judicial districts. You are looking at
the capacity with jurisprudence to do that.
Mr. Culberson. Sure.
Chief Fisher. But there is another critical piece here that
we are looking at, as well. We have taken a look at about a
dozen different consequences that we have at our disposal
subsequent to an arrest. And instead of looking at each of
those programs and trying to figure out, well, which one has
the best recidivism rate, which one has the best re-
apprehension rate, what we decided to do is come up with what
is called a ``consequence delivery system.''
And what that does, very quickly, is it takes all, in a
particular area, all the consequences that are available to
CBP, and then we do an analysis of alternatives where we take a
look at schedule, performance, and cost and try to figure out
what we are trying to effect.
And, in all consequences, there are two primary things we
want to effect: One are the individuals, and two are the
criminal organizations. And, in doing so, Streamline may be a
key that we would want to, in specific populations, go forward
to the U.S. attorney for prosecutions. But, in other cases, we
may not because of the outcomes that we are trying to achieve.
Mr. Culberson. What other consequences are available to
you? I mean, the immigration court is a civil proceeding.
Chief Fisher. Right.
Mr. Culberson. So the only real consequence--and I have
looked at this closely--that really has an impact is the
criminal prosecution. Then you have these guys 10-printed. If
they come back, it is up to 2 years. They don't come back, you
don't get repeat customers, if it is a criminal prosecution.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir. But, again, not all Streamline
cases and dispositions are the same. In other words, in
Arizona, for instance, the sentencing under their Streamline
cases--and they are doing 70 cases per day in Arizona, but the
time served is 3 to 4 days. So when you really look at the
consequence, it is not the program, it is what is happening as
a result of that consequence.
So, one in particular would be the Operations Against
Smugglers Initiative for Safety and Security, also known as
OASISS, where we take the case, we take the principal, we take
the material witnesses, and we develop the case for prosecution
of smuggling in Mexico, and we turn over that case and the
principals to PGR [the General Prosecutor] in Mexico. We have
seen very low recidivism rates when we do that.
So, again, it is based on the outcome and what we are
trying to effect, not just putting people into programs for the
sake of the program.
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Ms. Roybal-Allard.

OFFICER CONDUCT AND INTEGRITY ASSURANCE

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Mr. Fisher, I have been deeply troubled
by the long and growing list of Border Patrol misconduct cases.
According to the LA Times, over the past 2 years at least five
Border Patrol agents have been accused or convicted of sex
crimes, including one individual who assaulted an immigrant
mother while her children sat in a nearby car.
Last May, an immigrant detainee died after being beaten and
shocked with a Taser four times. In June, an agent admitted to
assaulting an immigrant at a processing center, while later
that month an unarmed 15-year-old boy was shot and killed in El
Paso by Border Patrol personnel. And, in September, an agent
went on trial for torturing a 16-year-old suspected drug
smuggler.
My question is, what steps is the Border Patrol taking to
correct this pattern of wrongdoing? For example, what changes
are being made in regards to the training and the supervision
of the Border Patrol so that these things don't happen?
Chief Fisher. Yes, ma'am. And we take every allegation very
seriously, as you well imagine. And, certainly, we turn those
cases, when they are brought to our attention--which, a vast
majority of those cases come to our attention first, and we
turn those over either to the Office of Inspector General, to
ICE's OPR, or to our own Internal Affairs.

OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY

The specific things that we have put into place over this
last year include, but are not limited to, the following: One
is recognizing that even our CBP Internal Affairs Office, you
know, we have backlogs in terms of background investigations
and reinvestigations for current Border Patrol agents. So we
are looking to get that backlog down.
And we have also instituted over the years polygraphing
employees. And we are also going to be hiring more polygraph
examiners to be able to ensure that integrity, first and
foremost, stays within our organization that we are very proud
of.
We are also looking at areas where we--when we had doubled
the size of the organization are taking a look at supervisory
ratios in specific locations and making those supervisory ratio
adjustments, where appropriate.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. Well, that brings me to the second
question, and I think, in part, that you answered it. Because
one of the concerns that was raised--and this was by Senator
Mark Pryor of Arkansas--was that, initially, in the rush to
hire Border Patrol agents, that hiring standards were lowered
and that barely 15 percent of Customs and Border Protection
applicants undergo polygraph tests, and, of those, 60 percent
were rejected by the agency because they failed the polygraph
or were not qualified for the job.
So are you saying, then, that you are now improving your
hiring standards and the rate of the polygraph tests and
background investigations, everything that needs to be done in
order to ensure that those who are working at the border meet
the standards that we all want is, in fact, now going to be
implemented?
Chief Fisher. Well, the standards to increase, again, the
background investigations and the reinvestigations, that is
accurate. We are looking to increase that, to be able to reduce
the backlog, and, also, to do more polygraphs than we have done
in the past.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. And about existing Border Patrol,
in that same Washington Post story, it says that the number of
CBP corruption investigations opened by the inspector general
climbed from 245 in 2006 to more than 770 this year, and that
corruption cases at its sister agency, the U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, rose from 66 to more than 220 over that
same period.
So is something also being done to prevent those kinds of
things from happening, not only in terms of the initial hiring
and the background checks, but also in terms of the supervision
and whatever else--you would know better than me--needs to take
place in order to ensure that these kinds of things don't
happen once folks are hired?
Chief Fisher. Yes. And, in particular, CBP, with ICE and
the Office of Inspector General, have worked this year. You
know, the first of it is to try to, you know, broaden out and
try to define the problem. You know, how many of the
allegations, for instance, that may be contained in a lot of
those numbers, how many of those were legitimate allegations?
What happened with the investigation?
So, as we get more information and share that information
between DHS and the Inspector General, I think we are going to
be able to make better judgments and informed decisions in
terms of what we can do to minimize those numbers in the
future.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay.
Mr. Winkowski, did you want to----
Mr. Winkowski. Thank you. The only thing I would add is, in
my office, Field Operations, we have done a number of things. I
think the most important issue that we have done is we have
begun a process, what we call AMSCO, which is an office that
has highly specialized officers in it in headquarters, that
looks at the data.
So, for example, in Field Operations, everything we do in
Field Operations, we leave some type of electronic fingerprint.
So, whether we are processing you on the land border,
fingerprinting you, or making seizures, we are leaving
fingerprints.
And what we are doing and one of the things that has
enabled us to move forward is the vehicle primary client, which
was part of the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative
implementation, taking that data and asking questions: Why did
that officer take only 5 seconds to process an automobile? I
mean, typically, it is 45 seconds. Why didn't they run names?
We are being more proactive and going in there and looking at
these things and then raising those issues up to Internal
Affairs and the IG. So, we are being more proactive, rather
than sitting back and having others come in and say we have a
problem.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. Well, you know, we really
appreciate what a difficult job you have, and so, any way that
you feel that the committee can be helpful--I am speaking for
myself, but I am sure that is true of the other Members--we
really would appreciate that kind of input from you.
Mr. Winkowski. Thank you.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen.

DRUG INTERDICTION: DETECTION OF SUBMERSIBLES

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much.
I want to thank you individually and collectively for what
you do. I hope to have a greater appreciation for what you do.
I know you focused on interceptions of surface vessels,
aircraft that are involved in drug smuggling. What about,
Admiral, the use of submersibles, or submarines?
I have read about it--we have all read about it for the
last couple of years. I assume they are cartel-owned
submersibles. What are we doing to interdict them? How many are
there out there? What are the loads--what sort of loads are
they bringing in? And how do you prosecute them?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, I will take that, and it is
several areas. One, clearly, the challenge is vexing once it is
on the high seas. You know, both Coast Guard and our DOD
partners have a significant resource challenge tracking, first
detecting, then monitoring movement of a fully submersible.
So, as I said earlier, it really starts with the
relationships. And so our relationships with Colombia, with the
Colombian National Police, detecting these as they are being
assembled, detecting these at the launch point, the most
critical point, is to get them at the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. With all due respect, with all of the
assets we have at our disposal?
Admiral Zukunft. These will operate over literally several
million square miles.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah, but----
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, sir. And----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I assume they have signatures.
Admiral Zukunft. Well, the challenges is, when they are
fully submersible and they are not emitting any electromagnetic
signature, it becomes----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So how many have we intercepted? Maybe
you can----
Admiral Zukunft. We have been able to--I don't have the
exact numbers of the semi-submersibles that we have detected.
We do have legislation in place where just moving one of these,
in itself, is a violation of U.S. law.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So you are telling me that the
Colombians, from what I can gather, have intercepted some of
these submersibles, right?
Admiral Zukunft. That is correct. There was one----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But we are, to some extent, beholden to
their goodwill? Colombia has been, actually, a very good
partner in that regard. So we are beholden to the goodwill of
countries that are home to these cartels?
Admiral Zukunft. Yeah, again, when these exist in the
sovereign shores--and these are in largely what I would call
ungoverned territories. These are in the jungles in the eastern
Pacific----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What ever happened to the Monroe
Doctrine?
Admiral Zukunft. They will carry upwards of 10 metric tons
of cocaine. And that is what we have seen----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, give us some good news on the
Committee--if that is allowable, Mr. Chairman--how much would
you characterize we have seized through the utilization of
these types of vessels?
Admiral Zukunft. I can get back to you with those exact
numbers. I know, when I was commanding the 11th District just
more than a year and a half ago, we seized five of these and
more than 40 metric----
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Five out of what, 505 or----
Admiral Zukunft. Out of the ones we detected.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. Well, have we made any
estimates as to how many of these----
Admiral Zukunft. We have not. And we had a recent
interdiction, as I said, about 2 months ago of one before it
was able to launch.

OFFICER FOREIGN LANGUAGE SKILLS

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just a last question. Throughout your
workforce--and we give you credit for having a tough job, a
dangerous job--linguists, a bilingual workforce, do you have a
full complement of the people you need? Generally speaking, can
you provide a brief response?
Mr. Winkowski. Yes----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. No lacking of people who can immediately
identify----
Mr. Winkowski. No, we have, as a matter of fact, a program
in place that, depending on the level of their ability to speak
a foreign language, we can pay up to a 5 percent award for
that. So, the vast majority are Spanish speakers, but we also
have a whole cadre of individuals that speak Asian languages
and Middle Eastern languages, and oftentimes we use those
officers to help out our investigators and others.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, no lack of information or the
ability of people to download it and understand it because of
linguistic issues?
Mr. Winkowski. Right. No.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all.

BORDER SECURITY: RESOURCES AND RESULTS

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Frelinghuysen.
Let me shift now to a little bit different topic in one
regard, but still keeping within the overall theme, the
operational control and resources.
Let me direct this to you, Chief Fisher. I know you are at
the front of the table, and it seems like you get directed most
of the questions, but this question would probably be more
aptly asked going toward you.
The Border Patrol has dramatically grown in the past few
years. At the same time, we have not achieved operational
control of the border.
Let's talk about resources more specifically. What is the
right mix of technology, infrastructure, and people to achieve
operational control? And how many agents will you need?
Chief Fisher. Mr. Chairman, over the last year or so, one
of the things that I had asked the field commanders to assess
was just that.
As of the last few years, we have been in what is called a
gain mode. We needed the resources. We had no idea what the
numbers would be, in terms of miles of fence, for instance. We
didn't know what the technology could bring to us, and we don't
know how many Border Patrol agents we needed. We just knew we
needed more.
And so what we are doing, now that we have the fence and we
have seen what that has been able to do to us, predominantly in
the urban areas, we are getting more and more technology, and
more mobile technology, which is really going to be critical.
And now that we have a workforce of 21,000--I had mentioned
earlier about our doctrine approach. What we want to be able to
assess is not whether we need more Border Patrol agents across
some linear line in some astronomical number because that, in
and of itself, is not going to achieve, whether by our
definition, operational control nor any levels of operational
security.
And so what we are doing now is trying to figure out, with
those deployments, what have we seen as a result of those
deployments? And, in particular, how can we use and deploy
those assets differently to achieve the same end state?
As a quick example, when I was a Border Patrol agent many
years ago, a sensor would go off, I had no idea if that was a
cow, if that was people, if it was backpackers. And so, what I
did, on my own, I would have to get out of a vehicle with a
flashlight, kind of run through the mesquite trees, catch some
sign, track it. And then, all of a sudden, I would come upon a
group. Maybe there was dope; maybe there wasn't.
And so, what we are doing now is--that doctrine is a lot
different than we are training Border Patrol agents. Now we
have the ability not only to detect but also to identify and
classify that threat. So instead of sending the Border Patrol
agent in there, what is our concept of operations for deploying
a UAS, for instance, to make that identification and
classification? And instead of having Mike Fisher with his
flashlight go out there, how about we have a six-man team in an
air-mobile concept going out there and effectively making that
arrest? Increased certainty of apprehension in a consistent
manner gives us a higher level of border security and helps us
even within our own operational control definitions.
Those numbers that you had asked for specifically in terms
of Border Patrol agents, I don't have that information for you
right now. But that is our attempt right now as we are looking
at the strategy and how we redeploy those resources to get that
level of operational control and border security that everybody
expects.
Mr. Aderholt. Of course, you know this Subcommittee wants
to get you the resources you need to do your job.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. But, of course, throwing money at the border
without a clear understanding of how that funding buys you
capability and makes the border secure is something different.
Very simply, we have been asking for nearly 4 years for the
Border Patrol's mission requirements and how the technology
infrastructure proposed meets those needs.
With the Secretary's announcement on the new Arizona border
technology plan, we again have requested the basis for this
change. How does your plan specifically meet your mission
requirements?
Chief Fisher. Very succinctly, sir, I will say that part of
the analysis of alternatives in the Secretary's assessment, we
were part of that, within the Border Patrol and, certainly,
CBP. And what we are looking at doing is taking commercial,
off-the-shelf technology and using that, specific to the
terrain, specific to the threats and vulnerabilities that we
see on the border. And our field commanders help assess that
for us.
So, as we start rolling out mobile surveillance systems
with radar capabilities, daytime/nighttime cameras, seismic
sensors, increased detection and identification and
classification systems, those levels and those deployments are
different than, for instance, building the Block 1 systems that
we have seen under SBInet in Tucson and Ajo.
Those systems are currently working for us, in terms of
giving us a broader situational awareness. But the assessment
piece also wanted to take into consideration, to what extent
did we want to build all of that across the 2,000 miles of
border? And so, what we came in--and based on the field
commander's recommendations and, certainly, my concurrence in
looking at the border, is having more of a mobile capability so
that we can respond to those threats, should they materialize.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, again, we want to support you, but we
need your help. I would like your assurance to this
Subcommittee that we will promptly receive thorough
justifications for the hundreds of millions of dollars'
investment you have requested?
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. And, in particular, how the technology
proposed provides the best possible security at the lowest
possible cost to meet Border Patrol needs.
Chief Fisher. I will take that back as an action item, Mr.
Chairman, and provide you what I am able to.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. I appreciate that.
[The information follows:]

Chairman Aderholt: . . . in particular, how that technology
proposed provides the best possible security at the lowest possible
cost to meet Border Patrol needs.
Chief Fisher: I will take that back as an action item, Mr.
Chairman, and provide you what I am able to.
Response: The overarching operational requirement is the need to
achieve awareness of border activity through surveillance and detection
to facilitate apprehension. By addressing this operational requirement,
the Alternative Southwest Border Technology Plan seeks to enhance
mission needs/mission criteria: to Detect, Identify, Classify, Track,
and Respond/Resolve threats.
With the DHS Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) as supporting evidence,
CBP's Office of Border Patrol (OBP) convened a panel of field
operational subject matter experts from the Tucson and Yuma sectors.
These experts were tasked to determine what technologies were required
to achieve the field awareness and the probability of apprehension
needed in each of their areas.
OBP wanted to ensure that the field operational perspective and
expertise from each area were leveraged to provide the most viable
solution. These solutions are designed to fill the mission needs in
their respective operational environments.
The Homeland Security Studies and Analysis Institute, who conducted
the DHS AoA, briefed these field experts on the results of the AoA. The
OBP panel of subject matter experts, informed by the results of the AoA
and their detailed knowledge of the border areas and the threats to
those areas, conducted a mission analysis and subsequently developed a
detailed technology deployment plan for Arizona.

Mr. Price.

OFFICER CONDUCT AND INTEGRITY ASSURANCE: POLYGRAPHS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to develop a couple of previous lines of questioning
further with Chief Fisher and Assistant Commissioner Winkowski,
if I might, the first having to do with the important efforts
to ensure the integrity of the CBP forces; and then, secondly,
some further questions about the hiring, using supplemental
funds and hiring in general.
CBP testified last year that the Mexican drug cartels had
had some success in infiltrating Federal law enforcement
agencies along the border. There had been cases of CBP officers
assisting drug cartels, letting vehicles pass.
Ms. Roybal-Allard raised earlier the rather alarming 60
percent polygraph rejection rate that you are seeing with
current job applicants. That, of course, raises questions about
who might have been hired when you weren't regularly applying
polygraph screening. So how big a problem is this, in general?
There are some cases that are troubling, the case of Border
Patrol Agent Marcos Manzano, who was illegally harboring a
previously deported felon who was distributing narcotics from
the agent's home. It took 15 months from the time FBI received
the allegations until that agent was arrested.
Now, we need to tie this, I think, to your plans for the
coming year and to your budget request. Your 2012 budget
request includes an additional $26 million for CBP integrity
programs--polygraphs, background investigations, periodic
reinvestigations--the idea being to progress toward the
requirements of the Anti-Border Corruption Act.
Now, in the past, CBP has not been able to polygraph all
its new applicants. In fiscal year 2008, only 5 percent
received a polygraph. I understand that figure has now grown to
around 25 percent. It seems clear to me that polygraphs and
background investigations are critical to make sure that you
have reliable employees.
What will that $26 million buy? If that increase in your
budget is enacted, will you be able to polygraph all CBP
applicants before they come on board? And then, other than
increasing funding for integrity programs, what actions have
you taken and do you plan to take to rout out unreliable
personnel?
Chief Fisher. Sir, our intent is to polygraph as many
applicants as we can prior to bringing them on board and
training them as Border Patrol agents.
And I will also tell you that, beyond just the polygraph
and the background investigations that we had mentioned, the
other thing within our organization----
Mr. Price. Well, excuse me, but I caught the ambiguity in
that answer to Ms. Roybal-Allard, and that is why I asked it
more precisely. What does ``as many as you can'' mean? What
kind of assurances can you give?
And there had to be some basis for that $26 million
request. No doubt it is not just about polygraphs. But what
kind of assurances can you give that we are really going to
move to much higher and more reliable rates of screening?
Chief Fisher. Well, sir, for clarification, it is my
understanding that we are building capacity to be able to do
polygraphs up to 100 percent, with the increase in the
examiners and with the money that was appropriated.
Mr. Price. Yes, sir. Would either of you want to elaborate
on further measures, either those that are indicated in this
budget or efforts that are otherwise under way?
Mr. Winkowski. Several thoughts, Congressman Price.
I think the polygraph program, as proposed and in law now,
is a step in the right direction. I really believe that the CBP
officers, the Border Patrol agents, the ICE agents, Coast
Guard, we are national security positions, and we have to be
treated as such.
And I think polygraph is good. It is a good start, from the
standpoint of all new--my understanding and Commissioner
Bersin's goal, as I understand it, is that every new applicant,
whether Border Patrol or a CBP officer, would be polygraphed,
and that would be part of that $26 million.
I think the other thing, and I mentioned it earlier, was
that we need to take, I think, a more proactive, a more
aggressive approach from the standpoint of using the data that
we have out there. You know, there is a lot of opportunity
there, and I think we have to keep in mind that we have this
small group. We have, you know, 60,000 employees in CBP, and we
are talking about this very, very small group. And we have
fallen short. There is no doubt about that. And one corruption
case is one too many.
But I think, as an office, we need to be more proactive,
more forward-leaning from the standpoint, at least in the field
operations area, of using the data, using the processing data
from the standpoint of data integrity and from the standpoint
of looking at how those data are used, how that process is
taking place real-time out on the line, and asking questions
about it. As I mentioned earlier, why did three cars just go by
and nobody was queried?
We have that capability now. And we have an office that has
been established in which that is part of its function. But I
think we need to be much more forward-leaning.
And I personally believe that, you know, polygraphing all
new applicants is important. And I think it is also important
that we institute some type of a random system from the
standpoint of polygraph, if we are going to look at ourselves
as national security positions.

BORDER SECURITY: OFFICER HIRINGS

Mr. Price. Thank you.
Let me move quickly to this question of hiring, using the
supplemental funds. You both gave partial answers to that
earlier and helped us understand what seems, on the face of it,
certainly, seems to be a slow pace of hiring.
I wonder, Chief, if you can elaborate and let us know of
those thousand Border Patrol agents, what portion will be on
board by the end of the fiscal year. I am talking specifically
here, of course, of the ones funded in the 2010 supplemental
appropriation.
And Commissioner, the same for the 250 CBP officers.
Finally, let me just raise an issue, and you may need to
respond in more detail for the record. There are questions,
again, on the face of it anyway, about the allocation of these
officers. The plan that you have submitted, the expenditure
plan, indicated 500 new Border Patrol hires would be deployed
in the Tucson sector. The remaining 500 will be part of a
mobile team disbursed into the largest Border Patrol sectors--
El Paso, San Diego, and the Rio Grande Valley--and will be used
to rapidly respond to threats and intelligence-driven
operations.
How is that determined? How is the deployment of these
mobile response team members determined?
El Paso has a very low apprehension rate, yet you are
deploying up to 187 additional agents there. Rio Grande is
getting none, although your expenditure plan had indicated it
would receive some. El Centro sector, which has the second-
highest percent of apprehensions, receives none.
It just, on the face of it, doesn't seem to add up, or at
least there is kind of a gap in terms of the rationale. Could
you say what you can say orally here and then perhaps elaborate
for the record?
Mr. Aderholt. Yeah, if you could briefly answer that, and
then we are going to go on to Mr. Carter.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir. The 500 of the 1,000 that are
earmarked for the mobile response teams [MRTs] along those four
corridors that you identified--although they would be
stationed, because we have to put the billets somewhere--are
going to be on those four locations. The intent is to have that
capability to be able to move them either within that sector or
within the corridors to broaden their resource capability
outside of that location.
For instance, El Centro, if El Centro has a requirement,
increased threat or activity or hotspot, the MRTs in San Diego
could be moved over there up to whatever level of additional
requirements they would need a lot cheaper than me assigning
agents from across the Southwest border over to El Centro. So I
am putting them across the Southwest border and for the primary
corridors on the basis of threat. They also can be redeployed
outside of those corridors if need be.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Price. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask, before you turn to
Mr. Carter, for a quick answer to my main question, which had
to do with where we could expect these hiring levels to be at
the end of this year? From each of you, if you don't mind.
Chief Fisher. Sir, we are on track by September of this
year to have 21,370 Border Patrol agents. That does include the
1,000 additional based on the supplemental funds.
Mr. Price. Does or does not?
Mr. Fisher. It does, sir.
Mr. Price. It does include.
Mr. Fisher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Winkowski. And we will have the 250 on, by the end of
the fiscal year.
Mr. Price. By the end of the fiscal year.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Carter.

MARITIME SECURITY: COAST GUARD PRESENCE IN TEXAS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think I'd better start off by saying I may have come off
a little harsh last time. I am an old trial judge, and some of
you, at least, have dealt with judges in the past. But I want
you to know that I am a friend of every agency you represent. I
am a huge supporter of the Coast Guard. I have sat on the
border with the Border Patrol in the dark. I have worked with
all of your agencies and highly appreciate you, and I am on
your side. I think you have a tough job, and I think you can do
the job. And I asked the questions in a spirit of trying to get
the job done.
Now, to shift to a couple of questions. Admiral, I got a
call last week from Texas State Senator Ogden on behalf of my
Governor, Governor Rick Perry, asking if the Coast Guard would
consider putting a permanent presence on our two lakes on the
Rio Grande. And, even better, they would love to see you have a
presence at least from the mouth of the Brownsville all the way
up to the dam.
If we can provide the resources and any authorization
language to do so, would that be a mission that the Coast Guard
could accomplish?
Admiral Zukunft. Well, certainly, we are seeing what impact
our surge operations have. Again, about each quarter, we send
teams to each lake for about a 1-week period to see what
impacts that has. You know, is this a transitory threat or is
this one that is going to be there for perpetuity?
And you did hear Admiral Papp say that, in order to source
that within our base right now, we would have to rob from one
mission set to do another. So, if this is clearly the will of
our Nation, it would take a permanent presence, to include the
infrastructure, to operate----
Mr. Carter. I would hope it is the will of our Nation, but
I can guarantee it is the will of the State of Texas, okay? And
those folks count on me.
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, sir.

BORDER SECURITY: LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Carter. So I will be in touch with the Coast Guard and
work with you on getting the additional resources and
authorization language, if anything.
Gentlemen, Texas cattle ranchers are the largest cattle-
producing State in the Union. We had 14 percent of the U.S.
Beef cattle production in 2010. Mexico is a huge beef producer,
and they purchase a whole lot of our beef. We swap cattle with
Mexico, about 1.2 million head of cattle a year. And this is
the normal commerce that goes on.
In addition, our Rio Grande Valley is one of the highest
crop-production areas for truck-farming-type crops in the
entire country, outside of California.
We are getting reports from our farmers and our ranchers
that they are frightened and scared. Many of the ranchers are
reporting that the Border Patrol has pulled back a mile from
the river, in some instances, leaving them where they feel like
they are out in ``no man's land''.
Our Texas ag commissioner has just produced data. It came
up yesterday, in fact--a Web site called
www.protectyourtexasborder.com. I would recommend you go look
at that. They show some of these ranchers and then, with night-
vision, showing you the invasion of their ranches.
The irrigation farmers are saying they can't turn the water
on at night in the Rio Grande Valley because they have been
warned that if they flood the fields when they are coming
across, they are going to kill them and their families.
They are frightened on the border. And, you know,
agriculture is the number-two employer and number-two part of
the economy of Texas, oil being number one. And we desperately
need something to protect those folks.
And we are perfectly willing to give you more resources, we
are perfectly willing to give the border sheriffs more
resources, and local law enforcement more resources, whatever
you think will help allow the citizens of Texas to live safely
on that border.
And I will tell you, from having this year visited the
State of Arizona, God bless the people of Arizona. They don't
even have a river. And I don't know how they are surviving. But
I am right now talking about things that have been asked of me
by my fellow Texans.
Any place we can give resources to other law enforcement or
to you, I am willing to do my very best to get that. And I need
you to tell me how the cooperation is with locals. If it is
enhancing border sheriffs and deputies from California to the
Gulf of Mexico, we are willing to do it. You tell me what you
need.
So, do you have any suggestions? How about local law
enforcement? More deputies backing you up, does that help?
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir. Not only does it help, it is
critical to our mission to be able to do that. As a matter of
fact, with Operation Stonegarden grants that the Department
hands out, that helps them to be able to augment the missions.
And, again, it is not, you know, having them stand side-by-
side along the river, for instance; it is recognizing, beyond
sharing of the information, deploying in high-risk areas, for
them to be able to use their jurisdictional authority to have
the same impact and help us in our ability to disrupt and
dismantle those organizations.
Mr. Carter. Stonegarden is for overtime pay, as I
understand it. And some of these are really small--and I
visited with some of them in Arizona, and I visited with them
in Texas. Some of them are really small departments with big
counties, as I know you are all aware of. And they need to hire
more deputies, as well as to give overtime. Some of those guys
are working a lot of overtime.
Chief Fisher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. So I am working on getting something to help
them hire new deputies, as well as this great program,
Stonegarden, which I thoroughly approve of.
Mr. Winkowski. Congressman Carter, don't forget the ports
of entry, from the standpoint of what the deputies do down
there for us also. They are working outbound operations. We
partake in the Stonegarden. If you go down to Hidalgo--I just
met with the chief of police down there--they have a strong
presence. They are helping us make millions of dollars in
seizures every year. So let's not forget the ports of entry
also.

IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT AGENTS: SECURITY POSTURE IN MEXICO

Mr. Carter. Well, we think that they are a good backup to a
great program that you are working diligently. And I will
testify before any court under oath that the work that the
Border Patrolman was doing in the dark when I was out there
with him that night, you can't pay people enough to do that
job. It is a terrible job.
And, by the way, I have another question real quickly. ICE
agents are getting killed in Mexico, and they are unarmed. And
I asked this of the head of the Department, and I didn't get an
answer. I might not get an answer today.
Are you the only unarmed American agents that go into
Mexico? Are the other agencies also unarmed, like the FBI, the
Drug Enforcement people and others? Are you the only ones that
are unarmed, or is everybody unarmed when they go into Mexico?
Mr. Dinkins. Sir, that is a great question. And rather than
discuss our security posture overseas in an open forum, I would
love to sit down and we could brief you.
Mr. Carter. That is the answer I got last time.
Mr. Dinkins. I was wondering what answer----
Mr. Carter. Yeah, that is exactly the same answer your boss
gave. Okay, well, let's discuss it because----
Mr. Dinkins [continuing]. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. I don't like the idea--because San
Luis Port of Sea is not the border. San Luis Port of Sea is
deep in Mexico. And for those guys to get ambushed deep in
Mexico and all they can fight them with is a smile, it is not a
good place to be.
Thank you, all of you. God bless you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
And thank each of you for appearing before the Subcommittee
today and providing your insights on the Southwest border and
the operations there.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks and I have said, we
have always made operational needs a priority in this
Subcommittee. And we take that very seriously, as I know all of
you do, as well. The safety of the men and women who stand on
the front lines are a great concern to us.
Before we close today, I want to hear from each of you, is
there anything that you need, issues or resources that we need
to address, to do everything possible to keep your people safe
in the field?
Chief Fisher. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to respond to that question.
And I don't have anything right off the bat to respond to,
other than, thank you and your staff for their responsiveness
in helping us understand what the requirements are and what the
end state looks like, in terms of a secure border. Your staff
has been very good, so thank you, sir.
Mr. Winkowski. The only thing I would add is just a couple
of issues. You know, we received quite a bit of money under the
ARRA, with $100 million for our NII equipment that is out there
at the ports of entry, as well as over $700 million for
improvements on ports of entry on the Northern border as well
as Southern border.
I do think that we need to keep our eye on the ball. We
have had growth in Field Operations. But, again, we are a
unique animal, in that we have this dual mission of
facilitating legitimate trade and travel and also making sure
that dangerous people and dangerous things don't come in this
country.
And, as we continue to open up new ports of entry--I
mentioned Donna and Anzalduas in Texas--we need to make sure
that the resources come with that. Oftentimes, they don't. And
we have to keep our eye on that, as well as a place like San
Ysidro. We are going to go from 24 booths to 63, and we have to
staff those.
You know, there is a big economic engine, and you all are
mentioning that today, that happens at that port of entry. And
I think we need to continue to give you the right matrix, we
need to continue to give you the right data, we need to
continue to, I think, present our case in that regard.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. And our staff will follow up with
that.
Mr. Dinkins. And, sir, I would just like to follow up. I
want to thank you, as well. I mean, I think ICE has really come
into its own. What I asked for and we have been working with
the committee on is really to ensure that we maintain that
momentum in moving forward into the next future budget years.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you.
Admiral.
Admiral Zukunft. And, Chairman, I am just thankful to the
Committee. You know, on Friday, we decommissioned a 67-year-old
cutter in Ketchikan, Alaska, the ACUSHNET. Unfortunately, there
is another 67-year-old cutter that now owns the distinction of
being the oldest cutter in our fleet. And it is the crews of
those ships that are keeping us ready. And so, when I say we
are on life support, that is, you know, it is really on the
backs of our people right now that are keeping us ready for
today and tomorrow.
But the fact that you have supported our recapitalization
of our fleet, that will better posture us as we look at the
Southwest border, not just today, but tomorrow as well. So, to
the committee, I am thankful for your support.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank each of you for your candor this
morning.
And the hearing is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I N D E X

----------
Page
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)........................     1
Administrative Violations and Removal............................    50
Agents Killed....................................................    41
Alternatives to Detention........................................48, 51
Biography: Morton, John..........................................    27
Biometric Exit...................................................    56
Cost Savings.....................................................    28
Criminal Aliens..................................................    33
Detention Bed Space:
Cost.........................................................    32
Specifics....................................................    40
Executive Office for Immigration Review..........................    49
Federal Immigration Law: Enforcement.............................    46
Inspector General Report.........................................    48
Intensive Supervision Appearance Program.........................    53
Jurisdiction.....................................................    53
Opening Statement:
Assistant Secretary Morton...................................    12
Chairman Aderholt............................................     1
Ranking Member Price.........................................     9
Sanctuary Cities.................................................    46
Secure Communities...............................................    37
Profiling....................................................    55
U.S.-Mexico Cooperation..........................................    38
Vetting of Counterparts..........................................    39
Visa Security Units..............................................    57
Re-Entries.......................................................42, 52
Removal Operations...............................................40, 54

Transportation Security Administration (TSA).....................   195
Advanced Imaging Technology...............................214, 215, 234
Procurements.................................................   217
Safety.......................................................   216
Training Requirements........................................   220
Air Cargo Security.............................................219, 249
Aviation Security Fees...........................................   214
Behavior Detection Program.......................................   234
Biography: Pistole, John.........................................   212
Biometric Identification.........................................   235
Collective Bargaining................................213, 222, 224, 251
Opening Statement:
Administrator Pistole........................................   205
Chairman Aderholt............................................   195
Ranking Member Price.........................................   201
Passenger Screening:
Identifying High-Risk Travelers..............................   226
Profiling....................................................   228
Private Screening................................................   230
Personnel....................................................   223
Secure Flight Program..........................................213, 252
Screening Operations.............................................   249
Transit Security Grants..........................................   221
Trusted Traveler Program.........................................   216
Expedited Screening..........................................   222
Transportation Security Officer Salaries.........................   229
VIPR Teams.......................................................   235

Southwest Border Enforcement.....................................   439
Air Interdiction.................................................   486
Border Security:
Apprehensions and Prosecutions...............................   487
Border Patrol Agent Death in Arizona.........................   484
Border Patrol Agents & CBP Officers..........................   480
Local Law Enforcement........................................   506
Measures of Progress.........................................   475
Officer Hirings..............................................   501
Resources & Results..........................................   497
Tucson Sector................................................   482
Unified Command Structure....................................   484
Drug Interdiction:
Detection of Submersibles....................................   493
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agents: Security Posture in
Mexico.........................................................   507
Maritime Security:
Coast Guard Presence in Texas................................   505
Office of Professional Responsibility........................   492
Officer Conduct & Integrity Assurance............................   491
Polygraph....................................................   499
Officer Foreign Language Skills..................................   497
Opening Statement:
Admiral Zukunft..............................................   454
Assistant Commissioner Winkowski.............................   451
Associate Director Dinkins...................................   453
Chairman Aderholt............................................   439
Chief Fisher.................................................   450
Ranking Member Price.........................................   446
Stopgap Funding, Impact of.....................................479, 481
Witness Biographies..............................................   469


