- DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

?

DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND
URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
TOM LATHAM, Iowa, Chairman
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              ED PASTOR, Arizona
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Dena Baron, Mike Friedberg, Sara Peters,
Doug Disrud, and Brian Barnard,
Subcommittee Staff

________

PART 4
Page
Department of Transportation FY 2013 Budget......................    1
Department of Housing and Urban Development......................   45
Department of Transportation--Major Modes FY 2013 Budget Request.  207
HUD and DOT Management Issues....................................  273
Outside Witness Testimony........................................  409

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
Part 4

TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
FOR 2013
?

DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION

________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND
URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
TOM LATHAM, Iowa, Chairman
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              ED PASTOR, Arizona
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Dena Baron, Mike Friedberg, Sara Peters,
Doug Disrud, and Brian Barnard,
Subcommittee Staff

________

PART 4
Page
Department of Transportation FY 2013 Budget......................    1
Department of Housing and Urban Development......................   45
Department of Transportation--Major Modes FY 2013 Budget Request.  207
HUD and DOT Management Issues....................................  273
Outside Witness Testimony........................................  409

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-711                     WASHINGTON : 2012

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, HUD, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
FOR 2013

----------

Thursday, March 8, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION--FY 2013 BUDGET

WITNESSES

HON. RAY LAHOOD, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
CHRIS BERTRAM, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUDGET AND PROGRAMS, DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION

Chairman Latham's Opening Statement

Mr. Latham. The subcommittee will come to order. We want to
welcome the Secretary of Transportation, and our good friend,
Mr. Ray LaHood, here this morning, and we want to say how
pleased we all are that your son is back safely.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. We all hope they have a wonderful honeymoon,
finally. Much delayed.
Secretary LaHood. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. That is great, great news.
The Secretary will be testifying on behalf of DOT's fiscal
year 2013 Budget Request and we look forward to his testimony.
This year, we will have a short hearing schedule and hopefully
an early markup schedule, right, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Rogers. Absolutely.
Mr. Latham. We are not able to schedule separate DOT modes
for individual hearings. However, we are providing Members the
opportunity to question the Secretary today. We will also hear
from a panel of DOT administrators, for highways, transit,
rail, and aviation on Thursday, March 22. This year, the
department is requesting authority to spend almost $74 billion
in fiscal year 2013. Last year, if you remember, we went round
and round on when we would see DOT's legislative proposal and
pay-for to fund the fiscal year 2012 program. Great debate went
into what was going to hopefully be a successful re-
authorization bill before the trust fund went broke. Like the
saying goes, just when you thought it could not get any worse,
sure enough, it does get worse. We seem to be at a crossroads,
literally, with the future of investment in transportation,
infrastructure, and financial solvency hanging in the balance.
So far, we are not seeing any proposals in terms of length,
costs, financing, or policy that will pass both the House and
the Senate. And I do not think the administration's proposal of
using the OCO funds, making transportation funds mandatory, or
the requirement that livability be used as a criterion for
awarding funds, will garner the required votes either. We need
to find middle ground for everyone. There are a lot of people
out there who want to see a robust, long-term transportation
bill, as we all do, but we need to find a way to pay for it.
Right now, the mandatory programs are the largest
contributors to our budget programs. Without a long-term,
realistic, or even sensible funding stream, I do not know how
we can really advocate for moving transportation over to the
mandatory side of the ledger. A lot of that spending is where
the problem is to begin with and to add more over there would
not be wise. A lot of Members looking to reduce spending put
eliminating the OCO funds at the top of their list of things
that we can do to reduce the budget.
I am looking forward to a lively debate on all things
related to the budget, both current and proposed. Again,
welcome, Mr. Secretary. It is nice to have you back.
Before we go to your opening statement, I will recognize
the gentleman from Massachusetts. This will be his last hearing
with the secretary, but Mr. Olver is recognized.

Ranking Member Olver's Opening Statement

Mr. Olver. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I, too, join
with the Chairman in your joy of having your son back.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Olver. One of the things that is possible for a ranking
member, you do not have to get quite as deeply into the details
as the chairman of this committee, so, I kind of take, I think,
a more generalized view.
Mr. Secretary, it is a pleasure to have you here, really,
today. The department's budget request reflects the ambitious
vision needed to ensure America's competitiveness in the global
economy through job-creating investments in our Nation's
transportation infrastructure. Overall, your budget request
provides structural guidelines for a robust, 6-year, $476
billion Surface Transportation Program, and that is what we
need. It reflects a growing consensus among partisan
professionals that increased public investment in our
transportation system as needed to maintain an efficient
foundation for our economy.
As you are well aware, DOT's most recent conditions and
performance report quantified the investment gap to maintain
our current system of roads and bridges and good repair at $27
billion and an annual gap of $96 billion to expand the system
to meet the needs of a population which continues to grow and
will continue to grow at 9 or 10 percent per decade.
For transit, repair backlog is nearly $78 billion.
Unfortunately, the House Reauthorization Proposal does not meet
the challenge. The threat of inaction, the uncertainty of
short-term extensions, or worse a lapse, disrupting state
planning activities and putting the upcoming construction
season in jeopardy, not only allows our infrastructure deficit
to increase, but it comes at a time when the unemployment rate
within the construction sector stands at 18 percent.
I am pleased that the administration continues its
leadership in advocating for a 21st century passenger rail
network. The $2.5 billion in requests for rail programs and
your commitment to the TIGER Grant Program reflects an
understanding that all users of all modes benefit from an
interconnected network that increases transportation options,
and that an all-of-the-above strategy is needed to meet the
transportation needs of population expected to grow by another
100 million people by 2050.
In addition, I am pleased to see that the 2013 budget
remains committed to the development of a next-gen air traffic
control system. It is clearly a complex management undertaking,
but I believe it is vital to efficiently utilizing our
airspace, reducing congestion, improving safety, and minimizing
aviation's environmental footprint.
Finally, the department must remain vigilant when it comes
to the agency's core safety mission. From day one, you embraced
this responsibility for all modes and specifically have made
raising awareness of the dangers of distracted driving a
personal crusade, and I appreciate that. That has become more
and more important. Your pipeline safety reform initiative
would add newer inspectors to provide oversight of interstate
and intrastate pipeline facilities. I believe the budget
request you submitted is robust and presents a strong vision
for how we tackle our evolving transportation challenges.
So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Chairman Rogers' Opening Statement

Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen.
We have the honor to have the chairman of the full
committee here, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, Ray, welcome back to your own turf here.
Secretary LaHood. Good morning. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. We are glad to see you here and we are
delighted about your son's return safely from Egypt.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. When I came to the Congress before you, in
1981, discretionary spending was about two-thirds of the whole
budget. One-third was entitlements. Today, it is just the
reverse. Two-thirds of the money the government spends is for
entitlements, mandatory spending. We have no choice, the
Congress, in appropriating those funds. They are automatic. You
qualify for food stamps, you get them. If you qualify for
Social Security, you get it. It does not take an act of
Congress, it does not take an appropriation. So, we have no
real effective oversight of that spending and it is eating us
alive.
Last calendar year, when Republicans took over the
Congress, there had not been any appropriations bills passed
for that fiscal year and we were four months or so into that
year already. So, we had to pass a FY 2011 spending bill, which
took the form of a large omnibus, H.R. 1. We finally passed it.
And then we had to do FY 2012 because it was coming up that
October 1 and we finally passed that one in a large omnibus
bill, a huge undertaking. So, we passed two appropriations
bills in one year. I do not think that has ever been done. But
most importantly, we cut discretionary spending in both of
those years, in succession, which has not been done since World
War II. We actually cut spending two years in a row in this
hard atmosphere.
Discretionary spending is not the problem now, it is the
mandatory, it is the entitlements, it is two-thirds of all the
money we spend. We borrow 42 cents of every dollar we spend,
most of it from China. We cannot go on like this. We have to
wrestle this thing to the ground and mandatory entitlement
spending is something we cannot increase. It is growing
iteratively, it seems, already.
So, why am I preaching to you on this? Because we simply
cannot afford to add any more money to the mandatory side of
the budget. That is where we have to fight to lower that
spending, and as we try to pass some of a bill here to fund
highway construction and the like, we have got to figure out a
way to keep that out of mandatory.
Now, none of us singly have the answer, including Mr.
Secretary, I do not think, to the problem of the diminishing
trust fund. We have got to figure that out, but no one has the
answer yet.
You have got a bushel load of problems that you have taken
on. We congratulate you on your work, welcome you to the
committee, and look forward to hearing from you.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and another sad day
and the last time Mr. Dicks will have a chance to visit with
the secretary of transportation here on their budget. So, we
welcome the gentleman from Washington.

Ranking Member Dicks' Opening Statement

Mr. Dicks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad to see the
subcommittee beginning consideration of the Fiscal Year 2013
Transportation HUD Appropriation Bill. This subcommittee funds
absolutely critical projects that equate to real, on the ground
jobs which play a crucial role in putting Americans back to
work.
Secretary LaHood, it is always good to see you and I thank
you for being here today to talk about the administration's
request and to make the case for further infrastructure
funding. You have been a great friend of this committee and of
mine over the years. A superbly effective advocate on
transportation issues and one of our finest transportation
secretaries. And I also appreciated the fact that you came all
the way out to Bremerton, Washington, and rode the ferry across
from Seattle and helped me christen our new tunnel in
Bremerton. My hometown, by the way.
The President's Budget Request for Fiscal Year 2013
acknowledges the infrastructure deficit facing this country. We
have seen study after study, blue ribbon panel after blue
ribbon panel chaired by both Republicans and Democrats, all
calling for substantially higher levels of investment in our
Nation's roads, bridges, airports, and public transportation
systems. The American Society of Civil Engineers gives us roads
and highway infrastructure a grade of D- and this is the
greatest country in the world, D-, while economists, organized
labor, and even the U.S. Chamber of Commerce all concur that
infrastructure investments are immediately necessary.
Transportation is vital to our economy, moving products to
market, getting workers to their jobs, and allowing people to
move about within their communities.
The fiscal year 2013 budget request puts forth a blueprint
for investing in our infrastructure, including the
appropriation requests in 2013 in addition to the $476 billion
reauthorization proposal that is outlined in this budget. We
are now just a little more than three weeks until the highway
funding is once again set to expire. I sincerely hope that the
majority in the House can put together a sensible
reauthorization proposal that our side will find acceptable and
that will provide all of our cities and states with the ability
to make long-range planning decisions. These short-term
extensions cannot keep going on. It is just not effective
governance.
I know there have been partisan disagreements about the
stimulus package that was approved two years ago, but in my
view and the view of most learned economists, the stimulus did
not go far enough in providing for infrastructure funding. We
sort of put more of the money in the infrastructure. These
projects actually put people back to work, provide business for
private contractors, and get money flowing back into the
economy and we still need growth.
Now with respect to the 2013 budget proposal, I believe
this is a request that responds to some of our most critical
challenges facing our national infrastructure. I am pleased
with the administration's continued commitment to passenger
rail and other mass transit and I am encouraged by the
inclusion of new funding for the TIGER Discretionary Grant
Program, which is truly accomplished what its full title
intended, transportation investment, generating economic
recovery. This has been an extremely popular and effective
program, Mr. Secretary, not just among states and localities,
but also among Democrats and Republicans here in the Congress,
as well as tens of thousands of other constituents whose jobs
have been supported by this program.
Again, I want to thank you for being here and also we are
really very happy your son was released and you have been the
model of bipartisanship. And, Mr. Rogers, I have tried in your
absence to restore a little regular order up here and we are
looking forward to working together this year on a bipartisan
basis. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Dicks. After the secretary gives
his opening statement, we are going to be going back and forth
here on the five-minute rule. We have votes expected at about
11:15, 11:30, ground there. So, we hope to conclude the hearing
at that time. I would hope people would not extend, Mr. Olver,
past that. [Laughter.]

Secretary LaHood's Opening Statement

Secretary LaHood. Mr. Chairman, you have my statement, and
in the interest of time, if you want to just put it in the
record, I will happy to just begin with questions so that
everybody gets a fair shot here.
[The statement of Mr. LaHood follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.005

Mr. Latham. Okay. Well, if you had any comments in opening
that you would like to make, go ahead.
Secretary LaHood. I think a lot of this is going to come
out in the questions, but let me just, on a personal note, say
thank you to all of you for your expressions for my family. We
appreciate that very much. And I am happy to answer questions.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you. That is probably the briefest
opening statement I have ever heard. [Laughter.]
Mr. Rogers. It is the smartest move I have seen in a long
time. [Laughter.]

HIGHWAY TRUST FUND

Mr. Latham. While we are in the middle of this
reauthorization bill, given certain scenarios out there, what
happens to the Highway Trust Fund if there is no extension
beyond March 31?
Secretary LaHood. We have sufficient funds to carry us
through the Summer of 2013?
Mr. Bertram. Thirteen.
Secretary LaHood. Yes. Chris Bertram, my CFO, is with me,
and Chris tells me that we have funding, I am going to let him
say it correctly, but through next year. Chris, do you want
to----
Mr. Bertram. There is enough funding in the trust fund
through next year, but I think your question is if there is no
extension of----
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. Bertram [continuing]. The expenditure authority at the
end of March. First, what really happens is the people that
work at the Federal Highway Administration that actually
administer the Federal Aid Program cannot come to work because
we cannot pay them. That means that we need to stop reimbursing
the states for the projects they have underway. It is about
130,000 active Federal aid projects that would not be able to
be reimbursed by the Federal government. The states would
either have to stop those projects or they would have to find
other funds to keep those projects going. It would also affect
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration and some of the
grants that the Federal Transit Administration administers.
Mr. Latham. So, you are saying there is enough money in the
pipeline assuming there was an extension?
Mr. Bertram. Right. We think the trust fund this fall in
the highway account would reach about a $4 billion balance.
That is the time when we start monitoring the trust fund very
carefully. Our current projections are that we would not have
to slow down reimbursements to the states until next summer
some time.

DISCRETIONARY/MANDATORY GRANTS

Mr. Latham. You have got proposals for discretionary
grants, and we do not have a copy of the exact legislative
proposal, but how many programs and how many dollars in highway
and transit modes are competitive grants where the awards are
left to the discretion of the secretary?
Secretary LaHood. Do you know the answer to that, Chris?
I do not, but we will have to get that for the record, Mr.
Chairman. I do not think we have that, do we?
Mr. Bertram. No, we do not. We do not have it.
[The information follows:]

The FY 2013 President's Budget request for the Federal Highway
Administration includes $1.9 billion for three competitive
discretionary programs: $500 million for the Transportation
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (TIFIA) loan program, $700
million for the Transportation Leadership Awards and a total of $700
million for the non-formula portion of the Livable Communities Program.
The FY 2013 President's Budget request for the Federal Transit
Administration includes $2.4 billion for five discretionary grant
programs: $2.2 billion for the Capital Investment Grants program, $27
million for Transit in the Parks, $15 million for Tribal Transit, $30
million for Livability Demonstration Grants and $50 million for
Greenhouse Gas and Energy Reduction Demonstrations.

Mr. Latham. Now, given your proposal making the highway and
transit funds mandatory, does that not kind of fly in the face
against the discretionary grants? Why do we not have a proposal
to make everything mandatory or formula-driven?
Secretary LaHood. Go ahead Chris.
Mr. Bertram. Well, I think there is a balance between----
Mr. Latham. Oh, come on, Ray. [Laughter]
Secretary LaHood. I am not going to say something here
that--I would rather let Chris answer.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Mr. Bertram. I think there is a balance between regular
formula-driven programs that go to the states and to transit
authorities to provide a base amount of funding and the
discretionary grants that can be given for larger, major
infrastructure projects above the regular formula. In our
reauthorization proposal, we will continue to have a program
for discretionary bridge, discretionary interstate, and in
transit, we would have the New Starts Program.

SURFACE REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. Latham. Last year, we had a debate about where we get
the money and what we----
Secretary LaHood. Yes.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. Do for the reauthorization.
Language last year contingent upon enactment of a multiyear
surface transportation authorization legislation was based on
what the appropriation was.
Have you put forth a reauthorization bill proposal?
Secretary LaHood. Well, what we have put forth is the
President's budget, which is a $500 billion budget, which is
paid for. Unlike the last two years that I was here when many
of you criticized the administration or at least asked a lot of
hard questions about how do you pay for what you want to do, we
pay for it this year. Half of it comes out of the Highway Trust
Fund and the other half comes out of the Iraq/Afghanistan War
Fund, which, by the way, has been scored by CBO. So, the idea
that we have not paid for it is not accurate. If you want to
know what our priorities are, if you want to know what the
President's priorities are when it comes to transportation,
they are laid out in his budget and they are paid for.
Mr. Latham. But you have not put forth a proposal?
Secretary LaHood. We put forth the President's budget.
Look, we have provided a lot of technical assistance, to the
T&I Committee, when it comes to their bill and we have provided
a lot of technical assistance to all of your staff when they
have asked for it when it comes to putting your bill together.
Everybody knows what our priorities are, and if you do not,
look at the President's budget.
Mr. Latham. Okay. I am out of time.
Mr. Olver.

HIGHWAY TRUST FUND

Mr. Olver. Well, I can see this is going to end up being a
discussion on semantics. The President's budget has in it, as I
understand it at least, a broad outline for what a very robust
program should be with the how to pay for it, as you have
indicated. The proposals that we have on either side, the first
proposal coming from the actual writing of the legislation has
always been left to the legislature, to the Congress. In my 20
years, we have not had legislation for any of the
reauthorization programs that have originated in the Executive,
but here because of the tangle, we have this deadline on the
end of March with which if that goes by and we do not have a
reauthorization, then there is what I talked about as a
possible lapse and the confusion and the really obstruction
essentially of planning for a future program and you do not
know how and when you are going to get it back going, even
though we may have money, if I understand from what--and you do
not have a tag, so, I forget names.
Mr. Bertram. Yes, Bertram.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Bertram, you have said that the trust fund
monies that you expected to go in will take us through the
fiscal year 2013.
Mr. Bertram. Correct.
Mr. Olver. And did you mean also into fiscal year 2014 at
all or only through this fiscal year?
Mr. Bertram. Well, we are in fiscal year 2012, so, we think
that the trust fund on our projections under baseline spending
will have enough money until this fall to where it reaches the
point where it has about a $4 billion balance, which is when we
start watching the balance more carefully. We do not think we
will actually hit a critical point where we have to slow down
spending from the trust fund until the summer of next year,
which is 2013, which is the fiscal----
Mr. Olver. Which is in the 2013 fiscal year.
Mr. Bertram. Fiscal year, right.

METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Olver. Okay. Well, thank you for that clarification.
In any case, the proposal ended up removing transit from
the trust fund issue and covering only the highway business,
but urbanization is going on in this country. This last census
puts quite a number of millions of people. We are now up to 4
out of 7 people are in our metropolitan areas, which have more
than 1 million people in them. That number of metropolitan
areas of that size goes up each census, but in this instance,
we are now at 57 percent of the total population of the country
is in those 50 metropolitan areas with over 1 million
population. And so, to put them adrift in this process when
those are the places where the exceptional need seems to me for
doing infrastructure sort of as you go, helping them out to get
planning and to get into these constructions before they grow
even worse and the problem becomes geometrically worse, that is
important.
So, your program paid for, even though it is with the OCA,
we have to find a different way to pay for it if we are not
going to pay for it as the administration has proposed. It is
the underlined yellow here and I am perhaps already wandering
in my comments. [Laughter]
But is clear that the administration is laying forward what
the need is for the economy and for an effective economy which
we must grow, as well. The best way to get out of our budgetary
problems and our deficit problems is to grow the economy and
this kind of investment is necessary for that.
I will yield back.
Mr. Latham. You have no questions?
Mr. Olver. I have no questions.
Mr. Latham. No questions.
Mr. Olver. No questions.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Rogers.

TRANSPORTATION PAY-FOR

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, last
year and again this year, you are proposing to move all surface
transportation outlays to the mandatory side of the budget,
$60.3 billion. You know, you tried that last year and we said
no way, and you are trying it again this year and I have got a
feeling we are going to say no way.
And, you know, I think your justification was it was in the
Simpson-Bowles Commission recommendation. Well, there were
other provisions of the Simpson-Bowles plan, which you have
conveniently ignored. For example, they proposed increasing the
gas tax by 15 cents or tying current year's spending to
previous year receipts. Both of those you said we are not going
to do that. But you conveniently picked this, I am going to
call it a gimmick, to move the funding to mandatory and outside
the purview of this Committee; outside the oversight of this
appropriating committee.
We have the responsibility to guard every penny that is
spent. Except when it goes to mandatory and entitlements, it
escapes our oversight and I do not like to see that happen, you
might guess. So you know, you are proposing to take OCO money,
assuming there is money in OCO, the wind down of the wars,
there are 50,000 other agencies with their eye on that fund of
money, if there should turn out to be that kind of money. So I
do not really believe that you have given us a realistic option
here and you are going to leave it to us to try to figure out
what to do to fill that $60.3 billion hole that is in your
budget because you have not responsibly given us a route to
travel. So how do you advise us to fill that hole?
Secretary LaHood. Well, take your lead from the President's
budget. Look, for two----
Mr. Rogers. That is what I just got through talking about.
Secretary LaHood. For two years, Mr. Chairman, people have
sat up there and criticized us for no-pay-for. We are not going
to raise the gas tax. The President has been against raising
the gas tax since the day he was sworn in. So that has not
changed.
So we take the Highway Trust Fund, the money that is in
there, and we take the remainder from the Iraq-Afghanistan
Fund. Now, there may be 50 people lined up, but our budget was
put together with our colleagues at OMB. So we assume that when
they sign off on this, this is one of the priorities the
President wants the money used for. So we have a pay-for.
Mr. Rogers. What is that old saying, the President
proposes, and what is it?
Mr. Carter. Congress disposes.
Mr. Rogers. Congress disposes. Well, I am here to tell you
we have already disposed of that provision. And so we have got
to have something more constructive and we would rather do it
with your absolute cooperation.
Secretary LaHood. Well, look, we are more than willing to
cooperate. We are willing to sit down with anybody that wants
to. We need a transportation bill, Mr. Chairman, and we need
the money to pay for it.

SURFACE REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. Rogers. I agree we need a transportation bill or we are
wrestling with that even as we speak. The Senate Bill, two
years, we are trying to draw up a House Bill of five-year
extension.
Secretary LaHood. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Rogers. Which would you prefer?
Secretary LaHood. What I would prefer is that you use the
model that the Senate used, which begins with bipartisanship,
where the chairman and the ranking member--you have Chairman
Boxer and Ranking Member Senator Inhofe, who sat together
around a table with their members and put together a bipartisan
bill which was voted 18 to nothing out of their committee. And
now it is going to be debated in the Senate. Use that
bipartisanship as a model. If you begin there I think you will
get a bill. And theirs is paid for, by the way.
Mr. Rogers. It is two years. It does not solve the long-
term insolvency problem that is haunting all of us. We are
trying to find a bill that would be a five-year extension that
tries to solve the long-term insolvency problem that is
hampering states, localities, private enterprise from making
some kind of long-term planning on how to spend the money.
Would you not prefer a five-year extension?
Secretary LaHood. Well, first of all, I would prefer that
Congress passed a transportation bill that reflects the values
of the American people; reflects the values of what Congress
has always done. Now, I served on the T&I Committee and I also
served on this Committee. And when we served together we did
things in a bipartisan way. There was no more bipartisanship
than came out of the Appropriation Committee and the T&I
Committee, and I sat next to Mr. Latham on that committee when
we put together two bills that passed the House with 400 votes
and the Senate with 80 votes. That is the way you do it. That
is the way it has always been done.
Mr. Rogers. Would you prefer if we have a two year
extension?
Secretary LaHood. I would prefer Congress pass a bipartisan
bill that reflects the values of the American people.
Mr. Rogers. All right.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Dicks? Gone. Mr.
Pastor.

ARIZONA TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Morning.
Mr. Pastor. First of all, let me thank you for your years
of public service as secretary, as well as in the Congress.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor. And I am also very happy to hear about your
son.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor. I will take my time to thank you for all of the
efforts in developing the light rail system in Maricopa County,
as well as the efforts the Administration has done in Pima
County in Tucson, and so it is very important to us.
I can tell you that the first 20 miles are completed and
the ridership has doubled. And with the gas prices as they are,
we probably will see increased ridership, and so we are taking
advantage of the transportation system that we have in Maricopa
County.
With your support we are going to continue to expand the
light rail system. The next three miles is in Eastern Maricopa
County, which happens to be in Congressman Flake's district, so
we are also going into the eastern part of Maricopa County. And
with the investigative money that the department has invested,
we are now looking for expansion to Western Maricopa County as
well as Southern Maricopa County. So we are very appreciative
and very happy that the system is going to continue to expand
and provide public transportation for many people in the
county.
An initiative that this subcommittee started in terms of
having HUD and Department of Transportation provide grants in
terms of how do you develop the light rail system for
affordable housing, economic development, commercial
development. With the recent grant that we received, we are now
planning to take the light rail system and meet the objectives
of the initiative with affordable housing and economic
development and commercial development. So we are on track.
We also want to thank you because you have supported ADOT,
the Arizona Department of Transportation, in how we can--well,
we are investigating the feasibility of building a commuter
train between Phoenix and Tucson, which would connect in
Arizona the two largest urban areas and connect 85 to 90
percent of the population in Arizona.
And so I thank you for all of those efforts, and on behalf
of my constituents and the people of Arizona, we thank you for
that. As you know, about a year ago the entire, we sometimes
surprisingly get them all together, but the entire Arizona
Delegation, including our two senators, contacted you in
designating a north-south corridor, as we propose the
Interstate 11. That would basically serve as a corridor from
the border in Mexico north.
And we have worked jointly with the delegation of Nevada,
as well as the entire Arizona delegation. I just have the
question as what is the progress of this designation within
your department?
Secretary LaHood. You know what, Mr. Pastor? I will get
back to you. I do not know where that stands, but I will get
you an answer. And I want to thank you and your colleagues who
have shown great leadership in your state for these projects
that you mentioned. We cannot do what we do unless we have good
leadership, and you all have really stood up and said this is
the kind of transportation that we need in our state. And it
has made a difference and it will continue to make a
difference, and we look forward to working with you on these
important projects, and I will get back to you on the
designation.
[The information follows:]

The Arizona and Nevada State Departments of Transportation must
submit a designation request to the U.S. Department of Transportation
through the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Division Office in
order to begin the review process for Interstate 11. Designation
requests should include a route description, justification, and have
the recommendation of the State involved. In a letter dated July 14,
2011, the Department informed the Nevada and Arizona delegations that
to date FHWA has not received a request to designate Interstate 11.

Mr. Pastor. Thank you very much. I will yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. The gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Carter, the judge.

PORTS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Once again, Mr.
Secretary, welcome.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. And I am really happy for the good fortune of
your family.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Many of us were praying for you.
Secretary LaHood. I know that, thank you.
Mr. Carter. I want to start off with a question I got from
one of my city managers yesterday, and I had lunch with him. He
is from Temple and he had just come from this transportation
seminar that, I think, you all are probably part of.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.
Mr. Carter. It has been going on here in Washington. And he
was talking about our harbor situation. We do not have any
harbors in my district.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.
Mr. Carter. But we have a harbor in Texas. It is, I think,
the second largest harbor in tonnage in the country. We also
have something peculiar to the Gulf Coast states called
hurricanes. And when they blow inland, they blow silt up into
harbors.
And the discussion yesterday that was held at the
transportation seminar was the fact that the Panama Canal is--
we have just expanded the Panama Canal. We are major transit. A
lot of the China trade is headed for the Gulf Coast. We have
one-lane channels at almost every major Gulf Coast port that we
have. And the estimate of time to dredge the channels at that
seminar yesterday was 14 years because of the additional
regulations that have been imposed since the last time we
dredged those channels.
Now 14 years, there is going to be a lot of stuff parked
out in the Gulf of Mexico waiting to land over 14 years. And I
was shocked by that number. But all of the other regulations,
not necessarily directed by your department, but--I would
expect, at least, the secretary of--and the Department of
Transportation is in the business of making transportation work
and should be advocates for transportation projects and helping
to fast track dealing with regulations as best you can when we
get to these transportation projects.
But it is unacceptable to say that the Houston ship channel
has to be a one-lane ship channel for the next 14 years with
the China trade sitting out in the Galveston Bay. Do you have
any input about these kind of thoughts?
Secretary LaHood. Yes. Look, Judge, this is a very
important issue. When I came to this job I held a port summit
in San Diego, got all of the port directors in the country
gathered together. Since that time each year we have had a port
summit where we talk about issues like this.
This Administration has given more money to ports, to more
ports, than any administration ever. We have done it through
our TIGER Program. Now, that money has not been used to dredge;
it has been used to increase capacity. We have really tried to
help these ports out.
Ports are an economic engine, they provide jobs. We also
developed at DOT a program called the Marine Highway Program,
which I will send your office a copy of, where we actually use
the waterways to relieve congestion and deliver goods around
America, in and out of America. That report is out, and we rely
on ports.
[The information follows:]

A copy of the Marine Highway Report was provided to Mr. Carter on
March 9, 2012.

At the meeting that the governors had with the President
two weeks ago, Governor Haley from South Carolina asked the
President about this. How can we take some of the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund and use that to help ports become
deeper, dredge them, and cut through the red tape? And what the
President said was he would put together, under his Chief of
Staff, a working group within the Administration, because he
agreed and we agree it takes too long to do the permitting.
And it involves too many Federal Agencies. So we get it, we
know it takes too long. It does not take too long because of
DOT. We do not have any--you know, we are not standing in the
way. We are trying to help ports. But there are agencies within
our government that do take too long. And I think the President
recognizes it and we hope to get on this immediately.
Mr. Carter. Yeah, well, as you raised that issue that I was
not even going to go into, not only the ports silted up, but
there are coastal canals silted up, too.
Secretary LaHood. Correct.
Mr. Carter. And that ships all of the stuff to your part of
the country where you came from.
Secretary LaHood. Right.
Mr. Carter. It all moves up the Intracoastal----
Secretary LaHood. Right.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. To service Chicago all of the way
over to Pennsylvania. And if those shipping lanes close, it is
a bad deal.
Secretary LaHood. Right.
Mr. Carter. And I wanted to raise this issue first because
it was raised to me yesterday.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.
Mr. Carter. Especially from a person that is not even
connected to port.
Secretary LaHood. Right, right.
Mr. Carter. So I think it is a--I think the President, if
that is what he is going to do, I have some other Federal
regulations I would love for him to come down to my district
and help me cut through them, but----
Secretary LaHood. Well, in his absence I would be happy to
do that.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. We made the disclaimer statement
not all projects are shovel ready when we think they are shovel
ready. I would argue it has to do with other agencies and their
new regulations that they are imposing and it is getting to be
a real problem.
Secretary LaHood. Well, look at, Judge, whenever you invite
me, I will come to your district. I do not speak for the
President's schedule but I would love to come to your district
and meet with you.
Mr. Carter. We will get you down there.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Mr. Carter. One more thing.
Secretary LaHood. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. You said you would send me something. Last year
it took an awful long time to get something. It took us like
five months.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Carter. Could you shorten the time if we need to get
stuff from you?
Secretary LaHood. Sure. What do you need?
Mr. Carter. Well, last year, in March, I had some questions
I do not know now.
Secretary LaHood. Oh.
Mr. Carter. Have those reports you just talked----
Secretary LaHood. It took too long and you forgot what it
was.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. No, but last year I forgot what it
was. It was way past the time we needed it.
Secretary LaHood. You figure out what it is and I will get
it to you quickly. [Laughter.]
Mr. Carter. Okay. Get it there fast, that helps.
Mr. Latham. Thank you for being so short there. Mr.
LaTourette.

SURFACE REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
nice to see you again.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. Just a couple of clean-up matters, and I am
sorry Mr. Dicks is not here anymore because, you know, a lot of
us did have difficulties with the stimulus bill. And given his
comments, the Republican version that often gets overlooked was
half as much money and most of it went into infrastructure, and
I do not remember Mr. Dicks supporting it. But it is good that
he bemoans the fact that the original stimulus bill only put
about $68 billion in the infrastructure.
Secondly, I am kind of amazed by the observations that we
are coming up against this March deadline and people are sort
of saying, well, I cannot believe that this is happening. You
know, and I assume most all members of the Committee knows,
that the last highway authorization expired in September of
2009.
Secretary LaHood. Three and a half years ago.
Mr. LaTourette. And at that time the President was the
President, the current majority leader in the Senate was the
current--was the majority leader, and Ms. Pelosi was the
Speaker of the House, and every extension until the beginning
of this year was under that storage ship.
And I have to tell you, Representative Cravaack gets really
mad at me when I say this, but you had in place an individual
as chairman of the T&I Committee that knows more about
transportation than any of us will ever know in Jim Oberstar in
Minnesota. He had a bill. He had a six-year bill. But he was
constrained by Mrs. Pelosi and I think the Administration for
moving forward. He paid for it. It was $450 billion. It would
have addressed the needs of this country moving forward and it
was squashed not by the current bunch in charge now. It was
squashed by our friends on the other side of the aisle.
Now we get to the current, and I have read your comments
about the Mica bill, and I cannot because of my party
affiliation go as far as you did, but I will tell you it is not
a satisfactory bill. And I believe that a majority party has
the ability to write a partisan bill. We certainly saw that
with Mrs. Pelosi. And if you can get 218 votes you can do that.
The difficulty with this--and you are right, I participated
in T-21 and SAFE T-LU, and those bills flew out of here. I
would love to see a bipartisan bill and I think given the fact
that the whip count yesterday was another disaster on the five-
year proposal, I think you will see a bipartisan bill when we
come back from our recess.
And we have to get 218 votes because the fact of the matter
is the Senate has parked their bill at the desk, and even
though nobody wants a two-year bill, I think that is
disgusting, and it is everybody's failure to deal with the
issue that we have seen coming since I got here. Nobody wants
to deal with the issue. It is disgusting, but you know at the
moment it is the only bipartisan thing in town and we have to
get something over there or else all hell is going to break
loose. I guess that is enough of that.
I do want to express disappointment in a couple of areas
that, you know, there is this business about the President
proposes and the Congress disposes. I will tell you, I believe
every President since Dwight Eisenhower has submitted the full
bill text of their legislative Highway Trust Fund
Reauthorization, either as an executive communication from the
President to the Speaker, or a letter from the secretary to the
committee chairman. I do not believe that this administration
has done that. So that is one disappointment.
Two, this OCO thing is not real, and it continues to create
the same type of fiction that the Mica bill does. The Mica bill
is dependent upon sticking it to the pension contributions of
Federal employees, current and those in the future. That is not
solving the trust fund problem.
And your reliance on OCO is not solving the trust fund
problem. It may score right, but I read your blogs, I also read
Mr. Elmendorf's blogs, and you know that the OCO funding is
discretionary. And the way CBO scores that is that they look at
what was spent this year and they make it the same number for
next year, adjusted for inflation. There is no OCO fund. There
is no money lying around that is going to be appropriate. If
the wars are over we need the money for other purposes.
There is no stream. So your proposal is not paid for, the
Mica proposal is not paid for. The Senate proposal is paid for,
with some fancy maneuverings. I still think they have some
problems.
But the fact of the matter is, listen, we either have got
to go to vehicle miles traveled, somebody has got to have the
courage to adopt Simpson-Bowles and actually raise the gas tax
15 cents a gallon, or all we are going to do is continue to
have 10-year projected fixes for problems and extensions that
go a couple of months, 10 months in the case of the payroll
tax. That is why we are broke.
And so I, you know, I like you, I like the President, but
this is not a serious pay-for and we have to get past this and
fix the Nation's infrastructure problem, and nobody is doing
it.
Secretary LaHood. Well, Mr. LaTourette, first of all, let
me thank you for your leadership. You have been a good friend
for Transportation; always have been and always will be. I
appreciate what you are doing.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Dent.

BRIDGES

Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Secretary LaHood.
Secretary LaHood. Good morning.
Mr. Latham. Is your mic on?
Mr. Dent. Oh, yeah, it is not. Glad to hear your son is
doing okay.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Dent. It is wonderful news. Just a couple of things
about bridge replacements. The last time I checked the bridge
inventory data suggests about 11.5 percent of our Nation's
bridges are rated structurally deficient. Nearly half of the
states are above that national average.
Pennsylvania, we have the unfortunate distinction of
ranking first in the country for deficient bridges with nearly
6,000, or more than 25 percent, of our bridges in the
Commonwealth are in bad shape. And my district is probably the
worst in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. So we have a lot of
deteriorated bridges. You know what happened with I-35 up in
Minnesota, the bridge was replaced in 437 days. That was simply
terrific.
I am working with the T&I Committee on language that would
make the approval process for these bridges faster and much
simpler. The reality is that the Emergency Relief Program
cannot fund all of these projects. But I certainly believe that
treating these bridges similar to how we treat these emergency
projects, you know, cutting the red tape, expediting the
process, would go a long way to building our bridge
infrastructure.
And to the extent that we replace bridges ``as is'', I
would like to really avoid using all of these various NEPA
steps and let us get to work. Time is money and since we cannot
find a way to pay for, you know, to replenish the trust fund
adequately, if we save time, we save money. I want to get your
thoughts about this kind of----
Secretary LaHood. We favor that. We just worked very hard
with our friends in Ohio and Indiana to open up the Sherman
Minton Bridge. We are working with our friends, the Governor of
Kentucky and the Governor of Indiana, on some important bridge
projects that we are going to speed up because we have to.
These river crossings are very, very important. You all
just passed a river crossing bill between the state of
Wisconsin and Minnesota, and it had the support of both
delegations, with the exception of one person. So if we can
speed things up, we will.
Some people know that our Highway Administrator Victor
Mendez started a program called Everyday Counts. That program
is about moving things quickly. We are not opposed to moving
things quickly and we know there are a lot of bad bridges
around the country. Nobody wants them fixed up more than we do.
We have had some great partners with our governors and will
continue to move things as quickly as we can. We are certainly
not opposed to that so anything you can include in the
transportation bill we will be happy.

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY PERMIT PROGRAM

Mr. Dent. That is good to hear. I appreciate that. And
also, a secondary issue that has come up recently, a few weeks
ago I met with an explosive company in my district. And they
brought an issue to my attention pertaining to the Hazardous
Materials Safety Permit Program. And I do not know how familiar
you are with that issue.
But since 2005, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration--I do not know, I guess FMCSA; I do not know if
that is the right acronym--has implemented a safety permit
program for motor carriers of certain hazardous materials
intended to ensure a higher fitness standard than required to
trucking companies generally.
It is my understanding that under the program, the
carrier's fitness is based solely on limited out-of-service
violation history, and the current rules do not provide an
appeals process for carriers whose permits were denied as
opposed to revoked or suspended. I am just concerned that a
number of these folks are simply just going to go out of
business.
They are just going to go out of business with some rather
arbitrary rulings that really are not affecting safety, and I
was hoping that we could have some conversations with your
office about this issue.
Secretary LaHood. Well, what I will do is I will have Anne
Ferro, our administrator, come up and meet with you, Mr. Dent,
and talk to you about your concerns and explain the program.
[The information follows:]

Administrator Ferro met with Representative Dent to discuss
the Agency's hazardous materials safety program on April 16,
2012.

Mr. Dent. Yeah, because there is some real issues there
that I think we do need to deal with.
Secretary LaHood. Sure.
Mr. Dent. With that, I see my yellow light is on, too, and
I am going to----
Secretary LaHood. Okay.
Mr. Dent [continuing]. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you gentlemen. Mr. Diaz-Balart.

CUBA

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Actually what I
was going to talk about was already touched on by Chairman
Rogers and Mr. LaTourette. I do, however, want to take this
opportunity, and you have heard again, but I think it is
important that you hear it.
First place, how relieved, frankly, all of us are, because
of the relationship that we have with you----
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. And I think the entire
country is, about----
Secretary LaHood. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. About your son and the entire
group of, frankly, really courageous Americans who are willing
to, you know, work for democracy around the world.
Secretary LaHood. Yeah, thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I just also want to remind everybody here
now as a kind of point of personal privilege that, you know,
this administration seems to be the administration of American
hostages. And as we speak, there is an American still being
held hostage in Cuba. Since December of 2009, he has lost 100
pounds, his health is frail, his daughter and wife are
suffering from--are fighting cancer, and, unfortunately, this
administration continues to give unilateral concessions to that
terrorist regime.
So I bring that up because as we remember and are grateful
for the fact that a group of Americans have been released,
still there is one American that is really, really suffering
and this administration seems to be either be powerless or
just, frankly, unwilling or unable to do anything about it. And
let us just not forget other Americans who are suffering as
hostages at this time. And we are exceedingly pleased about
your son.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And again, by the way, and also not only
pleased that he is here, but I would also, if you could, just--
our gratitude for his efforts for democracy.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. Recognize the gentleman
from Northwest Arkansas, Mr. Womack.

AIP GRANTS

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary for being here, and I associate myself with all of
the remarks that have come from my colleagues in a gratefulness
for the outcome there with your son.
I want to pivot for a moment to AIP funding because last
year I asked about this particular subject and about the
percentage that goes to the smaller airports. This year, I was
initially pleased to see in the budget that more AIP grant
money is going to smaller airports while allowing the medium
and larger hub airports to make up their funding shortfall
through increased passenger facility charges. I suppose that
would work with one exception, and that is the PFCs are capped.
So why did you propose PFCs as a solution to the funding
gap when current law does not allow for that kind of an
increase? Is that a Mr. Bertram question?
Secretary LaHood. Yes, if you do not mind?
Mr. Bertram. Our request would only cut the overall funding
for the large and medium airports if, in fact, there is a
legislative change that changes the PFC from $4.50 to $7.
Mr. Womack. All right. Do you support the current funding
level for AIP as $3.35 billion? I know right now, as I
understand it, the request is for a billion less than current
funding and the secretary has said many, many times in this
hearing that this is the plan. This is the plan that you
support. So I am coming back and asking if you would support
the current level of funding for AIP at $3.35 billion or
thereabouts?
Mr. Bertram. If there was not a change in the PFC, we would
support the current levels of funding for AIP. Our level of
$2.4 billion is predicated on an increase in the PFCs that
would allow the large and medium airports to raise the funds
locally.
Mr. Womack. One other question about that same subject
matter. So we reduce the level of funding in the request, and
AIP takes a pretty significant hit. While at the same time as I
understand the budget, not so much of a hit if a hit at all to
something like a high speed rail.
So what is the motivation between reducing there--I guess
it goes back to the secretary's position that it is the budget
that they have asked for, and it reflects the priorities of the
administration. Is that indeed the priority?
Mr. Bertram. Right. I think the general theory behind that
is that large and medium airports are not that dependant on AIP
grants. They have fairly large capital programs. AIP grants do
not make a big impact on that. They would prefer to have the
ability to actually raise the funds they need locally. So that
is what the----

CONTRACT TOWERS

Mr. Womack. Very good. I do not know how much time I have
left. I have two minutes? Okay. Let me go to contract towers
for just a minute. I think I can do this pretty quickly.
The administration's budget cuts funding for FAA contract
towers by 15 percent. It is one of the FAA's most successful
and cost effective air traffic safety programs. I have several
towers in my district, and one in the town where I was mayor,
that has a tremendous amount of corporate traffic in and out of
that airport. Can you explain why the administration is
recommending such a big reduction to a program so vital to air
safety in some of these areas?
Mr. Bertram. I think our budget for contract towers goes
down by about $2 million, and we can double-check to see where
you got the $14 million. We support the contract tower program.
It is a cost-effective way of providing air traffic services at
smaller airports.
The new reauthorization bill requires us to go through and
do a new cost-benefit analysis to determine if they stay in the
program and to what degree there needs to be a local
contribution. But, in general, we support the contract tower
program.
[The information follows:]

The total FY 2013 request in the FAA Operations budget for the
Federal Contract Tower program is $138 million. This consists of:

$130 million in the Contract Tower Base Program

$8 million in the Contract Tower Cost Share Program
This is a decrease of $2 million from the FY 2012 enacted level of
$140 million. The decrease reflects:

The budget's proposed adjustment to the Cost Share program
(increasing the local cost share cap from 20 to 50 percent), and
FAA's use of newly available, site-specific cost information to
update benefit-cost ratios used to determine local share.
The table below shows total funding levels for the program.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2012         FY 2013
FY 2011 Actual      Enacted         Request
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Contract Tower--Base Program....................................           122.6           130.0           130.0
Contract Tower--Cost Share Program..............................            10.0            10.0             8.0
-----------------------------------------------
Contract Tower--Total.......................................           132.6           140.0           138.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are currently 246 towers in the FAA's Federal Contract Tower
program. Sixteen of these are in the cost share program, where the
local sponsor pays a portion of the operating cost of the tower based
on the benefit/cost ratio (i.e., if the benefit/cost ratio is 0.85, the
local share is 15 percent). The remaining 230 towers are in the base
program and have all operating costs paid for by the FAA.

Mr. Womack. Have you done any analysis? Had any dialogue
with these contract tower programs to see the reality that if
indeed funding is cut to certain levels, that some of these
municipalities as an example may just simply close the tower
for want of funding? And I do not think that is a direction
that the----
Secretary LaHood. Well, look, before we would do that,
obviously we would sit down with the communities and talk to
them about the contract and talk to them about the amount of
money and make sure that they can continue to provide a service
there at some kind of a funding level that makes sense from our
point of view and from their point of view. We are not going to
arbitrarily go into communities and eliminate this service
without sitting down and talking to these folks.
Mr. Womack. I encourage that dialogue. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Gentlemen, I would recognize the gentlewoman
from Ohio, Ms. Kaptur.

SAINT LAWRENCE SEAWAY

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much. Welcome, Mr. Secretary.
Sorry I could not be here a few moments ago. I was at a
competing hearing. I wanted to thank you for your great work
and I just have a few issues I would like to ask about.
First of all, I noticed the Saint Lawrence Seaway
Development Corporation is not mentioned in your testimony.
Have I not found it or is it not a priority for the
administration?
Secretary LaHood. It is doing so well, Ms. Kaptur, that we
did not have a thing to say about it. We just leave it lie
because everything is fine. If we raise it as an issue then
somebody around here might get an idea about doing something.
Everything is fine at the Saint Lawrence Seaway.

TRANSIT

Ms. Kaptur. I wanted to ask you, on transit I was very
pleased to see some reference to that in your testimony. And
just to express the view of the part of the country we come
from, transit is absolutely critical. We cannot get people to
work from areas where there is high unemployment, and we
certainly need some sort of a close attention by the department
to places of high unemployment and the condition of their
transit systems and to get people to jobs that are in the
region.
I might encourage you, you know, just ask your staff to
take a look in the 10 poorest places in America and look at
what kind of bus systems or transit systems that are there to
move people regionally. You might be interested in what you
find.
Secretary LaHood. Yes. Look, transit is a very high
priority, and particularly as gas prices go up, there are some
people in this country can little afford to put a gallon of
gasoline in their car, but they can ride a bus or light rail or
other forms of transit. Transit is a high priority. The reason
I spoke out so strongly against the bill that came out of the
House T&I Committee is what it did to transit. Transit is one
of the most important transportation options that we have in
America today. It simply is.

CLEVELAND INNER-BELT

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Did Mr. LaTourette in his question
period get into the inner-belt in Cleveland or not?
Secretary LaHood. No, he was actually lecturing me on the
fact that we have not paid for the bill the right way.
Mr. LaTourette. I was pretending I was older for the
moment.
Ms. Kaptur. Oh, all right. All right. I just wanted to--you
know, you have got a little problem there in Ohio with a
massive transportation project over in Cleveland from which
they do not have enough money. And the administration will be
in receipt of information and an request for TIGER attention to
that project. But it is plugging up traffic in that major city
and is a real priority, obviously for the region and that
community again stretched in terms of jobs and income at the
present time and needing to get that infrastructure in place so
they can build their economy forward.

DISCRETIONARY SPENDING

Finally, Mr. Secretary, I wanted to ask a question
regarding the budget, and I think someone took my piece of
paper here. Here we go. Thanks, David. The Budget Control Act
last year set discretionary spending for 2013 at $1.047
trillion, $4 billion above 2012, this year. It appears there is
some news out of the House Budget Committee.
There are some members that would like to reduce
discretionary spending down to $930 billion or $950 billion.
Funding at those levels would mean that your Department of
Transportation would have to absorb cuts as high at 22 percent.
Can you please talk about what that would mean to overall state
of our infrastructure, our ability to compete in the global
market place, put our people back to work if we had to sustain
cuts of that level?
Secretary LaHood. Well, for the record, I can get you some
specifics, but the Chairman has been talking earlier about
mandatory versus discretionary, and I certainly understand his
point very well. And so we will see what the Budget Committee
does and respond accordingly. But I will be happy to provide
for the record what impact it would have.
[The information follows:]

A reduction of 22 percent in discretionary spending totals would
adversely impact infrastructure development and transportation
operations funded by the Department. In particular, a cut of this
magnitude would significantly affect modernization and operations of
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the New Starts program at
the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), and Amtrak's operating and
capital investments. For instance, the FAA might need to curtail late
night air traffic control services at low-level-use towers, which would
disproportionately affect rural communities. They might also need to
close towers and consolidate air traffic control services. In addition,
progress on the Next Generation air traffic control system would come
to a halt. The FTA would postpone new Full Funding Grant Agreements
(FFGAs) to finance and support locally planned, implemented, and
operated transit capital investments. In addition, the FTA might have
to reduce payments to existing FFGAs. This change in funding could
stall local transit projects, delay the delivery of greatly needed
transit services, and eliminate construction jobs. Under this funding
scenario, Amtrak might have to halt large-scale capital projects and
reduce operating service for subsidized lines, which would affect rural
areas served by long distance trains. Overall, a reduction in
discretionary spending of 22 percent would have a significant impact on
transportation operations and capital investments; however, the
Department would continue to prioritize safety activities to ensure any
cut does not compromise our commitment to safety.

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentlewoman. The gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Wolf.

WMATA SILVER LINE

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And Mr.
Secretary, I want to welcome you. I wanted to thank you, but
before I did I want to tell you, I was in Egypt last year in
June, and I met with your son. And the job they were doing out
there was an incredibly, incredibly important job, and I know
you are very proud of him. But they were really making a
difference, and I hope that effort will be able to continue.
But I want to let you know----
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. In a very tough environment he was
doing a tremendous job.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Secondly, I want to thank you for your help on
reaching out and bringing this whole issue with regard to rail
to Dulles. You basically have saved the project, and I
personally want to thank you very, very much. I also want to
ask you to thank your IG. Mr. Latham and I, on March 7th, sent
a letter to Calvin Scovel asking that they do an in-depth
investigation of this rail to Dulles to make sure there is
transparency.
Personally, I think the MWOL Board is dysfunctional. I
think it has kind of gone astray. And that is why this
committee, and I appreciate, Mr. Latham, writing two new people
on from the state of Virginia. We are having--when the terms
end, they end. But if you would, thank your IG for the work
that they are doing. They are going to be coming out with an
in-depth analysis investigation both of contracts, government's
transparency. Most of the board meetings are in secret; they
ought to be public. So if you would thank him, I would
appreciate it.
Secretary LaHood. Of course.

INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR MWAA

Mr. Wolf. The last question I would want to ask you is,
this Congress, I think, under the leadership of Congressman
Davis and others, put together an IG for the Metro system. And
I am thinking of--I want to ask your opinion of passing and
asking this committee, if we would, to have an IG, inspector
general, for the Airport Authority so that once your people
give their report, which will print sometime in May, June, July
of this year, then there would be a clean slate and we would
then have an IG on the Airport Authority who could make sure
that this thing was run appropriately.
So the Congress I think, maybe when you were here did an IG
for Metro. What are your thoughts on having an IG?
Secretary LaHood. You know, I have never really thought
about that, Mr. Wolf. But I would be happy to visit with you
about it and figure out if it really makes sense. As you know,
the Federal government does own the airports but I have never
thought about it. Can I just say to you, Mr. Wolf, you know one
of the reasons we got involved in the Dulles line was because
of you and your support for this.
For the rest of the Committee, this is the connection for
people in Washington to Dulles International Airport. And it is
not just people that are flying in and out. It is for a lot of
people who work there and a lot of people who work along the
corridor. This is really the completion. This line could become
a model for the country in terms of how it is funded, the
number of people it will deliver. And so I want to thank you,
Mr. Wolf, and members of your delegation for really hanging in
there and making sure that we get it right. It is a very
important project. It completes the Metro system in this area.
Mr. Wolf. It does. Well, I thank you for your comments and
I hope that there could be a LaHood station somewhere along the
way.
Secretary LaHood. I think the Wolf station is probably more
appropriate.
Mr. Wolf. I do not want anything named after me ever. I
just--just on my tombstone. Anyway, thank you very, very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Price.

NEW STARTS

Mr. Price. All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. Glad to have you before the
subcommittee again. I find a lot to like in your budget
submission. I want to thank you for the emphasis on safety and
various aspects, on aviation modernization, on high-speed rail
development. There is a lot here that I hope we can respond to
in a positive way.
Also, I want to quickly say thank you on behalf of our
Department of Transportation in North Carolina for the approval
of our I-95 proposal for the third and final slot in the
Federal Highway Administration Interstate System Reconstruction
and Rehabilitation Pilot Project. That is a very positive
development for our state.
In my limited time here this morning, I want to turn to
transit and to the process for awarding New Starts funding and
supporting funding to communities undertaking transit
development. As you know, we have a very strong interest in
this in the Triangle area of North Carolina. We had some
disappointments in earlier years, but we are now on board I
believe.
Our area transit providers, advocates, the local
governments do now have a collaborative transit expansion plan
with the combination of bus and rail service. And on the
fundraising piece, the local fundraising piece, Durham recently
approved a half-cent sales tax dedicated to this expanded
service. And we are hopeful that the other affected
communities, Orange County, Wake County, hopefully, will follow
suit.
We have now submitted a formal Notice of Intent to FTA for
their okay to let us go forward with the scoping process. And
we had FTA Administrator Rogoff in the Triangle recently to
check out the whole situation. So we are hopeful.
I wonder if you could tell us from the Secretary's
perspective what kind of efforts you have had underway and
anticipate developing to streamline this process? I know we
have all talked about that, streamlining the process of
applying for transit and light rail funds, and to diversify the
criteria that you are looking at. You know, there are many
approved projects that really are not new starts but are simply
extensions to older lines. That is a good thing, I am sure, for
those communities because they have made this work and they
want to make it work in an expanded area.
But we do need for emerging communities growing areas, like
the one I represent, to be able to get started on building new
infrastructure. There are economic development considerations.
There are maybe some particular qualities of these communities
that would require some flexibility in terms of applying the
usual models. So I wonder what kind of ideas you would have
about how we can help growing areas like ours with truly new
starts, what this process.
Secretary LaHood. Sure. It is a very important program that
we have implemented. Our transit administrator, Mr. Rogoff, has
put out an NPRM which is on our website and it really gives us
an opportunity to show people, we are trying to really shorten
the time that it takes. Almost from the very first day on the
job here, I have had Members of Congress on both sides of the
rotunda ask me why it takes 12 or 13 or 14 years to get a New
Starts Project approved.
It is too long. We have short-circuited it. We still are
going to have good criteria, but we need to move things along
and we need to short-circuit and eliminate the duplicative
things that take place, procedures that take place, and we
intend to do that. If you look on our website, and I will be
happy to provide it for the record, the way that Mr. Rogoff
really--I think has figured out a way to make sure that we are
doing it by the book, but that it does not take 12 years.
[The information follows:]

In June 2010, FTA began a new rulemaking process by publishing an
Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) to update the New and
Small Starts evaluation and rating process to better capture the wide
range of benefits transit can provide, including specific questions on
how to measure and evaluate cost effectiveness, economic development,
and environmental benefits. FTA reviewed the comments received on the
ANPRM and developed a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), which was
published in late January 2012.
The NPRM seeks to balance the goals of measuring a wider range of
transit project benefits and establishing measures that streamline the
project development process. FTA aims to change the current system in
which the measures used to determine the project justification or local
financial commitment are so complex that they create an unnecessary
burden for project sponsors or the agency. FTA wants a system and set
of measures that are not difficult to understand, and which can instead
foster effective public involvement. The simplified measures and
streamlined process could save both the federal government and
taxpayers millions of dollars annually by allowing approved projects to
begin construction sooner, thereby creating savings in finance charges
and other construction costs.
The key features of these changes include:
 Use of a broad set of more objective measures, including
environmental benefits and a project's impact on local economic
development. FTA proposes to give these measures equal weight in
project justification evaluations.
 Establish measures that support streamlining of the New Starts
and Small Starts project development process, including:

Use of project ridership instead of user travel time
savings as a streamlined measure of mobility;

Streamlined analytical methods to develop the
information needed by FTA for project evaluation and rating;

Simplified and more clear-cut comparisons for
incremental measures; and

Revised local financial commitment criteria to address
more clearly the strong interaction between capital and
operating funding plans.
Through these changes, FTA proposes a more holistic evaluation of a
project's potential benefits to a community while maintaining rigorous
scrutiny of proposed major capital projects. It will allow FTA to
reduce red tape and approve projects that are more reflective of a
local vision rather than only those that fit a rigid, outdated set of
criteria.

Mr. Price. Well, and then the question--I appreciate that
and I think it is extremely important and very promising. There
is also this question which I alluded to about what exactly by
the book means. And I have said all along, I would gladly trade
a reduced Federal percentage, you know, a reduced Federal
participation, for greater flexibility in looking at these
proposals and working with these communities.
Secretary LaHood. Sure. Well, we are trying to find the
flexibility and not really cutting short people's money to do
it. We can have it both ways, really. We can eliminate some of
these duplicative procedures and still get to the goal of
proving these funds, but doing it in a shorter period of time.
Mr. Price. All right. Well, that is good news. And we look
forward to working with you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

TRANSPORTATION PAY-FOR

Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. We will go to the second
round. Again, we expect votes probably in a half-hour, so if we
could expedite the process, that would be wonderful.
It is interesting with the offsets that you are using the
OCO funds. If we remember, Mr. Obey, our former chairman of the
full committee, and every time we would have a budget he would
either want to raise taxes or borrow to pay for the war
funding.
He said that money is not there. You either have to borrow
it or raise taxes. Even Mr. Obey agreed that there was no money
there to use for an offset for this program. So I just throw
that out there. I do not know if you have any comment.
Secretary LaHood. Did you ever think you would be quoting
Mr. Obey, Mr. Latham? I never dreamed you would.
Mr. Latham. Well, you know.
Secretary LaHood. But anyway, look, I know you all would
like to have it both ways. I know that for two years, I have
come here and you have criticized me and you have said where is
the pay-for? And I have had no answer. This year I have an
answer. It is paid for and it is scored by CBO and you still do
not like it. Look at this as a no-win deal for me. I get it.
Okay?

PIPELINE SAFETY INSPECTORS

Mr. Latham. God bless you, Ray. Okay. Let us change the
subject then, shall we? Okay. You are keenly aware that it is
not easy to enact new laws around here, but we did get the FAA
and Pipeline Safety bills completed and signed by the President
just a few months ago.
Your budget request proposes some program levels that are
well above the authorized levels. Would you agree with me that
the authorized levels are now the law and should govern the
funding decisions or are you sticking with your proposal?
Secretary LaHood. The one thing I do not want to compromise
on is when you pass the Pipeline Safety Bill, you increase the
number of inspectors. That is very, very important. I visited
San Bruno and I also visited Pennsylvania, both places that had
explosions. When you go to those communities, what you find is
that people are startled by the fact there is an explosion in
their front yard. We need more inspectors. You all put that in
the bill, and it is a good provision.
Mr. Latham. Right. But that was for 10 more inspectors. In
your budget, you are talking about 100 more, which is well
beyond the authorized levels. So you are staying with your
budget proposal apparently, even though this was just signed
into law by the President. Now you are already going way beyond
what the President signed.
Secretary LaHood. Yes, I know. Look, part of my job is to
recommend to all of you what we need. We need more inspectors
in pipeline safety. That has been a problem. No administration
has paid the kind of attention we have paid to pipeline safety.
And not one of you on this panel wants to have an explosion in
your community and then have somebody say well, these have not
been inspected for 100 years or whatever. That is what we are
trying to do. This is about safety.
Mr. Latham. There are 12 unfilled positions--there are 13
unfilled positions right now for inspectors. Were you not aware
of this when the bill was signed into law?
Secretary LaHood. Unaware of the fact there were 12
unfilled positions or 13 or whatever?
Mr. Latham. Well, 13, and now you say you need all these
additional ones. I mean, the ink is not even dry on this and
you are already----
Secretary LaHood. Well, look, I am not going to compromise
on safety. If you want to, that is fine. We need more
inspectors. And what we need to do is find people--this is a
complicated inspection job. This is not like going out and
looking at a fire hydrant or looking at your water heater to
see if everything is okay. These pipelines are in the ground.
They are over 100 years old. Many of them need to be replaced.
You need to have the right people. So we are going to find the
right people. We need to get the right number. We need to make
sure that communities that have pipelines running through
people's front yards are inspected so that we do not have these
explosions. That is what this is about.
Mr. Latham. I could not agree with you more, but it is
frustrating that we just signed a bill into law that limits
what we can spend, and you are going way beyond that here. This
is the President's proposal and it is a bill the President just
signed.
Mr. Olver.

TRANSPORTATION PAY-FOR

Mr. Olver. I have tried very hard not to get into a debate
with the Secretary about anything today, but I have enjoyed
very greatly the conversation today. I am very sorry. It has
been rumored that you may go out the door with Norm Dicks and
myself at the end of this year, and that would be a tragedy for
the country because you have done such a wonderful job, I
think, as secretary of transportation. I just want to start out
by saying that.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Olver. Oh, my goodness. At least you come back, and we
had gotten back into the OCO business again. The OCO at least
has the feature that the one war, the war of choice in Iraq, we
have wound down and are really getting to low levels. The other
one, which was the one that stuck around for a long time was
basically forgotten for a long time. That is going on far too
long. But if we get down on that one, we will have some monies
that are clearly available, and your administration has decided
that that is where they are going to put it. Our chairman here,
I do not want to get into a debate with him either
particularly, but here I am starting.
The pay-for is in the bill that was proposed and now is put
aside. The papers for that were even more imaginary by far than
the pay-for that you have put forward because we are winding
down; those wars are ending.

PORTS

Now, I want to move on to just a short comment about the
conversation with Mr. Carter. You made the assertion that this
administration has put more money into port-related facilities
than any. I do not know how far you wanted to go back, whether
you meant going all the way back to 1790 or what. But in any
case, I just want to give a little bit of statistics here. You
have done about 15 or 16 projects out of the TIGER grants that
come to at least $250 million that cover the landside part of
the proper movement of freight that is necessary for an economy
to function. The other side of it, the water side, comes out of
a different subcommittee. It comes out of Corps of Engineers in
the Energy & Water Committee, which we both happen to serve on
also. And if I remember, if I understand it correctly, you have
an MOU with the Corps of Engineers so that there will be
cooperation, collaboration, and so forth on other of these
flexible grants that come through TIGER grants. I am just
supporting very strongly the TIGER Grant Program at the same
time. But would you talk about that MOU?
Secretary LaHood. Well, look, one of the common complaints
that we hear from our friends in the ports is that they need to
be dredged in order to be effective. I visited the Savannah
port in Savannah, Georgia. It needs to be dredged. I have
obviously visited a lot of ports. I have been to a lot of ports
around the country. Every one of them needs to be deeper in
order to accommodate what is going to be happening at the
Panama Canal with the expansion of the canal.
What some governors are suggesting to the administration is
the use of the Harbor Maintenance Tax, at least part of it,
because dredging is so expensive and there really is no money
to do that. I think that is one thing that this working group
that the President put together under the Chief of Staff
certainly will be looking at. Dredging these ports now is very
important in order to accommodate the big ships that are going
to be coming through with the expansion of the Panama Canal.
Mr. Olver. I think we really must articulate the land, the
rail, and truck transportation systems with the water and port
systems. I think that is very important.
Secretary LaHood. Right.

NEXTGEN

Mr. Olver. Now, let me just quickly--your budget includes
over $1 billion for the Federal Transportation's NextGen
program. And that, of course, is the program to change our
pretty ancient air traffic control system, a low technology
system, from a ground-based system to a satellite-based system.
And that is a multiyear--we already spent a fair amount of
money on that. Can you give us some sense of what with the
money spent has really been accomplished at this point? What
are the best examples of the advances that we have made that
really highlight what is achievable with the NextGen system?
Secretary LaHood. We have opened up some opportunities
around the Gulf, around the Houston area, and the availability
of helicopters to fly around that area. There are a couple of
communities where we have begun to implement the models for
NextGen, and I will be happy for the record to get that to you.
We have made some progress, but now that you all have passed
the FAA bill and it has been signed, we have the resources and
we have the capability to really launch this and continue to
make a lot progress over the next four years.
[The information follows:]

In a continuous rollout of improvements and upgrades, the FAA is
building the capability to guide and track air traffic more precisely
and efficiently to save fuel and reduce noise and pollution.
NextGen integrates new and existing technologies, creates policies
and procedures to reduce delays, save fuel and lower aircraft exhaust
emissions to deliver a more reliable travel experience.

Examples of the considerable progress NextGen has already
achieved include:

Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B): The FAA
has rolled out over 339 radios providing ADS-B service, with a target
of 500 by the end of FY 2012 and all 800 in place next year, providing
satellite-based surveillance coverage of the East, West, and Gulf
coasts and most of the area near the U.S. border with Canada.

Performance Based Navigation Routes: The FAA substantially
increased the number of Performance Based Navigation (PBN) routes and
procedures available. PBN provides direct routes, which save time,
fuel, and reduce aircraft exhaust emissions.

System-Wide Information Management (SWIM): The program is
providing weather information to our users in formats that can be
easily used in their systems in an effort to improve our joint planning
for bad weather. In addition, we are providing surface traffic
information from all major airports where our Airport Surface Detection
Equipment Model-X (ASDE-X) system is deployed. This is a surveillance
system using radar and satellite technology that allows air traffic
controllers to track surface movement of aircraft and vehicles to help
reduce critical runway incursions.

NextGen Tools for Controllers: FAA is rolling out tools for
air traffic controllers. New systems help air traffic controllers
better track the spacing between aircraft lined up for final approach
during periods of reduced visibility, as well as predict periods of
potential congestion. These new systems help us optimize aircraft
routing and better manage ground delays.

Mr. Latham. I am glad after the light went red you finally
got to a question.
I understand the gentleman from Kentucky does not have any
questions?
Mr. Rogers. No, no further questions.
Mr. Latham. Okay. In order of appearance here, Mr. Carter.

TIGER GRANTS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
Mr. Olver for the clarification. I was a little confused. I was
looking at the--I actually have a list of the TIGER grants that
you mentioned. All three were rail projects: one in the Gulf
Coast and two others on the West Coast and East Coast. But I am
glad we all are on the same team.
Secretary LaHood. Sure.
Mr. Carter. We have to fix those ports.
Secretary LaHood. Sure.
Mr. Carter. And the question I asked last time were CFRs,
after we got through asking our questions, we asked them in
March, we got the answer in August.
Secretary LaHood. Sorry about that.
Mr. Carter. A couple of things I want to ask you about.
Fuel economy mandates.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.

FUEL ECONOMY MANDATE

Mr. Carter. According to a recent study and an analysis of
the government's fuel economy and mandate, this will average
$3,000 a vehicle for every vehicle built anywhere in the world
that is going to be sold in this country. This is going to
prevent, according to this study, 6.8 million drivers from
being able to qualify to buy an automobile. Therefore, they are
not going to be on the roads. Therefore, they are not going to
be paying the fuel tax. Therefore, we are losing revenue. Do
you have any opinion about the rationale of preventing 6.8
million Americans by regulation--meanwhile the President just
announced he is going to up the government tax credit on the
vote from $7,500 to $10,000, and on this Fisker Karma and Tesla
Roadster, which means I might as well be speaking a foreign
language. I do not know what that is, but it is going to raise
it. We have a $7,500 tax credit on two cars that cost $95,000.
Now, how does all that make sense as we are battling how we are
going to pay for our transportation, and we are pushing people
off paying the tax?
Secretary LaHood. Well, let me stipulate, first of all,
that no administration, no President, has done more for the
American automobile manufacturer than this President.
Mr. Carter. Granted.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you. We will not have to have that
debate then. Your figures are correct that there will be an
increase in automobiles by 2025 with the increase to 54.5 miles
per gallon, but it will be made up by the savings in the cost
of gasoline for people that will be driving those automobiles.
So the one figure is correct, but you need to make sure you
understand that there will be a cost savings on the other end
by the amount of fuel that people will not be using in these
more fuel-efficient automobiles. That is part of the
calculation.
Mr. Carter. I understand it, but it is really kind of
Catch-22 when we are getting our money from burning gasoline to
pay for the highways, and we are building fuel-efficient cars
pushing people out of the market, and then we are wondering why
we do not have the funds for the highways. It is sort of a
Catch-22, if you ever read that book.
Another question I have to ask you for the sake of my God-
fearing farmers in Texas. The Department of Transportation
recently set forth some comments about causing or wanting to
require our Agriculture workers on the farm to have commercial
drivers' licenses. I know you backed off of that, but it is
still being pondered very heavily in the Agriculture community
about what the rationale was for having tractor drivers on the
farm have to have a commercial driver's license.
Secretary LaHood. Look it, Judge, when I was here, for 14
years my district was largely an agricultural district. When I
heard about that, I put a stop to it. Nobody at DOT is talking
about that anymore.
Mr. Carter. That is what I want to go home and report.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Price.

HIGH SPEED RAIL AND TIGER FUNDING

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, let me
return to the topic of high-speed rail. Your budget requests $1
billion to supplement the funding that was provided for high-
speed rail in the Recovery Act and the fiscal 2010
appropriations bill. Unfortunately, as you know, the 2011 and
2012 bills did not include specific funding for high-speed
rail. However, the TIGER grant program does permit some funding
for that purpose.
So let me just ask you a group of interrelated questions.
First, can you give us an update generally as to the projects
that are underway with the previously appropriated dollars? Do
you in particular expect the California project to move
forward? Your recent TIGER NOFA indicated that as much as $100
million of the fiscal 2012 TIGER funding will be available for
high-speed rail projects. Now, those preapplications are in I
expect. I would like to know what level of interest you found
in high-speed rail projects. And then finally, what more
generally can you tell us about the ongoing interest of states
and localities and further investments in high-speed rail?
Secretary LaHood. Well, first of all, let me say this.
There is a pent-up demand in America for high-speed intercity
rail. We have put out $10 billion, over $3 billion in
California, over $2 billion in Illinois. We have put some money
out in some of your states because of the leadership in your
states. The people are way ahead of some members of Congress on
this. The people want high-speed intercity rail.
We did put out the idea that we might use up to $100
million of our TIGER money for high-speed intercity rail, and
the requests came in at $1 billion. So the country wants high-
speed rail. That is not because Ray LaHood says it. That is
because of what they just requested. Those requests just came
in for the TIGER money.
We have great partners in governors all over the country,
and the people want this because they are tired of being in
congestion. They want a good form of transportation, and that
is what high-speed intercity rail does. It is the next
generation of transportation for the next generation. It is not
for us. It is for our kids and grandkids. This is the
President's vision, but it is also the country's vision.
And again, the people are way ahead of a lot of elected
officials and politicians when it comes to high-speed rail.
Mr. Price. Well, I can certainly attest to that from a
North Carolina standpoint. I wonder if you could give us
anecdotally and then maybe provide more systematically for the
record an answer to my first query about the state of these
projects across the country, projects that are underway with
the previous----
Secretary LaHood. Just generally, there are no projects
that are stalled. We have reached agreements with just about
every freight railroad that we needed to, the states have, to
be able to use freight rail. In California, they will begin
construction soon. In Illinois, there are all kinds of rail
work going on with the money we have given. We just gave Amtrak
almost $1 billion to buy new cars, to fix up catenary. We are
doing some great work in some of your states, but I will give
you the specifics.
[The information follows:]

The table below shows the status of the High-Speed and
Intercity Passenger Rail (HSIPR) grants as of March 19, 2012.
FRA distributed over $10 billion from three sources (FY 2009
Recovery Act, FY 2009 Intercity Passenger Rail Grants, and FY
2010 HSIPR) to states and other entities for passenger rail
projects in six regional corridors. Of the total, 95 percent
has been obligated. The table shows the total funding profile
for each corridor along with a summary of activities and
funding amounts in progress.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.007

Secretary LaHood. The $10 billion is starting to be spent.
This not only creates jobs, it creates the next generation of
transportation for America. It is what this generation will do
for the next generation when it comes to transportation.
Mr. Price. And as you say, the pent-up demand is there.
When you say $1 billion in applications through TIGER----
Secretary LaHood. Correct, for $100 million.
Mr. Price. That is $1 billion for high-speed.
Secretary LaHood. Just for high-speed intercity rail.
Mr. Price. All right, that is my question. That is just for
the high-speed rail component of those applications.
Secretary LaHood. That is correct.
Mr. Price. All right, very convincing.
Secretary LaHood. And when Florida decided to turn their
money back, $2.5 billion, we had $10 billion worth of requests.
Mr. Price. All right, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr. LaTourette.

TRANSPORTATION PAY-FOR

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I
want to be real clear in case you did not get my observation
about your pay-for before. I will tell you that it is fake, it
is phony, and it is disappointing. And even if it was not fake
and phony, it still relies upon a general fund transfer to pay
for something that has always been funded with user fees. It is
the exact same problem we have with the Mica bill: It increases
pension contributions on Federal employees to create $40
billion to plug a hole. Even if the money that you are
suggesting is real, it is a general fund transfer to plug a
hole rather than fixing the problem.
And when Judge Carter talks about the fuel efficiency
standards--my good friend, Jeff Davis, who writes this
transportation weekly and who knows a lot more about this than
I do--the gas tax when President Clinton initiated the increase
in the gas tax in 1993, the purchasing power was when every
mile you drove on the highway, that gas tax translated into
about seven-tenths. You were paying about seven-tenths of a
penny to drive. Now because of alternative energy things--
electric cars, all these cars--that moving away from purchasing
gas tax, the ethanol subsidy, it is down to about half of a
cent. With the new fuel efficiency standards that the
administration has proposed, it will be down to .25 cents.
There is no way that the math works unless you pivot to vehicle
miles traveled or unless you raise the gas tax or unless you
come up with some other solution. Your pay-for, even if real,
which it is not, does not solve the Nation's long-term problem.
And I said some things about the Mica bill, and I want to
be clear. I understand where that came from. Where it came from
was Secretary Peters' argument that you have all these
diversions from the trust fund and people are not contributing
to it, so you need to take it out. I could not disagree more
with that.
I happen to be a transportation enhancement proponent. I
happen to think transit is good. And the short-sightedness of
the current bill on transit was that people said, well, transit
does not participate in the trust fund. They do not pay any
money in, so let us just take them out. And after five years
they can jump off a cliff and good luck to them, and I hope you
can still have buses and trains in this country.
But that failed to recognize that if my transit authority
gets $5 million as a result of that 2.86 cents, it is not just
$5 million. They are able to take that guarantee of 2.86 cents
to Wall Street or to the bank and leverage it 10, 15 times.
That is what funds transit in this country. We have to fix the
problem.
And with all due respect to you because I am so fond of
you, your pay-for does not fix the problem. And if the
President is reelected or if there is another President who
happens to be elected in November, somebody really has to have
the courage to either fix this or--and I never thought I would
be a fan of this. We have some voices in our conference that
want to just devolve all this back to the states. If we are not
going to be serious, and if we are not going to have a trust
fund that is funded with user fees in a way that is sufficient
to take care of our needs so we do not have the D bridges and
the F highways, we should just send it all back to the states
and let them do what they have to do. But for us to sort of
limp along and perform in this shameless way with 10-year pay-
fors, general fund transfers, rather than facing up to the
issue, I really think it is sad, Ray.
And I have to tell you, the blame does not lie with your
administration solely. It lies with the Republicans and the
Democrats and the House and the Senate and previous Presidents.
But for you to come here today and say that, okay, we beat you
up for two years and now you have this great pay-for, it does
not pass the straight-face test and I am sorry we are having
this discussion.
Mr. Latham. Gentleman, yield back?
Mr. LaTourette. I am about done with that I think.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Nothing at this time.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Womack.

TRANSPORTATION PAY-FOR

Mr. Womack. I am not going to go into a monologue about how
I feel because I associate myself with some of the remarks that
were up here, maybe not all of them. I, too, believe that OCO
is a gimmick. It is borrowed money, and I have problems with
using that as a pay-for.
But I just wanted to ask you, Mr. Secretary, that given
what Mr. LaTourette has said and others--the distinguished
judge here from Texas--with these fuel-efficient standards and
electrification and who knows what is next, how do we fund
transportation infrastructure in the future?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we have made a proposal. Obviously,
some of you do not think it is real, but it is real. It has
been scored by CBO. Some people like when CBO scores things and
some people disagree with it. Look, you cannot have it both
ways here. I know people here like to have it both ways because
I have been in those chairs. I loved having it both ways. For
two years you said where is the pay-for. Guess what? We
provided one. If you do not like it, figure something else out.
You will all work your will. You always do.
But we have put together as good a budget as has been seen
around here for a long time, $500 billion. And what it does, it
addresses the values, the transportation values of the American
people--airports, rail, roads, bridges--and it puts a lot of
Americans to work. It is a good budget and it is paid for. If
you do not like the pay-for, have at it.

ARKANSAS TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Womack. Let me just finish by thanking you. I think it
was last July, you came down to Northwest Arkansas and spent
some time on the I-49 project in the Greater Northwest Arkansas
Area, and I want to thank you for taking time out of a schedule
to come down there and see. And I hope that by that visit you
were able to see that--and I have to brag on our state because
our state is investing a lot of its own resources into
leveraging the Federal dollars that we get to address some of
the major transportation concerns.
Later this year our state will vote on a tax increase to
support infrastructure in our state. Without offering an
opinion as to whether that is a good idea or a bad idea, the
fact is the state has recognized that our ability to develop
infrastructure in the future and economic development programs
relies on our having skin in the game. And so I commend our
state for at least having that desire.
Secretary LaHood. I agree with that. You have great
leadership. I just saw your governor at the meeting that they
had here. He and I spoke about that project and a few other
things. Your two senators have talked to me often about
transportation. You have a lot of good leadership in your
state, including yourself, sir, and we look forward to working
with you.
Mr. Womack. Thank you very much for your time today. I
yield back.

CLOSING STATEMENTS

Mr. Latham. The gentleman from Massachusetts. We are not
going to have another whole round here. We will try to conclude
the hearing, but if the gentleman would like 30 seconds.
Mr. Olver. I will need much less than that. I just wanted
to thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you. Are there any other questions right
now? If not, thank you very much, Mr. Secretary, and look
forward to working with you.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you. Yes, sir. Thanks a lot,
appreciate it.
Mr. Latham. Meeting is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.008

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

WITNESS

HON. SHAUN DONOVAN, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
Mr. Latham. The subcommittee will come to order. Today we
welcome the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Shaun Donovan, to the THUD subcommittee to testify
on behalf of HUD's fiscal year 2013 budget request. We look
forward to your testimony, Mr. Secretary. Due to a shortened
hearing schedule, today is the only opportunity to question the
secretary. We will hear from HUD's inspector general and the
GAO later this month regarding HUD management issues.
The department is requesting authority to spend almost $45
billion in fiscal year 2013. On its face the budget looks like
a current services budget, but as with most things, the devil
is in the details. For example, you state that we should use
FHA receipts in determining your net spending level. Everyone
knows this would artificially increase spending and create huge
cliffs when these receipts go down. I am concerned that we are
at a tipping point with the amount of renewals overtaking the
rest of the department's budget. For every 1 dollar you
increase for public housing, you have to cut $5 from other HUD
programs. I am interested in seeing how you plan to implement
the reduction in funding for the Project-Based Rental
Assistance Program. Your confidence in implementing this change
will influence our decisions going forward so I expect to hear
a little more about this in your testimony and upcoming
questions.
Another concern I have is the administration's actions
related to the Federal Housing Administration and FHA loans. It
seems like you are raising premiums in order to backfill
reserves and increase budget authority without increasing the
private market share. CBO's March reestimate of the President's
budget estimated that the administration's recent 75 basis
point increase will cost FHA borrowers more than a billion
dollars in mortgage premiums. However, CBO and OMB assume that
the administration's recent policies do not do anything to
drive more people into the private market.
So the only reason I could think of for the increase is to
replenish your reserve fund and to use these receipts to pay
for increased government spending. I think we would all agree
that this is not the best way to budget.
Mr. Secretary, as I stated last year, I thank you for your
service at HUD and thank you for your commitment to address the
ongoing problems we face. However, it is disappointing to learn
that there were six reported anti-deficiency violations last
fall where your department spent more money than it had. This
is not just bad management but is a violation of the law. So I
hope this has been fixed and duly investigated.
To end on a good note, I want to congratulate you and your
staff for submitting much improved congressional
justifications. It has taken a while, starting with Mr. Olver's
direction, but the justifications submitted are substantially
better and I look forward to your continued improvement in this
area.
Again, welcome, Mr. Secretary. It is great to have you
back. Before I recognize you, I will ask the ranking member,
Mr. Olver, for his statement.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, it is a
pleasure to have you back before us today, the last time that
you will be before me at least.
While the recession technically ended almost three years
ago, hundreds of thousands of families continue to struggle
with the burden of underwater mortgages in the face of
institutional intransigence. As the Secretary of the Department
of Housing and Urban Development, you have embraced the
challenges and have personally accepted the responsibility of
helping families facing foreclosure, providing housing security
to families experiencing economic insecurity and in making
capital investments in housing infrastructure to create jobs.
This is an incredibly difficult undertaking and I greatly
admire your dogged persistence over these years.
I am particularly pleased to see that your fiscal year 2013
budget request continues to embrace the VASH homeless veterans
program by providing $75 million for an additional 10,000
vouchers. This funding is needed as veterans are over 50
percent more likely than the average American to become
homeless and already over 11,000 veterans of Iraq and
Afghanistan have found themselves on the streets. More
generally, the budget also requests $2.2 billion for the
Homeless Assistance Grants Program in order to address the
broader homeless population. The administration has made
reducing homelessness a priority and this robust request
reinforces that commitment.
In addition, I am pleased to see that the fiscal year 2013
continues HUD's commitment to the Sustainable Communities
Initiative. Through this initiative HUD has been a leader in
promoting interagency cooperation and breaking down the
stovepipes that stifle innovative planning. Like you, I
strongly believe that federal dollars are most efficiently
utilized when local communities have the resources and
flexibility to determine what the right investment mix of
housing, transportation and infrastructure is for their
community in order to foster job growth. I also look forward to
hearing more about your proposal to combine the public housing
capital and operating funds and how it will strengthen PHAs by
modernizing asset management practices and improving their
ability to maintain, operate and expand housing services
efficiently.
While there are many aspects of your budget request that I
appreciate, I must express concern about your proposal to fund
two-thirds of the project-based Section 8 contracts for less
than a full year. We experienced this with the previous
administration and I am interested in better understanding what
lessons you learned from the previous administration's mistakes
and how you plan to ensure that tenants are held harmless by
the proposal.
Lastly, in past years I have expressed concerns about the
wide discrepancy between HUD's and CBO's FHA receipts
projections and the constraints it puts on this subcommittee. I
am pleased to see that this year's CBO estimates were $1.7
billion higher than HUD's and it should strengthen our ability
to provide robust resources for HUD's programs.
Mr. Secretary, in conclusion while I wish the current
fiscal environment would allow you to request higher capital
funding levels, I do believe the request allows HUD to
contribute to our economic recovery. I greatly appreciate your
leadership over the past three years and I am committed to
working with you toward our shared goal of strengthening HUD's
ability to provide affordable housing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver. I want to recognize also
that this is the last hearing you will have with the Secretary,
and thank you.
Mr. Olver. I should not have mentioned that, should I?
Mr. Latham. You could change your mind. A great partner
there. After the Secretary's testimony we will have rounds of 5
minutes on the clock. With that, we would invite you to make
your opening statement. Your full written statement is included
in the record. So, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

Secretary Donovan's Opening Remarks

Secretary Donovan. Thank you, Chairman Latham and Ranking
Member Olver, for this opportunity to testify today. I do want
to thank you, Chairman, for the cooperative way our teams have
worked together and appreciate you recognizing the improvements
that we have had in submitting our budget this past year. I do
want to thank the ranking member for his service and appreciate
the way that we have worked together so well. You will be
missed very much in this body, so thank you.

HOUSING AND COMMUNITIES

Today I would like to discuss how HUD's fiscal year 2013
budget proposal is essential to creating housing and
communities built to last and will support 700,000 jobs. Mr.
Chairman, in developing this proposed budget, we followed four
principles. The first is to continue our support for the
housing market while bringing private capital back. The
critical support FHA provided the last 3 years has helped
nearly 2.8 million families buy a home and more than 1.7
million homeowners refinance into stable, affordable products
with average monthly savings of more than $125. At the same
time, we have taken the most significant steps in FHA history
to reduce the risk to taxpayers and reform FHA's mortgage
insurance premium structure. With premium increases of 10 basis
points recently enacted by Congress coupled with additional
premium increases on jumbo loans reflected in the budget, FHA
projects to add an additional $8.1 billion in receipts to the
capital reserve account in 2013. And 2 weeks ago we announced a
series of premium changes that will increase receipts to FHA
above those already in the budget by 1.48 billion in fiscal
years 2012 and 2013. We have also taken steps to increase
accountability for FHA lenders and continue to seek expanded
authority via legislation that will further enable us to
protect the fund, as will the recent settlement with some of
America's largest banks through which FHA will receive
approximately $900 million to compensate for losses associated
with loans originated or serviced in violation of FHA
requirements.
With FHA's market share declining since 2009, these reforms
will further help private capital return while ensuring that
FHA remains a vital source of financing for underserved
borrowers and communities.
Overall, HUD's budget request is $44.8 billion in gross
budget authority. This program funding level was offset by $9.4
billion in projected FHA and Ginnie Mae receipts at the time
the budget was submitted leaving net budget authority of $35.4
billion or 7.3 percent below the fiscal year 2012 enacted level
of $38.2 billion. However, because of premium increases I just
mentioned, the administration now projects that the cost to the
taxpayer of this budget is offset by an additional $894
million, more than meeting our deficit reduction targets while
still allowing us to improve oversight of our core programs. As
you know, the Congressional Budget Office has just provided the
committee with its own scoring of receipts which is a total of
1.77 billion higher than the President's submission.

IMPROVING HUD'S HOUSING PROGRAMS

The second principle we used to develop our budget was to
protect current residents and improve programs that serve them.
The 5.4 million families who live in HUD assisted housing earn
$10,200 per year on average and more than half are elderly or
disabled. That is why 83 percent of our proposed budget keeps
these residents in their homes and provides basic upkeep to
public housing while also continuing to serve our most
vulnerable populations through our homeless programs.
As you know, inflation and stagnant incomes put real
pressure on the cost of these programs each year. This year we
redoubled our efforts to minimize and even reverse these
increases not just for this year but in the years to come. For
instance, we are working to enact Section 8 reform legislation
that would save $1 billion over the next 5 years while also
supporting the ability of PHAs in small towns and rural areas
to better serve the working poor. The budget also achieves
savings in the Project-Based Rental Assistance Program by
improving oversight of market rent studies, capping certain
annual subsidy increases and offsetting excess reserves.
I would note that should Congress fail to come to an
agreement within the framework of the Budget Control Act the
sequestration that would result, by design bad policy, could
well mean that some of the families now receiving HUD rental
assistance would be put out on the street and undo virtually
all of the progress we have made toward ending homelessness.
Further, struggling homeowners across the country would not get
the housing counseling needed to help them stay in their homes
and communities of all sizes would lose funds they count on to
build infrastructure and create jobs.
Already, protecting current families required us to make
choices we would not have made in a different environment.
Requesting $8.7 billion for the PBRA program allows us to serve
the same number of families, but it required us to provide less
than 12 months of funding for the majority of our contracts. In
addition, even though the budget maintains hardship exemptions,
the budget raises minimum rents throughout our core rental
assistance programs to a uniform $75 per month. These difficult
decisions are the kinds of sacrifices this budget environment
has already forced us to make and I would urge Congress to pass
the kind of balance deficit reduction the President has
proposed to avoid putting an even greater share of this burden
on our poorest families.
Indeed, the need to stretch federal dollars further even
further reminds us why our third principle, continuing
investments that leverage private dollars and create jobs, is
so important. Through our Choice Neighborhoods Program we are
helping communities engage a broad range of public and private
partners to transform our poorest neighborhoods and ensure our
children are prepared for the 21st century economy. As the
President said, if we are going to compete with China and
India, we cannot leave anyone on the sidelines. Likewise, our
Sustainable Communities Grants challenge communities to
creatively use existing resources that help them in-source and
bring jobs back to our shores. Memphis is using HUD's Community
Challenge Grant to more effectively invest federal and state
resources in neighborhoods surrounding its international
airport. FedEx has already created over 300,000 new jobs, and
companies like Electrolux and Nucor Steel are poised to create
another 1,500. And by ensuring grantees can collaborate not
only across sectors and jurisdictions, but state lines to align
their housing, transportation and economic development
strategies, this growth benefits not only Tennessee but its
neighbors in Arkansas and Mississippi.
Interstate planning is particularly critical to smaller
places. Nebraska and Iowa, Idaho and Wyoming and the Pine Ridge
Indian Reservation are but a few examples of rural and tribal
economies using regional planning grants which I would note
flow not through their states but directly to them. And at a
time when the fiscal environment has required us to make tough
choices about CDBG, dollar for dollar the most effective job
creators in our budget, these grants are essential because they
leverage the limited resources of core programs even smarter
and more efficiently.

REDUCING REGULATORY BARRIERS

Indeed, reducing regulatory burdens and increasing
efficiency is the fourth principle we used to formulate this
budget. For example, the budget provides flexibilities to PHAs
to better manage in this fiscal environment, and to hold our
partners accountable for the funding they receive it also
continues our Transformation Initiative. With your help, we are
both continuing the next generation management system that will
improve monitoring and oversight of our largest rental
assistance programs and launching a crosscutting technical
assistance initiative targeted to PHAs so that they have the
capacity to manage their budgets. TI research will also allow
us to propose increased investments in programs we know work
like permanent supportive housing and rapid rehousing, end
homelessness and save money. That is why even in this difficult
fiscal environment we propose additional funding for homeless
assistance grants and the HUD VASH program for homeless
veterans ensuring we can end chronic and veteran homelessness
by 2015. All told, despite tough choices, this proposed budget
allows us to serve 27,000 more vulnerable families. It
recognizes that the recovery of our housing market is essential
to our broader economic recovery and it expresses our belief
that every American should get a fair shot, do their fair share
and play by the same rules.

SETTLEMENT WITH BANKS

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. The settlement
between some of the Nation's largest banks and the
administration, close to a billion dollars, you said 900
million, will go to the Federal government to repay public
funds lost as a result of servicer misconduct. Did FHA pay
claims on mortgages insured by the agency due to servicer
misconduct? If so, how much? What were the costs?
Secretary Donovan. What we did to arrive at that settlement
amount is both on the servicing side. And the origination side
starting in the summer of 2010, we began an intensive
investigation of our five largest servicers and in each case,
both on the origination and servicing side where we settled, we
looked at thousands and thousands of files to arrive at a
statistically significant number that gave us confidence we
understood in the broader portfolios what share of loans were
either originated or serviced in violation of HUD requirements.
In the end, because we have the authority thanks to Congress in
many of those cases to assess treble damages, we arrived at a
figure for servicer of what the maximum potential exposure
would be considering those treble damages.
Like in any other settlement, we then entered into a
negotiation. It was not clear for sure whether we would win all
those cases or whether we would be awarded the full amount, but
essentially those treble damages we calculated created a kind
of ceiling if you will on the potential exposure and the single
damages, one time the losses that came to the fund as a result
of those loans, created kind of the floor and there was a
negotiation to arrive at the final numbers that we arrived at
in the settlement both on the origination and on the servicing
side.
So that was the process to get to those dollars. This is
far and away by 10 times the largest settlement we have ever
gotten in recovery for the FHA Fund so that it represents a
very aggressive effort to hold these lenders accountable.
Mr. Latham. With treble, what would be the ceiling?
Secretary Donovan. It would be in the range of about twice
what we were able to recover. Where we ended up was between a
single damages estimate and a treble. But, again, there is risk
anytime you go to litigation that you are not going to recover
that full treble damages amount so that we were in no case
assured that we would be able to recover the full treble
damages.
Mr. Latham. When do you expect to receive the funds?
Secretary Donovan. The settlement specifies that funds have
to be paid to the FHA within 7 days of the suit being approved
by the Federal District court here in the D.C. circuit. We
expect that approval to happen in April. We do not have an
exact date on that, but I would certainly expect that by May 1
we should have those receipts to the Fund.
Mr. Latham. If you do not get the funds, then you would
have to draw down on the line of credit from Treasury to avoid
a negative balance. Is that right?
Secretary Donovan. That really depends on what happens the
rest of the fiscal year. With the increased premiums that were
in our budget as well as the ones we have announced since then,
it really depends particularly on the volume of lending that we
have this year whether we would need to. But again, I think the
chances of us not getting this funding at this point are
extremely low given the agreements that we have reached and the
role of the Federal District court to be able to enforce the
settlement.

SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES

Mr. Latham. Once again you are proposing funding for
sustainable communities, even though Congress did not fund it
last year. While I support allowing--and even encouraging--
communities to work together to think about development in a
holistic way, I cannot support the administration picking 10
percent of interested communities to receive the funding.
As you know, there is no legal framework for the program.
There is no definition of sustainability or livability. It
appears to be simply in the eye of the beholder. So this, I
think, should be a local decision and not a decision made by
the administration without any authorization. Our colleagues on
the Financial Services Committee, led by Ranking Member Mr.
Frank, have recommended that we not fund sustainable
communities and that we transfer those funds to community
development block grants. Your budget funds sustainable
communities in the same account that has the block grants; so
every dollar for sustainable communities comes out of those
block grants. Why is funding for the pilot program more
important than increasing funding for communities to give them
the flexibility to use those dollars?
Secretary Donovan. I think it is a very important question
in terms of the way this funding kind of works together and
also how they are different. Let me try to focus in particular
on what we were able to accomplish with the sustainable
communities grants that we cannot with CDBG. Again, I think it
is very important to recognize as you said that it is critical
that this be about a local vision and I think the demand for
the program, the fact that we have had 10 times more
applications than we have been able to fund, is a good measure
of the fact this really is about local interest in implementing
their vision.
Specifically, the things that CDBG cannot do that this
effort is able to accomplish, one, is to work across geographic
lines. More and more, economies are regional and yet CDBG goes
to individual localities or to states not funding the way that
economies are now working in our metropolitan and rural areas
on a regional line. Kansas City is a very good example where
the Mid-America Regional Council has funding that covers a
metro area that is in two different states, for example.
A second is that private sector actors are not just
indirect beneficiaries but can directly come in and be part of
these applications. As you know, in the Des Moines Regional
Partnerships case, a chamber of commerce that covers a regional
area in Iowa, they have been a direct applicant in funding and
have been implementing their plan which they began well before
this program was put into place but needed funding to make that
happen.
A third example is that in many cases market rate housing
is an important part of these strategies. North Dakota has seen
a boom in oil production in the northwest corner. They have
individuals making over $100,000 a year that are sleeping in
their trucks or in man camps because they cannot build fast
enough. Clearly that kind of housing would not qualify for CDBG
because of the income limits and they have been able to put
into place a strategy to grow private sector market rate
housing through zoning and planning and other things that they
would not be able to keep up with or fund but for this grant.
Mr. Latham. You do not think that they would be able to
fund that with the explosion of money in that area without your
help? I am sorry, but they have more money than they know what
to do with out there.
Secretary Donovan. Clearly, and I have visited myself that
region, what I heard time and again from them is they have not
been able to keep up with the necessary planning and zoning to
have a regional plan that cuts across jurisdictions to keep up
with this. Could that do it in the long run? They might be able
to achieve it, but it might take 5 to 10 years longer without
this support.
Mr. Latham. I am out of time but it is amazing that the
federal government has to come in and subsidize them to do
planning. I am not sure that that would be expedited, having
federal restrictions involved in the funding there.
Mr. Olver. I have gone over time, so I will be flexible
with you, sir.
Mr. Olver. Let me start with a set of comments to try to
elicit some metrics on the program. How many actual
sustainability grants were given out? We know that we funded it
in 2010 and again in 2011, but not in 2012, so we have had 2
years of funding. How many grants went out in 2010?
Secretary Donovan. I believe there were 45 regional grants.
Mr. Olver. Regional grants?
Secretary Donovan. Yes. And 100 percent of those have been
allocated both in 2010 and 2011. One hundred percent of it has
been obligated at this point to those grants.
Mr. Olver. Where are the 2011 monies? Have those all been
awarded and at what stage are they?
Secretary Donovan. One hundred percent have been awarded so
that 100 percent of the funding has been obligated at this
point.
Mr. Olver. One hundred percent obligated?
Secretary Donovan. Yes.
Mr. Olver. But it is far too early to know what may have
been achieved by it.
Secretary Donovan. The 2010 grants are about halfway
through their 3-year life and so what we have started to see is
a number of communities that have completed and are
implementing the planning already. Columbia, Tennessee, was the
first to do that, we have a number of others, that even though
they are only halfway through the period have now completed
plans and are beginning to implement already. We would be happy
to provide more details on the specifics.
Mr. Olver. Is there any other place in the HUD budget that
regional planning, broadly regional kinds of considerations,
are taken up?
Secretary Donovan. There is no other way for us to fund
directly those regionals that cross county lines or even
particularly across state lines which is particularly important
in many communities.
Mr. Olver. But you sort of mentioned when you talked about
Memphis and the effects that that regional planning program has
on Arkansas and Mississippi.
I would also note that from a map that I sometimes keep a
vision of, that the Charlotte, North Carolina, area has a broad
regional--quite a number of counties involved, and they are in
South Carolina and North Carolina, and provide--my guess is, if
my colleague from North Carolina were here, he would be very
supportive of that sort of thing.
So what I am getting at is, the Chairman has pointed out
that it is not authorized, but then neither, by the way, is
CDBG authorized at this stage. It was authorized once, but it
has not been authorized in quite a number of years.
So this is an effort, as I see it, at doing something in a
broad regional way. What have you learned out of this in these
first 2 years? When some of them are well in implementation,
you have probably been following what they are doing. What are
the features of projects which are particularly important in
these kinds of sustainability initiative grants that would not
get otherwise dealt with? What are the features that are
important to it? And where do you see some of the biggest
opportunities?
As we know, you have only been able to give 10 percent of
the applications that came in, so there is a demand. It is a
lot like the TIGER Grant demand for flexible material that is
coming from the communities. It is emanating from the
communities rather than in a top down way.
Secretary Donovan. So I would say two things that have been
particularly helpful that we have learned. One is that having
the chambers of commerce, the private sector engaged in this
regional planning from the beginning makes it much more likely
that they are effective. And there are more than a half a dozen
examples where we have cut across state lines partnering with
chambers of commerce: Idaho and Colorado, you mentioned
Mississippi and Arkansas, North and South Carolina, Iowa and
Nebraska, New York and Connecticut; I mentioned Missouri and
Kansas. All of those are examples where we have the chamber of
commerce regionally leading this, and they are particularly
interested in how we ensure that infrastructure investment is
coordinated across state lines.
One of the biggest barriers to the growth of regional
economies is this fragmentation, where we have different tax
systems, different planning systems, different land use
systems.
The other thing that I would point out is that these grants
have put these communities in a much better position to be able
to benefit from a broad range of federal investments, because
we have aligned at the Federal level that our Kansas City is a
good example, where they have been able to access investments
to implement their plans from six different Federal agencies,
including HUD.
So these plans have put them in a much better position to
be able to attract private capital and other federal capital
toward their plans.
Mr. Latham. Gentlemen, it is time. Thank you. Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
Donovan.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.

HUD/VASH

Mr. Carter. I am, I would say blessed, in my district to
have the largest military facility on Earth, Texas, which makes
veterans a priority in my world. We have got to be concerned
about the men and women who serve bravely in the armed forces.
They are coming back. And you mentioned sequester, and if
sequester goes through, in addition to the agreed cuts in the
military which will put soldiers out on the street, we are
going to see possibly another 100,000 soldiers come out of our
army as a result of the sequester, heaven forbid, I hope.
But we have to be concerned about this. And I am very
supportive of the HUD VASH program. My veterans are very
supportive of this program and enthusiastic about it. I support
the President's request for 75 million and 10,000 new vouchers.
I guess the first question we need to ask, and I would like
your expertise on it, does HUD have estimates regarding the
number of additional vouchers? Will this number work? Do we
need more? Are there other forms of assistance we need to
accomplish the goal of ending veteran homelessness? We do not
want another generation, as our Vietnam veterans were, of
homeless veterans.
Secretary Donovan. First of all, I would say that this has
been an area where I must recognize the very strong work that
the committee has done on a bipartisan basis to support this.
It is largely because of VASH, although we have other
investments around veterans homelessness, as well, that we were
able to accomplish a 12 percent reduction in veterans
homelessness around the country in just one year, and, in fact,
an 18 percent reduction in the number of veterans sleeping on
the street. So it is working, and thanks to the push of this
committee, we have been able to improve the implementation.
We do think that 10,000 is the right number per year to add
to this. We think it would be hard to absorb a significantly
higher number than that in a year. But we do think that we will
need an additional likely 2 to 3 years more allocations after
this in order to truly solve veterans homelessness.
And so we do think if we can get 10,000 this year, that is
the right thing for this annual budget. But we should recognize
that it will not be the last allocation that we will need to
solve veterans homelessness.
Mr. Carter. Well, I am fully supportive of that. I guess
the other question that I am going to be talking to the city
about this, too, probably today, how is HUD and VA working? Are
they working well together? Are there stumbling blocks that you
bump into as you work between the agencies to get this done?
And what can we do to improve the program?
Secretary Donovan. So I would just recognize Secretary
Shinseki and his team have been great partners. We actually
have regular HUD Stat meetings that combine our staffs. We set
a joint goal for reducing veterans homelessness. We were not
even using the same systems to count veterans before. And I
think, as the committee knows, when we came into office, the
VASH program had only served about 1,200 veterans in total. We
are now over 35,000 and counting.
We are not only accelerating our progress, we serve 28
percent--or about 30 percent more veterans in 2011 than we did
in 2010. It allowed us to exceed our goal that we set jointly
for VASH with VA by 78 percent over the last 2 years. And we
decreased the amount of time it takes to get a veteran into a
VASH voucher by 40 percent. So we have made real progress in
partnering with them.
I think the single most important thing that we can
continue to do is to make sure that we have--we continue to
build the data systems, and this committee has been very
supportive of the investments that we are making in our
information technology infrastructure to be able to count and
target those vouchers to the right places.
And I think you will see increasingly, in the next year or
more, that we will be targeting these vouchers to places where
we have the largest concentration of veterans. Many of them
tend to come back to bases and stay in those communities, and
so we need to be more strategic about figuring out exactly
where these vouchers should go.
Mr. Carter. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Judge. In the order of appearance
here, Mr. Dent.

CDBG FORMULA

Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary, good to be
with you today. As you are aware, some communities in my
district took a pretty significant cut in their formula
allocations under CDBG due to the funding, due, in part, to the
funding reductions in the fiscal year 2012 bill, but largely as
a result of the new Census data. They ended up taking a pretty
disproportionate share of the cuts, cities like Allentown.
I am concerned that the formula in the application, the new
Census data, short-shifts the high-need communities while
providing additional resources to communities that may not be
as in desperate need. I know there has been a great deal of
attention to this when the formula allocations came out a
little while back. With these limited resources, I think we are
going to have to work to ensure every dollar is being spent and
leveraged as effectively as possible. Has the department looked
at the impact and considered these recommendations?
I am concerned, too, when you look at those three factors
in determining the allocations, you have got poverty, you have
got this population growth lag, and then the age of the housing
stock, and what are you recommending to deal with this? Because
a city like Allentown grew very substantially, and a lot of
that growth was a lower income population, and they seem to be
penalized under the formula for that. I am just curious as to
the reaction.
Secretary Donovan. And you are exactly right, particularly
in the case of Allentown. It is a Formula B. There are two
different formulas that are used. It is Formula B for
Allentown, which really was driven by a lower number of older
housing units relative to----
Mr. Dent. Pre-1940.
Secretary Donovan. Pre-1940 relative to other communities.
And, frankly, that they did not--Allentown did not experience
as much shrinkage or loss of population compared to other
communities over those 10 years. We do not have any flexibility
in terms of how we implement it. It is statutory that we needed
to use this new data. And Allentown is not alone in terms of
the impacts.
In terms of what we would propose, we have proposed in past
years changes to the formula for CDBG that would update it. We
are still operating on the original formula from decades ago.
In 1975, the program was created. And, frankly, we do think it
is worth working with Congress toward reform of the formula.
So the difficult thing, to be frank, is that in an era of
shrinking dollars for the program, it makes it that much harder
to do formula reform because, for the losers on that formula
reform, the cuts are even more dramatic, as you have seen with
the recent formula.
And so we had proposed originally a sort of hold harmless
factor that we would provide when we proposed an increase in
CDBG funding. Unfortunately, with the challenges in the budget
this year, we simply were not able to propose a kind of hold
harmless methodology that would allow us to do that reform. So
we think that is something worth Congress working together on.
We think it is going to be very difficult, frankly, in this
budget environment this year to see that reform happen with the
harm that it would provide to many communities.
Mr. Dent. Well, CDBG, I will assume that it is going to
become even more diluted if we do not adjust this allocation
formula. Another question regarding CDBG, I corresponded with
the department in the fall last year about an issue that came
up in my district with a misuse of CDBG funds. What was
happening, that a city in my district was improperly
transferring CDBG funds into the city's general fund in order
to support operating expenditures and costs.
I appreciated prompt response with respect to this
particular situation.
I want to continue a dialogue with you on what is being
done on a broader level to make sure that funding is being used
very efficiently and effectively. Language in our bill last
year directed you to work to identify and address waste, fraud,
and abuse in programs like CDBG and HOME. As I wrote you in
October, I support the CDBG and believe one of the strengths of
the program is that it gives localities flexibility to target
resources.
However, it is not intended to be used as a slush fund, to
backfill other budget shortfalls. I am just interested in your
comments on efforts to address these issues more broadly. Are
you seeing this around the country, communities in these tough
times moving their CDBG funds, you know, backfilling elsewhere
which is clearly prohibited?
Secretary Donovan. What I would say is, we have two
different issues here that we are seeing, and the budget
pressures, the cuts in CDBG, there is no question that it has
reduced the number of staff that localities have that are doing
budgeting, doing maundering and oversight, and that does raise
concerns for us in terms of the challenges in operating and
implementing the program well.
On the one hand, what we have done with the help of this
committee, you have given us more flexibility to invest in the
right kind of technical assistance. It used to be that our--we
were basically sort of check-the-box technical assistance. Now
what we do is go in and do a much more real assessment of what
the shortfalls in a community's oversight of the program is and
target training and help to them to build their capacity,
particularly with the limited budget resources that they have.
On the other hand, we have had to increase accountability.
And so what we have done and what we are going to be doing this
year with the support of the Committee is significantly
improving our data systems to find and avoid the kind of
challenges that you are talking about, where money may be
diverted. We need to have better systems that ensure that we
have that data that shows us where communities may be misusing
those funds.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Gentlemen, your time has expired. The gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. LaTourette.
Mr. LaTourette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary,
nice to see you.
Secretary Donovan. Good to see you.

NEIGHBORHOOD STABILIZATION PROGRAM (NSP) 2 GRANTS

Mr. LaTourette. In a rare spurt of bipartisanship on
Monday, we introduced a piece of legislation with a lot of
Republicans and Democrats from Ohio and Michigan in particular,
and we hope to broaden the base, that deals with the situation
of abandoned property. As you know, currently only 10 percent
of the neighborhood stabilization funds may be used by a
community to demolish properties.
The bill would permit those cities and land banks to use
100 percent where it is appropriate, and in addition,
supplement those funds with the authority for Treasury to issue
$4 billion in qualified bonds, where the bond holders would
receive tax credits rather than other compensation.
We toured an area in Cleveland, Marcia Fudge's district,
called Slavic Village, and, you know, everybody has heard the
expression, ``Everything but the kitchen sink.'' We actually
went into a house with no wiring, no copper, down to the studs,
and they had taken the kitchen sink.
And so while I think everybody has as a goal, you know, if
you can go in and rehab and refurbish a house, that is great,
but I think everybody knows that there are some houses that are
not coming back no matter what the good intentions are. The
City of Cleveland has already taken down 6,000 houses. They
have 15,000 more to go. And so this program is going to be
modeled after something in Flint, Michigan. Dan Kildee had a
land bank up there who is now, I understand, running to fill
the seat of his retiring father, Dale Kildee, our colleague,
took about $3 million and used it to demolish homes. And as a
result, they saw the tax duplicate in the City of Flint,
Michigan, go up 200 million. And, clearly, I think sometimes
before you can rebuild, you have got to rip it out.
So my questions are multi-planed. One, are you familiar
with what they did in Flint? And if you are not, I would be
happy to send it to you. And two, just the outline that I have
described of the legislation, which I think is going to receive
a lot of bipartisan support here in the House and also in the
Senate, does any of that cause you any angst as sort of the
shepherd of the neighborhood stabilization?
Secretary Donovan. So, first of all, very familiar with
what Dan Kildee has done. And, in fact, we have worked with him
very closely. The largest NSP2 Grant that we made was to the
State of Michigan and included the leadership of Dan's
organization in bringing together a range of different
municipalities that were hard hit.
And I want to thank you for introducing the legislation. We
are very supportive of what you are trying to achieve with that
legislation. We think it does work very well along the
principals of what we have done with neighborhood
stabilization. In fact, there has been an investment of almost
half a billion dollars in Ohio alone through neighborhood
stabilization. We have been very willing to grant waivers to go
above 10 percent in terms of demolition, and I think there are
almost 14,000 homes that have been demolished across. You
mentioned Cleveland in particular, but many others in many
cities.
And we know that there is much more demand--Detroit,
Cleveland, many other places in Ohio, as well--and that is why
the President, as part of the Jobs Act, proposed Project
Rebuild, which would provide the kind of flexibility that we
did in neighborhood stabilization to do demolitions.
We obviously think that, in some cases, keeping those
homes, renovating them makes sense if it is a neighborhood that
is viable. It is very good for job creation. We think Project
Rebuild will create about 200,000 jobs. But we would very much
look forward to working with you and Congresswoman Fudge to
advance legislation that would continue to build on what we
have been able to achieve together with NSP and could achieve
with Project Rebuild and the Restore Our Neighborhoods Act.
Mr. LaTourette. I really appreciate that. And as we move
this product to the floor, I very much look forward to the
administration--in support of this so we can get everybody to
vote for it. And I would just say, aside from the jobs and
rebounding out their value, these things are dangerous. Last
year, Cleveland police officers have been injured going in, for
people who have sort of decided to homestead there. A month and
a half ago, a young woman and her one-year-old daughter were
dragged into an abandoned home and killed.
So I think it is the right thing to do. I am glad to have
your support. We will stay in touch as we move it forward.
Secretary Donovan. I would just add, Congressman, just
yesterday we had a HUD Stat meeting on this exact topic to look
at the impact neighborhood stabilization is having.
Interestingly, what we are seeing, because demolition tends to
be faster, some of the most impressive results we have seen
from the analysis we are doing, the vacancy rates are down,
home prices are up in these neighborhoods where we focused on
demolition. So we would be happy to provide that information to
you.
Mr. LaTourette. Thanks so much.

UNDEROCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. LaTourette. I am still somewhat
stunned by using the North Dakota example for sustainable
communities. I mean, Mr. Dent, I think, clearly stated the need
for the community development block grants. And to give--I
mean, God bless them, maybe they need your help up there, but,
you have got roughnecks making 100 grand a year, you have got
dirt farmers that have been poor all their lives who are now
multi-, multi-, multi-millionaires up there. So you are taking
money away from communities that really need it and subsidizing
a community that has got more money than it knows what to do
with. I do not understand that, but we will move on. Okay.
Earlier this month, the New York Times reported on a very
troubling issue with the New York City Housing Authority, where
about a third of all housing units are under-occupied, with
fewer occupants than appropriate for the unit. At the same
time, the article said 15,000 units are over-crowded and
160,000 families are on a waiting list for housing.
If you can just tell us how widespread the problem of the
mismatch between the available housing and families served is,
and what we can do to fix the problem, some remedies. You are
very familiar, obviously, with that market.
Secretary Donovan. Yes, and I think one of the things that
the article pointed out is, this is not unique to the New York
City Housing Authority. You do have, particularly where a
senior or an older couple whose children have moved away, they
are overhoused, and it is a significant number.
To be frank about this, this is not a simple issue. As you
can imagine, somebody who has been in their home for some
period of time, to force them to move is often difficult. You
may have a resistance or lawsuits or other things that----
Mr. Latham. Talk to my mother.
Secretary Donovan. Right. So it is something that we have
focused on and tried to make sure that housing authorities are
implementing rules, but we have left some flexibility to
housing authorities about how they push that or incentivize it
and how strong the rules are in terms of whether you would
displace a family from their community or a senior from their
community to be able to move. So it is something that we have
not taken a sort of one size fits all approach on, frankly.
If it is something that the committee would want to focus
on or that you personally would want to focus on, we would be
happy to come back to you with more analysis of the specifics
and some options that we might consider, either legislatively
or through notice of regulations.
Mr. Latham. Is there anything in the budget specifically to
address the problem?
Secretary Donovan. I think the improvements in data systems
and other things, that we have could help with that, but we do
not have a specific proposal in the budget to deal with that
issue.

FHA REFINANCING

Mr. Latham. Yes, work with it certainly. On a different
subject, you mentioned one of the steps to bring private
capital back is your recent administrative actions, which
include increasing the premium of FHA by 75 basis points.
However, in your and the CBO assumptions on the receipts
associated with this policy, do not assume that this will
reduce the value of the FHA guarantees. How then, is it not
simply a budget gimmick to make FHA borrowers pay an extra fee
to fund other discretionary programs?
And your assumptions, they are kind of saying two different
things. Number one, it will not affect the volume, but then
again, you are saying that it will affect the volume.
Secretary Donovan. Yes. I think it is an important
question. And as you said at the outset----
Mr. Latham. Very good.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. The devil is in the
details, right. We actually did estimate a reduction in volume
in our budget for next year. I think what you are seeing----
Mr. Latham. I do not think CBO did.
Secretary Donovan. What CBO did, we made it--we announced,
since our budget was introduced a reduction in our refinancing
fee. And so I think what is driving their numbers is that a
number of refinances will increase. Just to be clear, those
refinances are existing FHA borrowers. So it is not adding to
the total number or share of borrowers that have FHA loans, it
is simply taking borrowers that are in FHA and refinancing them
in FHA. So the fact that you would see a volume increase does
not necessarily mean it is adding to our market share, so to
speak, particularly of the new loans that we make.
Mr. Latham. If they are existing loans, it would not be an
increase.
Secretary Donovan. It would be an increase in originations,
because instead of them just keeping their old loan, they are
getting a new FHA loan, but it is not a new borrower to FHA.
And I told you the devil was in the detail. What we are seeing,
though, is a continuing shrinkage in our origination for
purchase, and that is really what shrinks our market share.
And as you know, Congress passed an increase of 10 basis-
points in our annual fee to pay for the short-term extension of
the payroll tax cut. That is about $9 a month on average in
increased fees. Our up-front increase we think is about $5 a
month on average. So the two of those together we do think will
shrink the share of the market that we have in purchase loans
while our refinancing of existing FHA loans does increase, and
that is what explains the difference.
And we think, frankly, it is the purchase loans where it is
most important that we focus on shrinking that share. For
refinances, what we are really doing is helping the economy
more broadly by lowering on average about $3,000 a year the
payments that those homeowners would make.
Mr. Latham. I am certainly glad you have clarified that.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. I want to engage just a minute about the North
Dakota situation. I have watched the Census statistics for
North Dakota now carefully for the last two Census, and in the
2000 Census, of the 96 counties in North Dakota, there were
only 6 in the whole state that grew in population. Virtually
the whole western part of the state was losing population.
Every county was losing population in the western part of the
state.
Interestingly, I was surprised, I thought there would be
roughly the same pattern. With the 2010 Census, there were
several counties there in western North Dakota that actually
were growing in population, and that is the oil boom. But most
of them were still losing. There were now a dozen communities
that were actually gaining population, even though the state's
population was gaining way below the national average,
nonetheless even though there were a few more counties that
were gaining in population.
And there are some of those counties that are basically
major Indian Reservations, or a number of Indian Reservations,
in North Dakota and South Dakota, though I do not have the map
in front of me so I cannot be sure exactly where they are. It
is almost half of the state that was part of what was getting
money. So there are places there which clearly have some rather
unique sorts of needs. At the same time, the growth and the
boom, the oil boom, is very narrowly located and growth there
might be a reasonable time to actually do some regional
planning about what you are going to do with that growth,
because it is probably going to be there. That oil growth is
going to be there for quite a number of years.
So, I am not so sure that that is an illegitimate one. It
was a pretty small grant, even though it covered a lot of
territory. A pretty small grant, it was only a million and a
half dollars or so in that planning grant.
I would have commented on Cleveland. Well, I will. Do you
ask for something in the--it is the Sustainable Communities'
planning grants to recognize that one of the areas that they
might think about is how to deal with foreclosed housing? I
mean, often I read columns written by economists who say the
housing market is not going to really recover until we have
absorbed all of the foreclosed housing, a fair amount of which
in the most severe places have actually been trashed, as Mr.
LaTourette was commenting about. But there are lots and lots of
those, and if those do not get absorbed, are you particularly
asking for large urban areas that were hit to consider what
they might use in implementation, what they would be planning
for? Or is that something that plans take some time to come up
with and you really need something that is happening right now
that you can use your money for? And can CDBG money be flexibly
used to do exactly that sort of thing to buy up those
properties?
Secretary Donovan. So, specifically in Cleveland, the work
that we have done through Sustainable Communities has included
these challenges. So it is focused on how those neighborhoods
that have been particularly hard-hit are tied in through
infrastructure and transportation. But, again, this goes back
to the point about this is really about a local vision for what
this funding would be used for. We have many areas that may be
growing, like, again, the North Dakota example, growing where
that would not be an issue, right? And so it really is going to
be driven by--the only other thing I would just say on it, to
go back to the North Dakota example, the fact that the real
issue here is, are there resources to do this kind of planning?
And is that planning something that the country ought to want
to see?
And the fact is, the problem is that the growth cannot keep
up with the needs of oil production there, and, frankly,
somebody living in a camper or in a man-camp does not
contribute to the funds that a community needs to plan with
cuts to CDBG and other cuts from shrinkage around the state. We
thought that this was actually a very good use of funds that
were not available otherwise, and would help not just the local
economy but the national economy by allowing faster growth in
oil production in that part of the world.
Mr. Olver. Could I use one minute of my next time so that I
can go on?
Mr. Latham. The gentleman is recognized for an additional
one minute.
Mr. Olver. I wanted to make a comment to my colleague, Mr.
Dent, but he has now left. When I start speaking, people leave.
Mr. Latham. So you have burned your minute?
Mr. Olver. No, no. That is all right. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Judge Carter.

REGULATORY BURDENS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Donovan,
last night I was reading through your fiscal year 2013 budget
overview and noticed your budget principles include reducing
regulatory burdens and increasing efficiency. Well, I was
pleased and a little bit shocked because when I go home every
week, and I go home to Texas every week, my constituents are
constantly telling me that the regulatory burden that is being
imposed by this administration is killing job growth in our
world. And I know the President in his speech to the Congress
talked about repealing regulations and rolling back job-killing
regulations, but folks back home are not seeing it.
It is a good election-time speech to make, but we see 106
major regulations that have been imposed on industry, which has
killed jobs and costing us about $46 billion annually, which is
around 5 times what the previous administration did in a 3-year
period. So, let us talk about what HUD is doing to rein in
unnecessary regulations. Give me some specifics as to what you
are doing to kill job-killing regulations.
Secretary Donovan. Let me try to be very specific about
things that are included in this budget that would allow us to
do that.
One, we are working very closely with your colleagues on
the authorizing side to pass Section 8 reform legislation that
would lower the cost of operating these programs. Just to give
you one very specific example, over 50 percent of those who
have vouchers or live in public housing are seniors or people
with disabilities whose incomes rarely change. They are on
fixed incomes. And yet, we have not had the flexibility in the
programs to do income recertification less frequently for those
kind of families than we would for others.
Another example is, those apartments that they live in
typically have less wear and tear, and yet we have no
flexibility on how often we might inspect those or we may have
an inspection for one program and then have to go back and do a
second inspection for a second program. Providing flexibility
to housing authorities in the way they implement these programs
will reduce the costs and, in fact, you see that savings
reflected in the budget. We are also simplifying the way we
calculate income and medical deductions and a whole range of
other things that are part of it.
A second thing I would point out that we are proposing in
the budget itself, not through authorizing legislation, is to
combine the operating and the capital funds. Right now, we
create a lot of paperwork for housing authorities to track
those two different funds separately when every other kind of
housing operates with a single stream of revenue and does not
have to divide up the operating and the capital. So, that is a
simplification, a streamlining that would provide real benefits
and allow us with the same dollars to serve more people.
And those are the kinds of things that have allowed us--we
actually have in our budget our proposal. We would fund the
same number of people in the voucher program with no increase
in cost this year, and the Chairman referred to this in his
opening statement. The concern about the long-term costs of
renewal of these programs, we have actually been able to keep
it level in the voucher program because of many of those
streamlining changes that we proposed in the budget this year.
Mr. Carter. Are you doing--you mentioned Section 8 and
having a little bit of knowledge about that. Is it basically
Section 8 existing that you are issuing the vouchers for or is
there actually new construction projects in Section 8? I know
there is probably rehab projects going on in Section 8. What
about the construction side of the HUD regulations that in some
instances are very, very onerous? Having been in that business
myself, especially when local codes are being met and HUD is
imposing additional and sometimes complex codes on top of local
codes, is anything being done in that area to reduce the
regulatory burden?
Secretary Donovan. We are making some of the same changes
on the project-based Section 8 side. Just to be clear, we do
not do new project-based Section 8 contracts, so it is all
existing. The only new housing that is being developed with
Section 8 is in our project-based voucher program. That is
where a housing authority has the flexibility to choose to
project-base some units for a particular development. And so
the streamlining we are proposing on the voucher side would
help to simplify for that new construction the regulation.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr. Diaz-Balart.

CDBG FORMULA

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary, how are you, sir?
Secretary Donovan. Doing well, thank you. Good to see you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Good to see you, and thanks again for your
service. Let me follow up on Mr. Dent. And I apologize, Mr.
Chairman. As you know, there are multiple hearings going on at
the same time.
Mr. Latham. I have to be at one myself.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes, it is that time of the year. CDBG
funds, and though I was not here, my staff basically gave me a
quick update as to what the conversation was. And obviously my
specific concern here is the new formula.
In the case of, for example, the city of Hialeah, which I
represent, which is a poor city. As you know, South Florida,
Southeast Florida, was in the epicenter of the housing crisis.
Unemployment is exceedingly high. We can go on and on and on,
and yet I believe they received a 50 percent reduction. Was it
50? Forty-seven percent reduction on that formula, and there is
just no way. In other words, there is no reasonable way with
the economic situation in that city, with the demographics of
that city--by the way, it is a minority majority city. I do not
see how mathematically that can work. It makes no sense. It
does not pass the straight-face test.
So what I would like is to see if you can look at that
specifically because when you look at, the national situation
out there--Southeast Florida, again, South Florida--got hit
exceedingly hard and yet they are getting hit in a level that
makes no sense whatsoever.
Hialeah City--Miami, which I do not have the privilege of
representing, but they also have huge hits, but, again,
Hialeah, the highest in the country, I believe. And there is no
way that the city of Hialeah--I do not think that there is a
way that you can justify the city of Hialeah being the hardest
hit in the country when you look at the demographics, when you
look at the economy, et cetera, and the population.
So, that is something that I would like to somehow revisit
with you, with your staff, and if you could let me know how to
do that so that we can look at it and figure out what happened
there because that makes no sense.
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, we would be very happy to
do that, and the short answer is that change was required
statutorily----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I know.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. By the data that we
implement. I agree with you that the formula is outdated. In
fact, with your colleague Mr. Dent we had a very similar
discussion about Allentown for different reasons----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Sure.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. But a cut that was deeper
than the average cut across the country. And there is no
question that the formula has outdated elements to it that have
not kept pace with what is happening on the ground, with the
challenges that South Florida is facing.
I would say we have been very happy to be able to work with
you and we appreciate your support around the regional planning
work that we have been doing that has added to the funds that
are available to that community, and done it on a regional
basis through the Sustainable Communities Program. And I just
wanted to say thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, and, Secretary----
Secretary Donovan. Thank you for your support on that.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you for being extremely accessible.
For example, the issue of Chinese drywall, which as you know
you were out there yourself and you saw what a tragedy that is
for the individuals that have to suffer.
Secretary Donovan. Yeah.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. It is hard to explain it to people----
Secretary Donovan. Until you see it.
Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. Just how--until you see it.
But anyway, thank you for being accessible. That is why I
wanted to bring this up and, hopefully, we can maybe sit down
with, you know----
Secretary Donovan. I would be happy to do that. Whatever we
can do.
Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. Your folks and figure out how
we can get a handle on that. Thank you.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. The gentleman from
Arkansas.
Mr. Womack. Yes, thank you. And I apologize for being late.
There are a number of hearings going on and we are all consumed
by those.
I want to go back to Section 8 reforms for just a minute.
Is there a time when we are going to have the U and the D out
of HUD dropped? Because housing consumes virtually everything.
I mean, we are $19 billion now? Over $19 billion in housing
programs? Do you foresee that this becomes just basically a
housing organization?
Secretary Donovan. Actually, frankly, we are trying to move
in the other direction to make sure that we are doing more to
support not just urban development, but rural development as
well. Our discussion earlier about the work we are doing on
regional planning and other things, and the coordination that
we have had, one of the big problems that we have had is that
we have only thought about housing separately and we have not
thought about it in a combined way with transportation or other
infrastructure investments, to the point where the average
American family now spends 52 cents of every dollar they earn
just on housing and transportation. We have not coordinated
where folks live, where they work. And what it has meant is for
many communities the cost of moving goods, it has become much
less competitive for many regional economies to be able to
compete with China and other countries, because we have not
focused on trying to coordinate and do a better job at the
Federal level of integrating the way that we make these
investments.
So, the more we can do on streamlining our programs,
simplifying them, saving costs, I think the more that we can
make sure we can continue to meet both missions of the
department.

PHA STAFF SALARIES

Mr. Womack. Last year, in a hearing there was a great deal
of discussion that transpired about the pay of public housing
administrators. I guess the new current law, if I am reading
correctly, says that no use of this year's funds may go to
increasing the salary above what the Assistant Secretary makes.
But my understanding is that some housing authorities are
interpreting that line about no use of this year's funds to
mean that money reserved from previous years and not the money
of the municipality if you are going to pay somebody more in
salary.
Are you aware of that practice?
Secretary Donovan. I honestly was not, had not heard that
there was this issue about prior year funds. We can check to
make sure. I do not think that is accurate, if that is the way
it is being perceived. And it is something that we can
certainly work----
Mr. Womack. And I hope it is not.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. With housing authorities
on.
One thing I would say, Congressman, and this committee was
very focused on this last year, it is one thing to set those
limits. The other thing is that I think we feel very strongly
there needs to be some real transparency about this issue. And
so, within the next few weeks, we will be making public for the
first time ever the salaries and other compensation of the top
five officers in every housing authority around the country. We
believe this is something the public has a right to know, and
so it is something that--and it is something the committee
urged us to do last year. We will be making those public in the
next few weeks, and we would be happy to sit down with your
staff and let you know----
Mr. Womack. Very good.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. What that data shows and
the timing of making it available.

RECAPTURE

Mr. Womack. I applaud you for that transparency. While I
appreciate that the public housing recapture is off the table
for this fiscal year, I would like to ask one more question
about the actual effect of last year's recapture. I have
received reports from one of my housing authorities that not
only are they receiving modified estimates from HUD on the
amount of money to be recaptured from their housing authority,
but the appeals process is sporadic, in their words, at best,
with HUD officials missing documents in certain cases and
communicating that they are still working on responses to those
authorities or requesting to speak with someone about their
denial.
Small housing authorities have been thrown into economic
uncertainty by the flaws of the process and cannot plan future
projects until HUD has it all sorted out. Are you aware of the
problems, and what is being done to manage this administrative
burden?
Secretary Donovan. So, I would first of all just say we
would be happy--any specific examples where you have concerns
we will follow up with you and make sure we know which housing
authorities have concerns and what the issues are. Overall,
what I would say is this clearly was a new process. We had
never before recaptured these reserves. We did propose this to
the committee, even though it was controversial. Many housing
authorities did not want to give up those reserves, but we felt
simply in a time of shrinking resources that we needed to take
some steps to make sure that money was being used quickly and
effectively and drawing down the reserves rather than cutting
other funds, we thought, was the right approach in tough budget
times.
We did set up an appeal process, so that housing
authorities could come in. I have gotten regular reports from
my team on that, and what I would tell you is the vast majority
of housing authorities we have been able to work through those
appeals. There may be specific cases that you are aware of
where there have been issues or document problems. We will be
happy to follow up on those.
Mr. Womack. Yes, and maybe just an isolated case, but we
would like to develop that conversation. Thank you, Secretary,
for your remarks. I yield back.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.

SHOP

Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Secretary, the
fiscal year 2013 budget proposes to eliminate the SHOP program,
which helps organizations like Habitat for Humanity continue to
do the good work they do, helping low-income families afford
new homes through a combination of sweat equity, private
donations, and public funding. Projects funded by SHOP leverage
about 5 non-Federal dollars for every 1 Federal dollar. Why are
you proposing to eliminate it?
Secretary Donovan. Honestly, Mr. Chairman, this is one of
those difficult decisions that we had to make. We felt given
that this is an eligible use of funds to do self-help housing
in the broader home program, that we would leave the
flexibility of local jurisdictions to make the decision. Many
of them do work very closely with Habitat and these other
organizations and do these kinds of projects themselves, and in
a different fiscal time we might have maintained the program.
We just felt that being able to combine them, have a single
program rather than multiple programs that would fund this kind
of work, was the choice that we made in a difficult budget
year.
Mr. Latham. Well, it is my understanding that most of the
SHOP sub-grantees are in rural areas, and they have to compete
for statewide home funds, which are obviously in high demand
and which are oftentimes set aside for large tax credit deals.
And with the recent cuts to the HOME program, I do not know how
likely it is that anybody who currently is in SHOP is going to
be able to compete in the HOME program.
Secretary Donovan. Well, look. You will not get an argument
from me that the cuts----
Mr. Latham. Oh, come on.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. To the HOME program have
been tough, and that we would have supported and would support
higher levels there. On the other hand, given the choice of
having these two programs with these lower funding levels, we
felt particularly with the allocations that do go to states
that are targeted at rural areas that there was a good chance--
and we certainly see this is a priority for many communities to
work with organizations like Habitat that do these self-help
efforts.
So again, in a different world fiscally we might have made
a different choice, but this is what we proposed in the budget.

CDBG FLEXIBILITY

Mr. Latham. The GAO's 2011 follow-up report on duplications
in programs found that HUD has made minimal progress in
assessing the extent to which its economic development programs
overlap with those at SBA, USDA, and the Commerce Department.
Of these four, HUD is the only one that has not taken steps to
define common economic development outcomes with the other
agencies. In particular, GAO found the Department does not know
what portion of its economic development programs are
duplicated by other agency programs.
What are you doing to better understand the extent and
types of duplication? And I would really be curious to know
what you are doing as far as interagency cooperation so that
the programs complement each other rather than duplicate each
other.
Secretary Donovan. With all due respect, Chairman, what I
would say here is this was a case of a disagreement with GAO on
this specific point. There are plenty of things in the report
that we thought that we agreed with. We have been working, for
example, on homelessness to better coordinate and simplify the
structure of the programs around our Energy Programs. We have
been working very closely with DOE. We simply think in this
case, GAO by saying that basically CDBG was a similar program
to these other programs that they focused on at other agencies,
we did not agree with that. It is a block grant, as you know.
It is enormously flexible. It allows infrastructure
development. It allows services like Boys and Girls Clubs, a
very broad range of things that do not fit into what GAO
characterized as character development. And so, we frankly, in
our report back to them, disagreed with their point about CDBG
looking at combining that with other programs because we think
it is a fundamentally different type of program.
Having said that, we do think we can do better and agree
with GAO that we can do more to show outcomes and to measure
the effectiveness of CDBG, and so we have a range of system
improvements that we are proposing and will implement during
2012 to improve the way that we track and monitor the outcomes
that CDBG has. We do not want to change its flexibility, so we
want to leave local discretion on how it is used. On the other
hand, we do think we can do a better job of holding grantees
accountable to what those dollars are actually producing
through changes that we are making in our systems.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to return to
what the chairman has just been talking about. On the Project-
Based Rental Assistance Program, your 2013 proposal is a $640
million reduction from the enacted 2012 level, and under this
proposal, we would expect nearly two-thirds of all of these
projects would be funded for only the continuation, only within
the fiscal year and not renewals. This is the gimmick that we
have seen before and it took $2 billion in the ARRA funding
only 3 years ago to make the program whole, and I think we were
sort of relearning bad behaviors.
If this were enacted into law, how would HUD propose
ensuring the solvency that these contracts for 2014 and beyond,
but try for 2014 at least?
Secretary Donovan. Yes. Congressman, I want to be very
clear from the beginning that this was one of the most
difficult decisions we made in this budget. We would not have
made this decision were it not that the other choice would have
been to reduce the number of families that we could serve
somewhere else in our programs. And so, we are not saying it is
something we would propose at other times and that it does not
have its risks, it does, but we simply made that choice because
we thought it was a less bad choice than some of the others we
would have had to make.
Mr. Olver. There is an inflation rate year by year that
drives these prices up. What would then for 2014 be the cost of
renewing those, even if it were just for the additional one
year? Are you proposing that you are thinking would go back to
the one year or keep the fiscal year program or are you going
to have to do more in one year?
Secretary Donovan. It is no question I think this is an
important one. This is a one-time savings. It cannot be----
Mr. Olver. What is the cost in the next year----
Secretary Donovan. So, we would need----
Mr. Olver [continuing]. Of doing this?
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. Just under $1.2 billion
additional next year to get to the full 12 months of funding.
To reverse the short funding, we would need roughly double that
in 2014.
To your question earlier, I am confident that we have made
improvements in the way we allocate this funding and work with
owners that this short funding would not result in units that
went unfunded or similar kinds of problems that we saw in the
past. I think the risks here are not on the operational side.
The issue is there is private capital that comes to these units
and there is a risk that there might be somewhat less
confidence on the part of those private lenders in supporting
these developments should this proposal go through and that
might have the effect of raising interest rates or other
things. That I think is the risk that I would focus on rather
than the operational risk, which I do feel confident we have
been able to solve the problems that we saw in the past.
Mr. Olver. Just let me summarize that. There is a shift
into the next year with interest of the costs of doing what is
there. Now, you have also suggested that there is some
possibility that because there is uncertainty with the
financing of some of the projects, how serious do you think
that threat is?
Secretary Donovan. I think given the history that Congress
has always funded these units, they have always made funding
available in subsequent years, we already have multiyear
contracts that are funded year by year. So, we have lived with
this uncertainty to some degree. I think it would increase
that----
Mr. Olver. Now, that is how we got into the $2 billion one
lump sum in the ARRA funding down the way because I have been
on this subcommittee for 8 years, 2 years in the ranking
position, 4 in chairing, and then back to 2 in ranking under
the distinguished present chairman, and I saw exactly what was
happening over that period of time. It is a really, really very
troubling situation. Thanks.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver. Mario, you do not have
any questions?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. No, sir.

FHA PROJECTIONS

Mr. Latham. The Department and the FHA have occasionally
been criticized for presenting more positive projections than
what actually exists. For example, your projections are
routinely more positive than what is reported in the Annual
Actuarial Report. As recently as December, you stated that this
review ``made clear that under base-case economics, the fund
will remain positive and its prospects for the future are
good.'' However, 2 months later in your budget, you projected
that you would need $688 million drawn from the Treasury. In
December, you testified the FHA Fund would recover to statutory
minimum of 2 percent capital level by 2014. However, just two
months later, you are projecting it will take until fiscal year
2015, even though you have taken a number of measures to help
the FHA Fund recover. Should we fire the guy that does
projections? Actually, what factors contribute to the worsening
conditions? Explain what is going on.
Secretary Donovan. Yes.
Mr. Latham. Why the projections are so far off all the
time.
Secretary Donovan. So, the single biggest determinate of
the health of the fund is house prices and where they are
headed. We have over the last few years the projections that we
have used, which are independent projections by Moody's
Analytics, they are not done in-house, they are not
administration projections, they are independent projections,
have proved to be more optimistic than what has actually
happened. That is the single factor that has driven the changes
that you are talking about.
The other criteria and issues that lead to those
projections, in fact, generally have performed better than have
been projected within the actuarial study, and I think one good
example of that is CBO's estimates this year that receipts will
be almost $1.8 billion better next year than the administration
projected. In other words, they think our models and our
projections are too conservative for what would be.
I think the important one I would point out about the
estimate that was in the budget that you pointed to, at the
time the budget was published we already knew that those
numbers were outdated. We did not have the settlement dollars
that we talked about factored in because the settlement was not
completed. We also had not announced at that point additional
premium increases because we were waiting for the settlement to
get completed in order to decide what the final numbers would
be that we would impose. So, we always knew that those numbers
were not accurate and that, in fact, we never expected to have
to draw on the Treasury. It was simply an artifact of the
budgeting process and the timing that those numbers were
included. And we continue to believe and, in fact, the budget
shows that we expect more than $8 billion in net receipts next
year and we expect the fund to recover to the 2 percent
consistent with that original projection that you talked about.
Mr. Latham. So, we can take that to the bank, right?
Secretary Donovan. I wish I had a crystal ball. If I did, I
would not be in this job probably; I would be somewhere else
making a lot more money. [Laughter].
But, certainly, what I will say is, again, the single most
important thing this year that determines where the health of
the fund will be is where house prices perform. Our base case
was a roughly 1 percent drop this year and that, I think,
continues to be what is expected overall net for the year, but
we need an additional roughly 4 percent drop before the premium
increases to push the fund negative and now it would be a
significantly larger drop and that would have to happen this
year to drive the fund negative.
Mr. Latham. Why do I not go to Mr. Olver?

SECTION 8 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES

Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, in the enacted 2012 bill, administrative
fees for tentative base Section 8 were funded slightly lower
than fiscal year 2008. During that time, since 2008, we have
seen a 14 percent increase in renewal costs for the program.
From what you have seen and heard from public housing
agencies, has this lower funding level for the administrative
fees impacted the PHA's ability to lease Section 8 vouchers?
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, there is no question that
the levels of the administrative fees in the last few years,
and particularly in 2012, are a real threat to the program.
And, in fact, something I never thought I would see, we had two
housing authorities that turned back HUD-VASH vouchers, Akron
and Milwaukee, and just since January, we have had 18 housing
authorities that have made the decision to give up their
broader Section 8 Voucher Program, so just since January, 18
agencies because they simply do not think that they can run the
programs given the level of administrative fees.
As you know, the proration in 2012 was about 74 percent of
what the estimate is of the full need to run those programs.
Even in a very, very difficult budget year, we made the
decision to add over $200 million to the administrative fees.
We would not have done that had we not thought there was a real
risk of serving fewer families of housing authorities giving up
their programs with the low level of admin fees. Even with the
increases that we are proposing, we would still only be at 81
percent proration of admin fees. So, this is something that we
are very concerned about, enough so that in a very, very
difficult year, we proposed more than $200 million increase and
we think that is the minimum necessary to be able to make sure
that housing authorities have adequate funds to be able to even
tread water, much less improve their programs.

VASH PROGRAM

Mr. Olver. I, of course, am particularly concerned about
examples of the turn back of VASH vouchers, but you are
suggesting that there are other more recent, since the 1st of
the year are not just VASH, that there are other resource
requiring programs that are also suffering. Which are those
other programs coming from? Which of those other resource
needful programs that are now, you think, threatened?
Secretary Donovan. Well, these 18 housing authorities since
January did not just turn back VASH vouchers. They decided to
give up their entire----
Mr. Olver. Prior program.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. Voucher programs.
Mr. Olver. Entire program.
Secretary Donovan. And, again, these admin fees I am
speaking about are just for the voucher program. So, they have
given up their entire programs since January, 18 of them.
Mr. Olver. Is there a difference between 202s and 811s?
Secretary Donovan. 202s and 811s are funded through
separate contracts through multifamily and do not have a
separate administrative fee associated with.
Mr. Olver. Are you doing a study of the fees? Is there an
administrative study being done? What is the status of that?
Secretary Donovan. Well, we do have a very extensive study
that is underway. It will not be fully completed in time for
the budget process in 2013. We do have initial results though
that will be coming over the next months that we would be happy
to share with the committee that might help to inform decisions
about the admin fee funding for next year.
Mr. Olver. You mentioned Milwaukee and another place. Was
it Asheville?
Secretary Donovan. Akron.
Mr. Olver. Akron.
Secretary Donovan. Akron, Ohio.
Mr. Olver. Milwaukee. I have not heard a list of the 18----
Secretary Donovan. The 18.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. Since the 1st of the year that have
gone beyond just VASHs and decided to go all the way here.
Secretary Donovan. Well, we would be happy to provide that
to you and the committee.
Mr. Olver. All right. And the study, you say, will not be
done for how long again?
Secretary Donovan. Let me get the exact date. If you give
me a minute, we will give you the exact date on the
expectation.
Mr. Olver. Well, at some point, you can tell me. I am ready
to yield back.
Mr. Latham. That is amazing. The gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Price. Welcome.

HUD FUNDING LEVELS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for my late
arrival. It is due, as you might guess, to another hearing,
another subcommittee. So, I will consolidate my questions.
I understand we want to make this the last round and I
think I can do that. But it is a challenge because there is so
much in this budget that is really going to stretch and strain
the agencies and the programs that we have counted on. One size
does not fit all in housing, and whether we are looking at the
HOME program or public housing or Section 8, there are a range
of approaches here and all of them are under a good deal of
financial duress, some more than others though. So, I want to
ask you about three programs that have been very important in
my district and just ask you what is going on and what kind of
assurance you can offer.
I am sure I am not the first to mention the Community
Development Block Grants, but you have essentially flat-lined
both CDBG and HOME. The HOME Program has been particularly
useful to promote home ownership. In a district like mine, you
can imagine this is a program we have taken full advantage of.
You are flat-lining both of these successful programs or
programs that I think most people would regard as great
successes.
I know you are dealing with the Budget Control Act and it
looks like the budget we are getting now is going to reduce
that allocation even further, which is not good news by any
means and for housing in particular. So, you do have these
constraints, and is that what is going on here or is there some
sort of trend here where the department is going to continue to
deemphasize CDBG and HOME in particular? Is there something you
need to tell us about your assessment of those programs in
particular?
And then finally, I come to you once again as a champion of
HOPE VI or as a witness to what HOPE VI has achieved in my
district. We have had model HOPE VI Programs, on time, on
budget, taking these devastated neighborhoods like no other
housing community development program can do and has developed
large areas in a very significant way that has simply turned
around significant portions of the cities of Raleigh and
Durham. I know Choice Neighborhoods is supposed to be the new
HOPE VI, just take up the banner there, but that has been
funded at a very low level: 5 implementation grants, I
understand, last year; 30 planning grants. I wonder what you
can say about where those awards have gone, to what extent it
is indeed supplanting HOPE VI or to what extent the kind of
emphasis we used to have in HOPE VI, the kind of awards you
were able to make are simply now not being granted.
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, I would say on all three
programs that you mentioned--CDBG, HOME, and Choice
Neighborhoods or HOPE VI--we certainly see Choice Neighborhoods
as a successor that builds on the great success that HOPE VI
had. In all of those cases, in a different budget environment,
we would clearly think there is reason to fund them at a higher
level. And, in fact, these are three of the programs that
dollar for dollar are the best job-creators available. And the
only reason that they are not funded at a higher level is that
in a world where 83 percent of our budget goes to renew just
existing units, and we have pressures of lower incomes for
those families and inflation, it makes it very difficult to
maintain the other investments that invest in new projects, and
that really is the challenge, but we would clearly support
higher levels.
What I would say on Choice Neighborhoods in particular is
that with just the five implementation grants that we have
provided so far--and I would make the point one of the concerns
I think you had and others had was would this deemphasize the
renewal of public housing by moving to Choice Neighborhoods?
And, in fact, what we have seen is that public housing has
continued to be the very centerpiece of what Choice
Neighborhoods is doing with over 75 percent of the winners,
including housing authorities and public housing as the focus
of what they are doing. So, I think we have kept our promise on
that.
And one thing I would point out, just those 5
implementation grants, we wish there were more, but just those
5 have leveraged from our awards 13 times the funding that we
awarded in private capital to create jobs, to do construction
to rebuild those neighborhoods. So, when I say dollar for
dollar, these are some of the most powerful job creators, they
leverage private sector funds in a way that is really
remarkable, 13 times our investment in terms of the scale of
private capital that is coming into just these 5 projects that
we have awarded.
Mr. Price. Well, both of those points are impressive about
the leverage and also the public housing.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask at this point in the record if
the Secretary could furnish the list of those awards for the
current year and any assessment he wishes to make about the
marginal difference, the difference at the margins, that the
substitution of Choice Neighborhoods for HOPE VI. I know there
are some reasons for that.
Secretary Donovan. Yes.
Mr. Price. I would like to have your assessment of what
kind of difference that, in fact, has made on the ground. Thank
you.

TRIBAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

Mr. Latham. Mr. Secretary, I am glad to see the department
is working with Native American Tribes to reduce large backlog
of block grant funds. We continue to hear from tribes that
specialized technical assistance is greatly appreciated, much
needed. What are you doing, any innovation to improve the
assistance for the tribes as far as the technical assistance to
advance their projects?
Secretary Donovan. Yes. One thing I would just say is to
say thank you for the flexibility the committee has given us to
improve our technical assistance through the Transformation
Initiative, and I really do think that is making a real
difference.
I think one of the most important things we can do not just
for Native American Tribes, but also, more broadly, is to
continue to focus our efforts around rural communities.
What we have seen and one of the many things I have heard
from many of the tribes initially when we came in was that we
needed to speed up and improve our funding processes. We have
been able to cut by 82 percent the time it takes to get our
NOFAs out. So, an 82 percent reduction in time I think has made
a real difference in getting the money to where it is needed
more quickly across the board. Housing counseling was an area
you were very focused on last year, where we made real
improvement. Choice Neighborhoods, we already have our awards,
our NOFA out. But specifically targeting in other programs to
smaller communities, rural communities has made a real
difference for tribes.
I would give you an example of our Rural Innovation Fund,
where tribes did very well because of the technical assistance
that we provided. Another area, sustainable communities, the
committee made sure that we had a set aside for smaller places.
We actually went beyond that and had a set aside for even
smaller places that has made sure that over 50 percent of the
winners in that program are rural communities and in particular
Native American communities have done very well. One example,
the first ever zoning code that has ever been implemented on
tribal lands for this tribe was able to be funded through a
Sustainable Communities Grant. So, making them eligible for the
broader range of programs has been one of the best results I
think of this technical assistance.
Mr. Latham. I know there is some concern with folding the
tribal technical assistance in with the Transformation
Initiative, concern about that, and I do not know if we need to
talk about it, or you need to respond.
The Navajo Tribe says they plan to accelerate their spend-
out, nearly 110 million over each of the next 3 years. But then
they received 90 million, so they are actually only going to--
they have got a $450 million backlog, but they are only
reducing that by about 60 million. I do not know if you can
work more closely with them to help them as far as----
Secretary Donovan. That has been a particular issue as you
know, that we have worked with them on. I know we have talked
to the committee about what I would say is the concern about
the set-aside for technical assistance. As we have moved with
the cooperation of the committee towards this Transformation
Initiative model, we have flexibly made available up to half a
percent in our budget that could be transferred to The
Transformation Initiative.
That is something where we have come back to the committee
for approval each year of how we are using it. And so I would
say if it is a focus for the committee to make sure there is
technical assistance funding available as it is for us, for
Native American activities, that that is absolutely something
that we would prioritize there and we would want to work with
you on making sure there is funding for.

IT FUNDING

Mr. Latham. I may run a little over here, if that is all
right. And then this will be my last round if we could do that,
okay? Thank you, Mr. Olver.
Well, you have kind of gone to what my next question was
going to be. Over the past couple of years you have sought
authority to skim about a half or 1 percent off various
appropriated accounts and use them for the Transformation
Initiative with the goal of transforming HUD.
This is your fourth budget and while we can understand some
need for flexibility early in the process, I would think that
by now you should kind of know where your funds are going to be
needed to actually ask for appropriated funds. In quoting from
your budget it says, ``Given the time between the formulation
of HUD's budget and its passage, new information needs to be
identified as current projects progress and policy issues
develop with input from across the department, Congress, and
outside experts and stakeholders.''
You are telling me that the Department that oftentimes
takes 365 days to get out the NOFA, you cannot plan ahead that
far to ask for appropriated funds rather than just moving--it
is like $200 million you are asking to move around.
Secretary Donovan. So, first of all, I would say I am glad
to report it no longer takes us 365 days to get those NOFAs
out. We did reduce that time by 82 percent, so a big
accomplishment. And part of that, frankly, was through the
Transformation Initiative, the investment that we have made in
technology. To be frank, what I would just say here is, in the
private sector, in the public sector, I think there is no
question that we do not know everything that is going to be
needed. The exact amount that is ultimately going to be
required in technical assistance, up to a year and a half in
advance.
Mr. Latham. Why are you unique to everybody else in
government?
Secretary Donovan. Frankly, this is an area where OMB and
the administration believe it could be a model, and this kind
of flexibility would be useful in other places as well. What we
are trying to make sure of is in a program like the voucher
program or others that--where we propose this, that having a
set amount that would be transferred is--I think all of us
would say is a less smart way to go than to have the
flexibility to say if it is not needed this year, if a budget
comes in below--or project comes in below budget, if the
technical assistance because the market shifts in FHA we are
doing less volume than we expected, to keep that money in the
core programs might be a better approach rather than having it
sit and not go used to help the families that I think we all
want to help.
And so that flexibility really goes to benefit our programs
by saying it is up to a certain amount that could go to these
uses, but if it turns out that it is not needed or that full
amount is not required because of changes that we could not
have anticipated a year in advance, the money stays within the
programs to be used to help more families or to make the
programs more effective.
That is really the flexibility we are talking about. And I
do not think we will ever get to a point where our planning is
going to be perfect enough where a year in advance we are going
to know, you know, down to the dollar. These are relatively
small amounts in our budget overall. Exactly what the timing is
going to be on these----
Mr. Latham. You can always come back the committee and ask
to reprogram. But, I mean, it is unique to your department. I
think we all get nervous when we see people have the ability
without any kind of oversight to basically move money around.
You are talking--I mean, 200 million bucks--of funds
sitting there that you can play with. You know, and I do not
know why it is not possible, like in the IT funding to, you
know, to have that go into the working capital fund to----
Secretary Donovan. Let me give you an example. And I would
say, Mr. Chairman, I----
Mr. Latham. We were here.
Secretary Donovan. I hope you believe we have--you have
seen that we have worked very closely with you. We come back,
we need your approval to use the money in that account, but let
me just give you an example. Last week we had a meeting on our
major effort with--this committee has been very supportive of,
to restructure our financial systems at HUD.
And as can often happen with a very large system
investment, there were some issues that came up that made us
step back and re-think--should we re-think the timing of the
way this rolls out, and to phase certain pieces differently
than we might have expected. That might have a real impact on
what the spending would be this year in real time for this.
Not something we ever could have anticipated, and I think
the flexibility that--particularly on these types of projects,
technical assistance, research and demonstrations, and
particularly IT, is a benefit to both of us as long as we
remain in very good communication, which I hope you would agree
we have on this.
Again, I would use a private sector example. This is the--
in my mind, more of the way a private sector organization would
be able to operate to be flexible in real time on being able to
do this. I would not say we are perfect yet on that or that we
have reached where I would want to get as an organization, but
I think the Transformation Initiative has made a real
difference in helping us get there.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much. I apologize, Mr. Olver,
for running over, but if you have a question----

HOUSING COUNSELING

Mr. Olver. We have had discussions around HUD's Housing
Counseling Program several times over the last several years.
In any case, the 2012 bill set an ambitious deadline for
awarding those grants within the 120-day period. And last week
I was pleased to see that HUD actually had met that deadline
and awarded within the 120-day period, another fast movement
here.
Just a few years ago, that kind of a 120-day turnaround
would have been a long stretch, so I commend you for that. I
know you set up a formal proposal to the committee which
requires committee consideration on both sides of the Congress
and approval for reorganization of the Housing Counseling, and
it is under consideration.
But I would like to know, in the meantime, what changes
have you made in the Housing Counseling Program?
Secretary Donovan. Congressman, let me just say, I do have
the information on the admin fee study that you asked about. It
will be completed in 2013, but in July we should have the first
findings available. And so we look forward to being able to
present that to the committee over the summer as we see those
results come back.
Mr. Olver. That would be good.
Secretary Donovan. Specifically on housing counseling,
there are a number of changes that we made that allowed us to
get this money out dramatically faster than we had in the past.
First of all, and I will say, we heard very clearly from the
committee that this was one of the reasons that it was not
funded in 2011 and that it was important that we move more
swiftly. We actually drafted and put together the NOFA in
advance of the committee appropriating the money so that we
were ready to go right away.
Mr. Olver. You actually assumed that the committee----
Secretary Donovan. No, we did not.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. That we would finally de-fund that
money?
Secretary Donovan. We just wanted to make sure that----
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Secretary Donovan [continuing]. If you chose to fund it,
that we were ready to go. We thought that work was worth the
risk that you might make a different decision.
Second, we have reorganized our whole clearance process of
how we have the different parts of the agency work together to
streamline the approval processes, and we have also radically
transformed the way we do funds control to simplify it and
speed up getting those grants approved and out there.
And then finally, I do think these changes in the office
structure are very important. When we looked at it, I think the
committee had a very reasonable concern that the way that we
had organized our Housing Counseling Function was not ideal.
And that lead to the reorganization that we have presented to
the committee, and we look forward to working with you on it.
Mr. Olver. Does that process that you have described also
include the stakeholders, the people out there in the field who
have to actually produce the counseling?
Secretary Donovan. I will tell you, we had a series of
meetings with our stakeholders. When we went and told them not
to get too much in the weeds here, that we were eliminating our
old logic model in the way that the NOFAs were done, we got a
standing ovation. So this very much was a collaborative process
with our Housing Counseling Organizations.
Mr. Olver. Thank you very much., Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver. Mr. Price.

REDUCTIONS IN HUD'S BUDGET REQUEST

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, as we
close out here, let me return to the broader question I was
raising earlier having to do with your overall allocation. As
you know, The Budget Control Act last year set discretionary
spending for fiscal 2013 at $1.047 trillion. That agreement is
now being breached with the House Budget Resolution which is
coming in at 1.028 trillion.
And, of course, even lower numbers have been bandied about
and debated.
So I want to ask you, you have testified already that the
very austere allocation you have been working with in putting
this budget together have led you to do such things as flat-
line CDBG and HOME and you have acknowledged readily that that
is not what you really want to do or think represents the best
of the best policy approach.
Choice Neighborhoods is another program that is being
squeezed. That is a very minimal program compared to what many
of us think it should be and what it has been at some points in
the past. Now you are talking maybe here about tentative and
project based Section 8 as well or public housing capital and
operating expenses, just the whole array of departmental needs.
Can you tell us, is there slack in this budget that we are
missing somewhere? I mean, what is the implication for cuts
even of the sort we are seeing in the House Budget Resolution?
What our subcommittee's likely share of that is going to be?
What implications do you see and to the extent you want to
comment more generally on the challenge of preserving our
housing stock or for that matter, keeping economic recovery
going? What would you say?
Secretary Donovan. So just to be very specific about the
budget proposal, assuming that it would lead to a 22 percent
reduction in the allocation to HUD, our estimate is that it
would lead to over a million families losing their housing.
Specifically, 585,000 families in the Voucher Program; 425,000
families in the Project Based Section 8 Program; between 110-
and 180,000 people in our homeless programs who would end up
back on the streets, and those are just the core housing
programs.
You talked earlier about CDBG and HOME. CDBG alone that
estimate--that level of cut we estimate would lead to the loss
of almost 17,000 jobs just for the one year of the budget that
we are talking about, and tens of thousands of new units of
housing that would not be built as a result of the HOME
reduction. So those are a few estimates to be specific about
what that proposed cut would lead to.
Mr. Price. And that is at the 22 percent level, which as I
understand it is at the high end of the cuts being contemplated
or discussed.
Secretary Donovan. That is correct.
Mr. Price. But even if something like what the House Budget
Resolution puts forward is enacted and we get our share of
that, I mean, it really is an important question, what our
share of that is and what this subcommittee is going to be
dealing with. Because presumably the numbers you cite would be
or some fraction of those numbers would be the result of almost
any reduction from an already austere allocation level.
Secretary Donovan. That is right. Given the choices that we
made around the Project-Based Section 8 Program, minimum rents,
other very, very difficult decisions, additional cuts would
result in families not being able to keep their housing.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentlemen. Do you have any more
further questions? If not, I think we will conclude the
hearing.
I will have some questions certainly to ask you for the
record. One, I know there is real concern with some property
and casualty insurance companies with some new regulations
coming down, their ability to continue to offer those
coverages. We will get more details and the question to you on
that.
But I just publically want to thank you for the
communication and the cooperation. You are a great partner to
work with, and I admire you very much in a very tough job
there.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I feel very
much the same way. Both you and I would compliment your team.
You have worked very, very collaboratively with us and I
appreciate it. And want to say thank you to Mr. Olver for his
service once again.
Mr. Latham. The last time. Anyway, with that we will
conclude the hearing.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.134

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION--MAJOR MODES FY 2013 BUDGET REQUEST

WITNESSES

MICHAEL HUERTA, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
VICTOR MENDEZ, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
JOSEPH C. SZABO, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
PETER ROGOFF, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION

Chairman Latham Opening Statement

Mr. Latham. The Subcommittee will come to order. Today we
welcome administrators from the largest modes at the Department
of Transportation. In no particular order, we have with us
Administrator Victor Mendez from the Federal Highway
Administration, Administrator Peter Rogoff from the Federal
Transit Administration, Acting Administrator Michael Huerta
from the Federal Aviation Administration, and Administrator
Joseph Szabo from the Federal Railroad Administration. We
welcome each of you here today, and we thank you for coming,
and we look forward to your testimony regarding the fiscal year
2013 budget request.
We do have a tight schedule this year. We are not able to
have individual hearings, which is probably a relief to each of
you, from the DOT modes, nor are we able to include all of the
modes today. However, we are providing an opportunity for
members to question the four largest modes, and we look forward
to a productive discussion.
We are going to also have a series of votes, so when we
leave for that, we will end the hearing. Because there is going
to be an extended series of votes, the hearing is going to be
somewhat limited, so we want to move along as quickly as
possible. Mr. Olver, do you have any comments?

Ranking Member Olver Opening Statement

Mr. Olver. Well, thank you all for being here. The Chairman
has gone carefully through the first and last names, so I do
not need to do that. As you know----
Mr. Latham. I have got it parenthetically written down.
Mr. Olver. [continuing]. As you know, Secretary LaHood was
with us earlier this month, and testified on the overall budget
for 2013. I believe this proposal reflects the vision needed to
ensure America's competitiveness of the global economy through
job creating and investments in our nation's transportation
infrastructure. And I look forward to discussing in more detail
your respective portions of the budget. So thank you for being
with us.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver. And when the Secretary
was here a couple of weeks ago, we decided to forgo opening
remarks in the interest of time and it worked really well. We
are going to ask you today to shorten your remarks to two to
three minutes each, and after that, we will get right into
questions. And, as always, your full statement will be part of
the record. Administrator Mendez, you are recognized for two to
three minutes.
Mr. Mendez. Thank you and good morning.
Mr. Latham. Good morning.

Administrator Mendez Opening Statement

Mr. Mendez. Chairman Latham, ranking member Olver, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
discuss the Federal Highway Administration's fiscal year 2013
budget request. The President's request for FHWA includes $42.6
billion for a restructured federal highway program that will
put Americans to work repairing bridges and repaving roads now,
while making worthwhile long term investments in America's
infrastructure.
FHWA programs not only help build and maintain our
infrastructure, but also provide people across the country with
transportation options to get to their jobs and other
destinations.
Investment in highway infrastructure is critical to the
success of our nation's economy. But the true impact of our
investment is realized by delivering the best value for the
taxpayer dollars. We must pursue better, faster, and smarter
ways of doing business.
To that end, three years ago, I launched an innovation
initiative that we call Every Day Counts to shorten project
delivery time and speed the deployment and widespread use of
new and proven technologies into the marketplace.
In combination with FHWA's innovation initiative, the
President's fiscal year 2013 budget request will support
thousands of jobs, improve safety, spur innovation that will
shorten project delivery and accelerate the deployment of new
technologies, make our communities more livable, and lay a
foundation for future economic growth. Mr. Chairman, with that,
I conclude my remarks and will be happy to answer your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Mendez follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.142

Administrator Rogoff Opening Statement

Mr. Latham. Thank you very much. Why do not we go to
Administrator Rogoff?
Mr. Rogoff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Olver, members of
the Subcommittee. I am going to highlight just a couple of the
Obama Administration's priorities for public transit this
morning. Our funding request for safety is our first and
highest priority. Our 2013 budget renews our request for $45
million to go along with new authority that the Obama
Administration has been seeking since 2009, to enable the FTA
to develop and enforce common sense safety oversight standards
for rail transit.
The transportation authorization bill that passed the
Senate by a wide bipartisan margin included many of the safety
provisions requested by the administration. Even the deeply
flawed and troubled bill that was reported by the House T&I
Committee significantly expands FTA's responsibility for
safety.
In the past two budget cycles, this Subcommittee has
deferred our request for new safety resources on the grounds
that our authority had not yet been expanded. That expansion is
about to come in some form, and it is long past time that we
were able to move forward on these important safety
improvements. Quite frankly, the status quo on rail transit
safety oversight is really indefensible. I really implore you
to take a hard look at our safety request this year, because,
like I said, our authority is about to be expanded and we do
need resources to address this issue.
Transit ridership is, again, climbing to record levels, and
the growth is occurring across all communities in America, both
urban and rural.
According to FTA data, transit ridership rose in January by
a healthy 5.1 percent over the same period a year ago. We have
some transit agencies, frankly, that are reporting growth of 10
to 20 percent this year, and that comes without any expansion
in bus route service or rail service; it is just ridership
spiking to that degree.
While transit ridership was increasing well before the
recent rise in gas prices, those higher prices now threaten to
undermine the ability of transit agencies to provide the
increased level of service that the public is demanding.
Transit agencies have to pay the higher fuel costs just like
everybody else. It is worth pointing out that the majority of
transit trips in America are still taken by bus. That makes our
budget request for temporary and targeted operating assistance
all the more critical.
Finally, FTA also needs appropriate staffing levels in
order to oversee federal funds and ensure they are spent
properly. The fact is, the FTA has far fewer people overseeing
more taxpayer money to more grantees than almost any other
government agency. So I encourage you to look at those
comparisons. We seek your support for a modest staffing
increase even at a time when we know that staffing increases
are hard to come by. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, that is all I
have.

Administrator Szabo Opening Statement

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Rogoff. Let us go to Mr. Szabo
here with the Federal Railroad Administration.
Mr. Szabo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to you, ranking member
Olver, members of the Subcommittee. It is an honor to appear
before you today on behalf of President Obama and Secretary
LaHood to discuss the President's proposed fiscal year 2013
budget for FRA.
With 100 million more Americans by the year 2050, we must
take aggressive action to increase our transportation networks
capacity. High speed and modernized inner city passenger rail
will boost capacity and alleviate the huge pressure on modes
already weighed down by congestion.
Since the year 2009, FRA has obligated 98 percent of the
Recovery Act funding that started funding for the high speed
and inner city passenger rail program. Our 32 state partners
building out rail projects will provide service to 65 percent
of our population in five regions. This year, there are $1.65
billion of high speed and inner city passenger rail program
projects that are under construction. Throughout the country,
we are seeing examples of how connecting a town to passenger
rail is triggering surges in new business and development. With
the new 110 mile per hour service recently achieved in the
Midwest, higher speed rail has officially expanded outside of
the northeast corridor.
The President's budget request includes $2.5 billion for
rail projects, and the budget also requests $196 million for
our top priority, which is safety. As the rail network grows,
the President's funding request for safety will help us remain
innovative in reducing accidents. We want to keep making
progress addressing the human element in building stronger
safety cultures.
FRA is committed to true 21st century rail and to working
with our state partners to better move people and goods. The
systems will not appear overnight, but they will put people
back to work today rebuilding America and ensuring that we make
good on a basic promise, that the country we leave for our
grandchildren is even stronger than the country our
grandparents left for us.

Administrator Huerta Opening Statement

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Szabo. Mr. Huerta.
Mr. Huerta. Thank you very much. Good morning, Chairman
Latham, ranking member Olver, and members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the administration's
fiscal year 2013 budget request for the FAA. Our $15.2 billion
budget is fiscally responsible and represents an important
investment. It supports our mission to deliver the safest and
most efficient aviation system for the traveling public.
This budget allows us to maintain appropriate staffing for
air traffic control, to keep pace with safety inspections, and
to continue critical investments in both airport infrastructure
and in NextGen technologies.
We are always striving to make our system safer. The FAA
has made important advancements in improving safety such as the
new flight duty and rest requirements for pilots that we
announced last December. And we are working toward a final rule
that required air carriers to implement safety management
systems.
We aim to improve cost efficiency, and we are tightening
our belt internally at the FAA, as well. We had to make hard
choices in this year's budget about how to maximize benefits,
and, for example, we are focusing our airport grants on smaller
airports.
We thank Congress for our four year reauthorization which
will continue vital safety programs, create jobs, and support
NextGen. The FAA forecasts that air traffic will nearly double
in the next 20 years, and to handle this growth, we need to
transform our aviation system through NextGen. We are moving
from the ground base navigation and surveillance system of the
last century to the satellite based system of the 21st century.
The FY 2013 budget request includes $1 billion toward those
efforts, and at the same time, the budget maintains our
existing infrastructure which must perform flawlessly every day
while we pursue this transformation.
NextGen will deliver more on time and fuel efficient
flights and continue to ensure that we operate the safest air
transportation system in the world. It is a better way of doing
business for the FAA, for the airlines, for airports, and for
the traveling public.
These improvements are vital to expanding on the 10 million
jobs that civil aviation creates and the $1.3 trillion the
sector contributes to the U.S. economy. I thank you for your
support of America's aviation system and for keeping this vital
economic engine running at full throttle. Thank you.

HIGHWAY TRUST FUND

Mr. Latham. Very good. Thank you all for your brief opening
statements. We will do five minute rounds if we can so
everybody can get questions in with our limited time. If we
could try to stay to that five minutes, Mr. Olver, we will do
that, I know.
Administrator Mendez, the Highway Trust Fund as we know it
is unsustainable. Your estimate for the trust fund is to run
out of money in the summer of 2013 if we continue to spend at
the current levels without any new sources of revenue. The FY
2013 budget would put an eight year band aid on the problem by
using the supposed OCO savings to fund increased spending and
making all surface transportation spending mandatory, even
though there is no long term revenue source to pay for it.
Essentially, the budget would abandon the user supported trust
fund model that has been in place since 1956. First of all, I
guess, are you comfortable with abandoning that model that has
worked in the past?
Mr. Mendez. Mr. Chairman, the President's proposal
certainly addresses the benefits of our investments in
transportation, so that is what we are focused on. Moving
forward with recommendations in terms of how to actually pay
for all of that, we are comfortable with that approach.
Mr. Latham. That is a yes. At our hearing with Secretary
LaHood, members of the Subcommittee made it clear that we do
not view the OCO as legitimate revenue because it would have to
be borrowed money, if, in fact, that money were to be spent in
the future, which no one is anticipating.
We are not willing to increase our country's already
enormous mandatory spending. I think it is telling that neither
the House nor the Senate authorization bills propose any kind
of mandatory shift in transportation spending. Is it not time
to abandon this, I mean the idea of going to mandatory?
Mr. Mendez. Well, as I said, our proposal, as it stands
today, is pretty clear on that point. We believe that is the
way to go. I know there is some disagreement on the OCO
component. But if you look at the CBO recommendations, I
believe CBO actually scores OCO. So we are comfortable with
that approach.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Have you submitted anything to do that?
Mr. Mendez. No, we have not.
Mr. Latham. If Congress is unable to pass new authorization
by the time we mark up this bill, I guess we have to assume it
is an extension of SAFETEA-LU. And without new authorization,
it says the trust fund can only sustain about nine billion in
FY 2013 highway spending if we maintain the $4 billion balance,
which you recommend, otherwise you have delays for the states.
And if we take the trust fund down even further to a zero
balance in 2013, we can spend about 22 to 24 billion, although
the states would have delays in their reimbursement. Would you
want to tell us about the difficulties if, in fact, we get into
that scenario?
Mr. Mendez. Well, if we get into that scenario, I think if
you run through the numbers, that would equate to maybe a 30 to
35 percent reduction in highway investment--it would be
devastating. I think you hit it on the nose. When we reimburse
states, there would be a delay in that regard. The states
themselves would have a hard time trying to plan the major
projects that make a difference. I am sure some states would be
able to continue with some of the smaller, minor projects,
pavement preservation and such, but I think as you look at our
needs throughout the entire nation, the major projects that are
critical from a national perspective probably would not move
forward.
Mr. Latham. Okay. We are doing a lot better than last year.
Mr. Mendez. Yes, we are. Yes, sir. Thank you.

EMERGENCY RELIEF FUNDS

Mr. Latham. At least you are kind of answering questions. I
actually applaud you for getting the emergency relief dollars
out. Places like Iowa, they got hammered last year, that was
extraordinarily important. And each year the authorizing
committee is provided about 100 million in emergency funds. The
rest, which totaled 1.7 billion last year, is provided by the
Subcommittee. And we have got to make sure that the largest
disaster expenses submitted by the States are sound.
The GAO report said you could do a better job documenting
and verifying emergency damage estimates. Are you doing
anything to follow their recommendations?
Mr. Mendez. Yes, sir, we are. And I do want to backtrack a
little bit. I want to say that I did go to Iowa to do the
ribbon cutting on I-685. They were able to turn that one around
really--well, I will leave that up to the state. But, the
important thing was, we were able to turn that around rather
quickly, in three months. Obviously, the weather helped, so
that was really good for your state.
We are continuing to look at those recommendations from
GAO. We are looking at modifying our manuals and looking on a
nation-wide basis through our structure to ensure that we
improve upon the reporting structure. We do monitor the ER
expenditures very closely. And, we are always open for any room
for improvement. I am supportive of that.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Olver.

TRANSPORTATION STATE OF GOOD REPAIR

Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to start
out slowly here. I am going to ask a question that I would like
an answer from each one of you. The last budget, the 2009
budget was the last budget under the SAFETEA-LU Authorization
Act.
We have had now at least three budgets since then, the '10,
'11, and '12 budgets, and we are trying to write now the 2013.
There have been eight extensions of the SAFETEA-LU budget in
that period of time, short term extensions that have gotten us
through that group of years. Now, in 2009, the American Society
of Civil Engineers gave grades for America's infrastructure
that fell from C minus to D minus. And I am not going to list
each one of your grades, you probably know what they were. Each
of your agencies has done their own evaluation of the state of
good repair and needs of your modes, events, and initiatives to
address the infrastructure deficiencies.
I would like each of you, and it has got to be fairly short
and concise, more concise than my question, to assess the
progress that you have been able to make over these last three
years. Has your agency been able to achieve a better grade than
the ASCE gave you three years ago in the area of state of good
repair? Okay. And we will go from Mr. Rogoff down the line.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, the short answer to your question, sir,
is, no, and let me explain why. We have a considerable backlog
of unmet needs in transit, some $78 billion by our own estimate
in unmet capital needs. Now, the Recovery Act did a very good
job in helping us buy down some of that backlog.
But the reality is, the backlog increased faster than we
could buy it down with the Recovery Act. So we have basically
been treading water, and absent a reauthorized program that
allows us to set a new course that includes our new state of
good repair program, we are going to continue to tread water.
As far as our grade on that, it sort of reminds me of my son's
performance in algebra right now, sort of barely passing and
lots of room for improvement. And I think that is where we are
in transit across the country.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Mendez.
Mr. Mendez. Yes, sir. Thank you. I would agree with my
colleague. ARRA, in fact, in the highway arena did help quite a
bit. We made a lot of improvements. But again, the demand out
there, as you are all aware, is overwhelming. I can tell you
that over the last decade or so, our deficient bridges did drop
from 31 percent to 29 percent. So we do have a good handle on
bridges and safety on roadway conditions.
And that is in spite of the increase in traffic volumes and
all of that. So I know you understand there are a lot of issues
out there.
But I would say one other thing, that if you look at what
is happening on a national basis, and probably all of you face
it in each and every one of your states, when it comes to the
major projects, the ones that make a real impact not only from
a state perspective, but from a national perspective, we are
lagging in that.
We do not have the resources. And each and every one of you
is probably struggling with at least one project in your state
that cannot move forward that would make a major impact.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Would you say your grade--you have earned
a grade higher or is it deteriorating?
Mr. Mendez. Well, unlike my colleague, I do not have kids,
so I do not go by grades. I am looking at my statistics.
Mr. Olver. All right. We do not need to spend the time
then. Mr. Szabo.
Mr. Szabo. I do not think there is any question with
congestion costing our nation nearly $130 billion a year, that
it is effecting our economic competitiveness. From a rail
standpoint, I believe we have made good progress in the past
three years in expanding and advancing our infrastructure for
both freight and passenger rail.
The TIGER program has done a great job--targeting
investments to expand the use of freight rail. And in the
passenger rail program, we are seeing some great substance
actually take place this year.
As I mentioned in my testimony, you will see 110 mile an
hour operations on both the Chicago/Detroit segment and
Chicago/St. Louis segment this year. And within the next two
and a half years, roughly 80 percent of Chicago/Detroit and
roughly 75 percent of Chicago/St. Louis will be at those
sustained speeds of 110 miles per hour including----
Mr. Olver. And some of that may not be state of good
repair. But I would generally agree with you, you were a
smaller agency three years ago and we have put a lot of effort
into it, so some of that has to have gotten to state of good
repair. Mr. Huerta.
Mr. Huerta. I also have a son taking algebra, so I do
follow grades. We were given a grade of D in 2009. As you know,
the FAA has to operate and sustain the existing infrastructure
while making the transformation to NextGen, and we have made
very good progress on that in the last three years.
Some of the achievements to date include modernizing the
automation of the base infrastructure that we have for air
traffic control. Our en route automation modernization is
replacing a 40 year old host system that we use to separate air
traffic into high altitudes.
We have a companion program that looks at terminal
automation modernization, and that process modernizes the RADAR
processing in display systems that air traffic controllers use
at or near the nation's major airports.
At the same time, we are also accelerating benefits
associated with this technology.
Mr. Olver. How much has your grade improved in all of this?
Mr. Huerta. I have not checked my grade lately, but I think
it has gone up.
Mr. Latham. Judge Carter.

CONTRACT TOWERS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Huerta, the
President's '13 budget proposes a $2 million cut in the FAA
contract tower program. This is one of the most successful,
cost effective air traffic safety programs around.
While this may not sound like a lot of cut for the size of
this federal budget, it represents a potentially $8,000 cut per
contract tower distributed equally among the 248 airports. If
only general aviation airport control towers are hit, it would
be a $16,000 cut per airport.
In Texas, we have invested a great deal of time and money
constructing contract towers with the understanding that the
FAA would provide funding for the operation.
Georgetown Airport, which is in my district, in fact, quite
close to my home, is a general aviation airport. And all across
Texas--we are involved in this program. Can you explain why the
administration is recommending reductions when this is a very
cost effective safety program for the general aviation at
least?
Mr. Huerta. Certainly. The contract tower program and the
cost share elements, one of the things that the President has
suggested is we re-examine and analyze the cost benefit
calculation that determines the relative amount of local share
that goes with it. The President's proposal is to update the
cost-benefit calculation and increase the local share
requirement. At the same time, however, we do recognize that
reauthorization has asked for an 18-month moratorium on updates
to be made before those changes would actually be implemented.
So that will make it difficult to achieve the $2 million cost
saving that we project based on the President's request for
2013.
Nonetheless, I think the question is still out there, that
it does make sense for us to update the cost share formulas
associated with the contract tower program. We have not done
that for four years and it is something we need to do. We want
to work with all of the stakeholders to come up with an
equitable resolution there.
Mr. Carter. Many view this as sort of a move against
general aviation. General aviation creates 1.3 million jobs and
contributes $150 billion to our economy. It is important to us.
In Texas alone, we have 391 public use airports, 50,932 pilots,
31,690 general aviation aircraft. It is an important part
getting across a big state.
In fact, anybody in politics in Texas that is running
state-wide and does not have access to a private airplane is
not going to get elected. It is just generally that important.
And I am asking the question directly. There are many in
general aviation that think that the issue with contract towers
is just one step in the discouraging general aviation. What is
the Department of Transportation and the FAA doing to encourage
general aviation, and is there a move to discourage general
aviation?
Mr. Huerta. There is not a move to discourage general
aviation. It represents a very significant element, as you
point out, of contribution to the economy. In terms of
operations in the system overall, I think it reflects the
majority of aviation operations that exist in the national
airspace system.
What the President's proposal attempts to do is recognize
that over time, the general fund contribution to the operation
of the FAA has gradually crept up. What we are looking to do is
find ways to assign more of those costs to the users of the
system. We recognize this is an important contribution and we
are trying to do it as equitably as we possibly can.

HIGH SPEED RAIL

Mr. Carter. Well, we see a trend of having a concept of
transportation in this administration, and in order to push
that concept, we are trying to come up with things, and we are
seeing the President out on the stump today talking about
issues to push people over into rail and so forth.
I am from Texas, 110 miles an hour, we drive 110 miles an
hour. I am all for a 225 mile an hour train, but I am not for a
110 mile an hour train, especially when it is only for like 40
miles of a 200 mile stretch. So it may fit D.C., it may fit
Chicago, it may fit New York, it may fit the East Coast. I
would argue it does not fit the Midwest, I would argue--at
least the central part of the country, it certainly does not
fit Texas. And I do not want us to start discouraging one
transportation means which is being effectively used in our
state because other states want to encourage pushing resources
over into rail.
I am not anti rail. My granddaddy was an engineer on the
railroad. But for effectiveness in my state, general aviation
is very important to us. And so I wanted to raise that issue,
because I certainly would not want to see us discouraging
general aviation. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Carter. Mr. Pastor.

H.R. 7

Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning
gentlemen. Recently the T&I Committee passed H.R. 7 and it
proposes to eliminate the bus state of good repair funding for
multimodal operators. Those are agencies that deal with both
bus service and the transit service. And as you know, the
Valley of the Sun, Valley Metro, does both. So Mr. Rogoff, by
elimination of this program what does it do nationally and what
does it do to us particularly in the Valley of the Sun?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, Mr. Pastor, there were four items
pertaining to transit that were in the President's statement of
Administration policy on H.R. 7 in which we issued our veto
threat and this was one of them.
Frankly, by FTA's own numbers, two-thirds of the bus trips
taken in America are provided by transit agencies that provide
both bus and rail. And to take the bus funds in the bill and
direct them solely to those agencies that provide only one-
third of the bus trips, we just see as deeply wrongheaded. It
is sort of like sending the subsidies to where the passengers
are not.
We feel strongly that obviously if we are going to have a
bus program of any size, all bus operators should participate
in it and especially those bus operators that are performing
the majority of trips, like Valley Metro in Phoenix.

202 SOUTHWEST LOOP

Mr. Pastor. Thank you. Mr. Mendez, as you know, we are
dealing with the Southwest loop of the 202. And it seems like
there is concurrence on the north and south alignment, both by
the city of Phoenix, Arizona Department of Transportation, and
MAG, which is the regional planning council. And their north-
south alignment is 61st Avenue; they have agreed that that is
the best place.
But the Federal Highway Administration has been hesitant to
give its blessing or to jump aboard on it. And the question I
have is what are the concerns that the agency has and how soon
do you think those concerns will be met so that we can go
forward with the procedure to finally construct the 202 in
Southwest Valley?
Mr. Mendez. Well, Congressman, the big issue there is, to
work on some of the 4F properties to ensure that we can find a
way to mitigate against that. Now one thing that we have been
working on very closely with Arizona DOT, with the regional
planning council, MAG, and the city of Phoenix, is to approach
the State Historic Preservation Office and look for a way to
reevaluate the historic properties.
And, in fact, late yesterday afternoon I spoke with ADOT
Director John Halikowski about the issue and we are working
together to approach the SHPO and see what kind of results we
can get. It really comes down to a matter of the historic
property being in the alignment. And so we want to find a way
to move it forward and mitigate at the same time.
Mr. Pastor. It is my understanding that the properties have
not been declared historic, that they have the potential to
becoming historic, but no one seems to have an interest in
making them historic.
If that is a situation that no one has come forth in the
last 10 years to make them historic, why is that problem
persistent and why don't we agreed that the probability of them
becoming historic is minimal and let us go forward and begin
the citing on that 61st Avenue?
Mr. Mendez. Right. It's my understanding that there are
certain criteria within the law that identify what could be
historic property. This property we are talking about meets, I
believe, most of those criteria, if not all of the criteria----
Mr. Pastor. But in the last 10 years no one has stepped
forward to say we want to protect it or claim it is historic.
Mr. Mendez. Right. But again, moving our way through the
requirements of the 4f section of the law, we have worked
collaboratively with everyone at the table on that. It is not
yet designated. It is a possibility that it could be
designated. So now what we are trying to do is reevaluate what
we have done to date and try and back off the limits so we
can--if we need to mitigate we will mitigate--and move forward.
Mr. Pastor. I guess my question is, there is always a
possibility, but you also have to decide what is the
probability. And it seems that everyone concerned says that the
probability is very, very minimal. There is always a
possibility, but the probability is minimal. So why don't we
proceed forward, so that we can continue the project and move
it forward? So does probability deal at all in your
determination?
Mr. Mendez. Well, we will continue to work on the issue and
try and get through the 61st alignment.
Mr. Pastor. I thank you for it.
Mr. Mendez. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr. Diaz-Balart.

TRANSIT FORMULA GRANTS

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have
a number of questions. First actually before questions, really
a comment to Administrator Rogoff. You obviously are very
familiar with the issue of Dade County when the FTA suspended
the county's transit formula grants, for a pretty good reason I
may add.
So I know you have spoken several times. I mean, I have
spoken to you and your staff. But I really just want to thank
you for dealing with this issue. I know that you were meeting
with the mayor, with our new mayor, or you are going to?
Mr. Rogoff. I actually spoke on the phone with Mayor
Jimenez just yesterday just to update him on our most recent
audits. We have got a lot of work we both need to collectively
do, but we are making sure that the public is still served
through the process.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, I just want to thank you for that
and I encourage you to continue to, as you have, to work with
our new county leadership and also just to let you know that I
support the efforts of making sure that the taxpayer and the
transit rider is well served. And again, sir, I look forward--
you know, use me as an ally.
Mr. Rogoff. Absolutely.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Consider me an ally on this issue, if you
would.
Mr. Rogoff. And we believe the mayor is committed to it as
well. There is just----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes.
Mr. Rogoff [continuing]. A good bit of work that needs to
be done.

NEXTGEN EQUIPTAGE

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Absolutely. I think that is probably an
understatement.
A few other issues, Mr. Chairman, that I have. The recently
enacted FAA reauthorization bill authorizes the secretary to
establish a Federal loan guarantee program to incentivize
NextGen equipage. That is an issue that has been central in all
of the FAA's and DOT's NextGen testimonies for now more than a
year.
So when should the aviation community, specifically the
general aviation community, expect implementing guidance and
how do you envision that new program working?
Mr. Huerta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Huerta. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Huerta. Thank you very much. Yes, the FAA bill does
incorporate language that calls on us to develop a credit
guarantee program to facilitate equipage. This, combined with
efforts that the agency is focusing on with respect to
operational incentives are very important I think because there
are two parts to the delivery of NextGen: the infrastructure
that the FAA delivers and then what the industry needs to do to
be able to take advantage of the capabilities. This has been a
central issue.
We were quite pleased to see that language. We are working
within our finance, operations, and NextGen organizations in
the FAA to frame out how best to respond. Then we want to sit
down with industry. This is what the legislation envisions as
the partnership approach: working with private-sector funders
and then ensuring there is a link between delivery of
capabilities and the users of the system equipping.
We would envision that it looks at the whole spectrum of
users of the system: air carriers, business aviation, and
general aviation. Those are details we have to finalize, but we
look forward to working with the industry.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Any idea of when you--are thinking of the
timelines for this?
Mr. Huerta. I do not have a timeline yet. We are still
framing out what the steps are, but we can report back to you
with a timeline.
[The information follows:]

Loan Guarantee Program

The FAA is pleased with the authority in the recently enacted FAA
Reauthorization Bill that allows the agency to establish an avionics
incentive program to help commercial and general aviation (GA) aircraft
equip with NextGen avionics.
We are currently talking to our stakeholders to seek their input on
the loan guarantee program. We hope to design a program that meets
their needs. One goal for an equipage program would be to encourage
deployment of NextGen-capable aircraft in the National Airspace System
sooner than would have occurred otherwise.

UNLEADED AVIATION FUEL

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Great. That would be great.
And actually, Administrator, a word if I may. Also last
year, the appropriations bill included $2 million for the
research on initiatives to transition to unleaded aviation
fuel. And I think the administration also, recommended $2
million this year I believe. There is obviously great interest
in that.
And I understand that you are working with stakeholders on
this issue, number one. Also the Aviation Rulemaking Committee
recently made recommendations to the FAA. When do you think the
FAA will announce these recommendations and what is the process
for implementation?
Mr. Huerta. With respect to fuel?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes. Yeah, the transition to----
Mr. Huerta. On transition to unleaded av gas, I'll need to
get back to you with a specific response, but this is a
significant issue. As you know, av gas is, for general
aviation, the last leaded fuel out there, and there is a lot of
concern in the general aviation community about its continued
availability.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Huerta. But I will get back to you with that.
[The information follows:]

Unleaded Aviation Gasoline (AVGAS)

The FAA is taking a leadership role in the General Aviation (GA)
industry's efforts to transition to an unleaded aviation gasoline.
Recent initiatives such as the Unleaded Avgas Transition Aviation
Rulemaking Committee (UAT ARC), in combination with the continuing
research and development support provided by the FAA William J. Hughes
Technical Center have made significant contributions to address the
technical challenges of introducing an unleaded aviation gasoline. Our
target is to work with industry to have a replacement fuel for leaded
aviation gasoline available by 2018 that is useable by most GA
aircraft. Once an unleaded fuel is available, each aircraft and engine
combination will need to be evaluated and approved to use the new fuel.
The timeline for the GA community's transition to an unleaded fuel is
uncertain and is largely dependent on market forces, the continuing
availability and cost of leaded fuel versus an unleaded alternative,
and the future regulatory environment that may restrict lead emissions
from aircraft sources. The FAA is committed to working with industry to
assure a viable path towards an unleaded fuel for the GA fleet.

Mr. Diaz-Balart. There are obviously economic issues and
market challenges and transition fleets and everything else. So
if you could just get back to us on that it would be great.
Mr. Huerta. Absolutely.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Chairman, if I may, just a couple of
more questions, if that is all right with you?
Mr. Latham. In 25 seconds.

FRA CRASH AVOIDANCE SYSTEM

Mr. Diaz-Balart. In 25 seconds. All right.
The issue of--and this is for Mr. Szabo--the crash
avoidance system, which obviously has been controversial at
best and we know the issues. So to make it quick, with all of
the issues out there, does the FRA believe they have enough
resources and personnel dedicated to the implementation of the
PTC? And what is a timetable for issuing the final rules
because obviously there is a lot of uncertainty out there?
Mr. Szabo. Well, the final rule, of course, is out there
published already. Based on the President's Executive Order we
are doing a revisit on that for some tweaks. A final rule
removing the dual test, which the industry was so concerned
about, will, in fact, be published by June of this year. It
should save the industry somewhere between half a billion to a
billion dollars.
And then the remaining miscellaneous issues that the
industry have been concerned about will have the Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking published by August. And of course, there
is a report that is due to Congress by the end of this year. We
will have that to you several months early. It is in
administrative clearance right now.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you. Mr. Price.

CAPITAL INVESTMENT GRANTS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We appreciate all of
you gentlemen being here today and the good work you do in your
agencies. In the limited time I have I want to focus on
Administrator Rogoff, if I might, and on the question of the
criteria governing capital investment grants, the rules that
are underway and the rules that might be contemplated in the
future.
We did appreciate, Administrator, your visit to the
Triangle area of North Carolina a few weeks ago; glad to be
able to show you firsthand the groundwork we are laying for a
strong regional bus and transit system and also, hopefully, we
were able to demonstrate the critical importance of regional
rail to assuring our quality of life as we grow.
As you well know, our regional transit agency was hamstrung
by DOT's midstream change in cost effectiveness standards in
the last administration, and more generally by a New Starts
system that seem to accommodate expansion projects and to meet
the needs of our largest metropolitan areas at the expense of
areas like ours.
So I applaud the secretary's efforts to reform the
evaluation criteria and the streamline of the process. Under
the last administration's rule, cost effectiveness counted for
about 80 percent of the project's worth. Now, of course, that
is still a criteria, but the administration has begun to
evaluate projects in a more comprehensive manner, including
land use, increased mobility, economic development, and so
forth.
Just this January, you published a rule that would
significantly revise the criteria to incorporate social equity
and environmental considerations, and would aim to speed up the
process, speed up FTA review by altering the process required
for projects to obtain a full funding grant agreement.
So I wonder if you could comment on the status of this
rule. I know your comments are just now coming in, but what
kind of practical difference do you anticipate this will make?
When do you expect it to be finalized?
And then just one further matter. I wonder if you could
comment on efforts to update the New Starts program to reach
smaller urban communities, communities that do need Federal
support. I have always thought it made sense to allow more
flexibility in the amount of Federal support, the Federal
share. And you have said the FTA would not take a one-size-
fits-all approach.
The Federal share is down; is 50 percent now down from 60
percent. In some cases a share of more like 25 or 30 percent
would be significant enough to get a project off of the ground.
So I wonder what your thoughts would be on that matter.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, let me address them one at a time. First,
let me say I, too, really enjoyed the visit and I really
commend the folks in the Triangle for approaching this on a
regional basis. It makes sure that we are not going to
balkanize systems and we are not going to have competing and
duplicative service. No one has the money for that these days
and there is a lot of need down there. As you know, Triangle
Transit has had some stutter steps in terms of moving off of
the ground and deploying a valuable system.
We have seen great success in Durham, where voters have
already voted to tax themselves to help match Federal dollars.
We are looking forward to seeing what Wade County and Orange
County are likely to do in the future. But there seems to be a
lot of enthusiasm and we want to partner with them.
On the rulemaking, the comment period for the Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking is still open, but it will close shortly.
And the Secretary and I are determined to get a final rule out
by this summer. The proposed rule has been very widely well-
received and as such, we do not expect to have a very difficult
time dealing with the comments we have received. It really, as
you said, takes a broader view in terms of what are the
benefits these projects provide and get us away from that very
narrow criteria that was imposed by our predecessors in 2005,
which, frankly, it was super statutory. They imposed criteria
even though they had no basis in the law. We are really, in
many respects, just going back to the law as it exists.
In terms of streamlining, yes, our rulemaking will also
enable us to streamline the process. The real benefits of
streamlining our process will come with reauthorization. I will
say with all of the disagreements that we are having with
elements of the House bill especially, and all of the
differences between the House and the Senate and the Executive
Branch over reauthorization, the approach on how we need to
streamline the New Starts projects is an area where we have
remarkable unanimity.
We think the language in the Senate bill is actually very
workable and the House bill language on this particular topic
is workable, too. Obviously there are other elements of the
House bill that we are troubled by. So in terms of share, in
terms of raising the available Federal share for smaller
projects, that is just challenging for managing the pipeline of
money.
I would love to have the same 80/20 split as we have in
highways. However, I do not have the resources to pay for that.
So that is really a----
Mr. Price. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Let me just clarify.
What I am talking about is lowering the share as a way of
letting the money go further and----
Mr. Rogoff. Lowering the Federal share?
Mr. Price. Yes.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, I think as you said, we have effectively
done that because we are now, you know, not only at 50 percent,
but some projects are at 40, 30, and 20 percent based on what
they can put up and what we can put up.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr. Womack.

HIGHWAY INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And before I ask a
couple of questions I would like to just associate myself with
the remarks of my friend Judge Carter down here on contract
towers. That is, associate myself with his remarks, all but
that driving 110 miles an hour thing. We have too many hills; a
little dangerous.
This is for Administrator Mendez. We all know that road
construction infrastructure projects are a source of great
jobs. As a former mayor, I look at it not necessarily in the
short term on jobs, but the long term on jobs and the return on
investment we get from a lot of this infrastructure. And with
that said, you know, I spoke last year about the I-49 project
and I will use it as an example because it is in my district,
and we do appreciate your support on the I-49 corridor.
But the large question is how do we keep these projects
that we have already committed to funded through completion.
When it is certain that they are going to provide us a long-
term return on investment through massive economic development
that has already been proven, in my district, for example? How
do we do that and ensure that the heartland has this capacity
to continue to build?
Mr. Mendez. Yes, sir. I think you hit really on the crux of
the matter here. We all know, I believe, that when you invest
in our infrastructure it is good for the Nation. It is good for
economic growth, particularly in today's economic conditions,
and trying to get people back to work. It certainly does that.
We know that for a fact.
I think what we need to focus on, as you mentioned, is the
long term. We have these major projects that are really
important, not only to the state, but to the Nation. The
processes we have in place when there is Federal
participation--we do have a process where on the major projects
we do require a financial plan to be submitted before we
actually participate in those big projects. We then continue to
monitor those projects on a monthly basis.
We have an office in each and every state, but we also have
an office here at headquarters that monitors the progress on
major projects. And that's our focus, to ensure that these
projects continue.
If there are hiccups we try and address them in concert
with the state DOT. So it is really, once they are up and
running, it is a matter of, how do we better manage that
process? And we can only do that in concert with the state
DOTs.
Mr. Womack. The greater Northwest Arkansas area, I think
can prove to be a model for how a region is putting its skin in
the game. In fact, there is a proposal coming up in November to
levy a sales tax in the state for infrastructure improvements.
Is it possible or is it even possible or practical for the
grant process to help reward areas that are willing to tax
themselves, levy themselves, so as to have a lot of skin in the
game and further leverage these very precious Federal
resources?
Mr. Mendez. Right. And you hit on another key point about
regions coming together as was discussed here just a while ago.
I have been there. I have been at the front line at a state DOT
and when you bring all of the parties together, you can really
create great plans and actually move them along.
I think what we have done with some of our grant programs,
we look at, for example, the TIGER grant program. If you come
in with an application that shows that you are leveraging any
funding you might get or receive from Federal aid, I think that
gives you a better positioning in the award situation. So we do
look at that in some of the grant programs.
Mr. Womack. Then I am going to pivot to the process,
particularly the environmental impact statement process, and I
will give you an example. In my district, Northwest Arkansas
Regional Airport received money for an airport access road back
in the late 1990s and they have waited 12 years to finish this
entire environmental review process with no end in sight, no
certainty to be seen.
So I would ask, with this example of mine, how can we
further refine the environmental review process to allow these
projects to move forward? Or should we just accept that they
are doomed to some kind of a 10- or 15-year process?
Mr. Mendez. No, sir, I cannot accept that. I think there is
a lot of room for improvement within FHWA. I believe you missed
my opening remarks.
Mr. Womack. I did, sir.
Mr. Mendez. We do have an innovation initiative underway
within FHWA to look at some of these processes and improve
them. I believe there is a lot of flexibility within the
current laws that we have not explored. On the environmental
process, a project like this under that innovation initiative,
we have SWAT teams. We call it Enhanced Technical Assistance,
where we would send in a SWAT team to do whatever it takes to
resolve those issues.
Mr. Womack. Thank the gentleman. I yield back.

HIGH SPEED RAIL

Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman. Mr. Szabo, the high-speed
rail project from Los Angeles to San Francisco is currently
about $100 billion in costs and it is also $87 billion short of
funds, and that is even after California committed $10 billion
to the project and the Federal Government committed $3 billion
to it. I think it is notable that there are no private
investors who have decided to commit any funds to it.
I know you are full steam ahead on high-speed rail, so let
us focus on the one line that is actually being planned today,
from Fresno to Bakersfield. The line is estimated cost about $6
billion, but the 6 billion does not include the cost of
electrification or any rolling stock on it. Do you know how
much those will cost?
Mr. Szabo. Well, actually what you are quoting from is the
earlier version of the business plan, which is in the process
of being revised right now, and so there will be new numbers
with----
Mr. Latham. Is there a new plan?
Mr. Szabo. Yes. Oh, yes. In fact----
Mr. Latham. Is it published?
Mr. Szabo. It is due to be released next week by the
California High-Speed Rail Authority. Through some value
engineering, they believe that the initial construction costs
will be less and so many of these concerns that have been
raised will be addressed.
Mr. Latham. So where do we get the funds for the hundred
billion?
Mr. Szabo. It is going to take a public-private
partnership. And there is, in fact--there continues to be
strong private interest. So the key is to make sure that
between the money that the Federal Government commits, that the
state commits, and with the operating plan that they have put
forward, that there is sufficient meat there to entice the
private sector to come forward with their investment.
But their interest continues to be strong. We continue to
hear from the private sector and so does California High-Speed
Rail.
Mr. Latham. Do they have any authority to use the Federal
funds for any activities other than the high-speed rail
activities in the grant agreement?
Mr. Szabo. No, the funds that we have granted, you know, or
have awarded through our grant process are specific for that
purpose of which they applied for. So there is not flexibility
either under the law or the grant process to shift them to a
different purpose or to another use.
Mr. Latham. Did you have any idea of what the $3 billion
would do as far as existing lines, as far as repair and
improvements?
Mr. Szabo. You mean elsewhere in the system? Well, again,
it would depend on those proposals. I mean, if you are talking
about the Northeast corridor, of course, we have put $3 billion
in there over the last couple of years and there continues to
be needs. The important thing is for the good planning to be
done in order to help define the projects and put into place
the engineering and NEPA work to make sure we can go forward.
That effort is being done now, led by the Northeast
Corridor Commission. And, in fact, the FRA is leading the
environmental planning. We initiated that effort a couple of
months ahead of schedule to start taking a look at the next
generation for the improvements on the Northeast corridor.

AIRPORT REVENUE DIVERSION

Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Huerta, are you aware of any patterns
of airport revenue diversions at any locations across the
country? Which ones are you looking at, and what are you doing?
Mr. Huerta. Airport revenue diversion is something that we
take pretty seriously, and we have a regular and ongoing audit
process where we work with our airport's district offices to
try to identify this. We do have a couple of specific requests
that have come in and have been brought to our attention. Most
recently, there is a request that has come in through the
Office of the Inspector General hotline relating to Los Angeles
World Airports, and potential diversion relating to cost
associated with the policing at the airport.
We have been working with the Office of the Inspector
General and with the local authorities there and they are
responding to questions. We have requested the OIG give us some
additional time to continue to work this, and we owe them a
report at the end of May.
Mr. Latham. Did you have any idea of how much has been
diverted in Los Angeles?
Mr. Huerta. I can get back to you with details on that.
Mr. Latham. And what are the issues with full-time rather
than part-time?
Mr. Huerta. Correct. It relates to, are they actually
carrying out airport-related functions? That is exactly the
subject of our investigation right now, to try to determine
what exactly is going on there.
[The information follows:]

Airport Revenue Diversion

The investigation into Los Angeles World Airports (LAWA) is
ongoing.

In August 2011, the US DOT Office of the Inspector General
(OIG) became aware of allegations that LAWA may have misappropriated
airport revenues by diverting them from airport security purposes to
security services unrelated to the airport.

The OIG informed FAA of the allegations in October 2011.
FAA subsequently contacted LAWA. LAWA was advised of the allegations
and asked to respond accordingly. Information continues to be exchanged
between LAWA and the FAA. As of February 2012, LAWA disagreed with the
allegations.

Due to the complexity of the cost allocations and
accounting involved, there has been no final determination as to
whether funds were actually diverted and misappropriated.

FAA expects to complete its investigation by May 31, 2012.
FAA plans to share its findings with the Committee at that time.

Mr. Latham. Okay. I do not have enough time to ask another
question. So Mr. Olver, I will yield to you.
Mr. Olver. I will be happy to use your time.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time is expired.

SURFACE REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. Olver. Mr. Huerta, you have just managed to get
recently a long-term authorization, so you have got your
marching orders for some period of time. We are now within 10
days of requiring a new surface authorization or a string of
extensions.
And my own experience suggests that if we do a short-term
extension--and it was very depressing to hear my chairman say,
we are headed toward a 3-month extension, because I think that
what happens is that we will get to 10 days from the end of
June and have not a surface transportation program ready to go
even then. And there will be the same argument of whether the
extension or something else.
If Congress does not take action, the endpoint of inaction
is that all of the surface transportation agencies, those that
are involved in the movement of people and freight, will end up
facing some sort of shutdown scenarios of planning and
constructions and so on. That is unthinkable in a sense.
But I would like to have a sense from the three of you, who
are in the surface transportation, what impacts a series of
short-term extensions would have upon the programs that you
deal with. And in particular, we are right into the beginning
of the construction season this year, when things are being
sent out to bid and construction would be starting and so
forth. What are the impacts that are particularly going to
affect us for this year?
So if you can put your thinking cap and not more than a
minute or so on each of you to summarize what you think the
problems are with short-term extensions.
Mr. Rogoff. There are several problems with short-term
extensions, the biggest one being the uncertainty it sows on
the part of our grantees and their inability to go to contract
on projects of any significant size. The upshot of that is it
depresses potential employment that we are going to generate
from those contracts. And importantly, it also, if you will,
dumbs down the type of work that they can and should be doing.
So rather than doing major important capital improvements to
deal with their state of good repair, they are going to be
doing a lot smaller purchases, not knowing whether they can
execute a contract of any size.
That means that buses are not going to be bought, bridges
are not going to be replaced, and it is why, frankly, we feel
strongly that the House rather than take up another short-term
extension, which, as you say, goes right into the construction
season and really knocks right through it, that the House
should take up and pass the Senate bill. Because it is paid
for, it is bipartisan, it is balanced, and will provide the
certainty our users need.
Mr. Mendez. Well, Mr. Olver, I think in the highway arena
it is very similar to transit. If you look at the implications
from a long-term planning perspective, if you are a state DOT,
for example, it really puts a big damper on your ability to
plan long term.
I think for those states that are up in the northern parts
of the country, construction season is pretty much around the
corner here, and that is going to have a major impact. So,
there are some pretty serious implications going short term to
short term.
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, there is no question that the uncertainty
brings significant problems. In our case, it would affect
public safety. It would, you know, affect our ability to
implement things like positive train control in a timely
manner, to assist the commuter rail expansion that is going on
and the work that we have to do with those folks, efforts like
conductor certification.
And then, of course, it also would put the $10 billion of
grants that have already been awarded at some element of risk
because, you know, we have to provide strong oversight to our
grantees and make sure that public funds are being spent
appropriately. And it is critical that we have the resources
that we need for that oversight.
Mr. Olver. Okay, so we are talking about what happens with
the ninth extension pending here. We have already had eight.
And if we end up doing some of the ones with aviation we are as
short as a couple of weeks. You know, it became really silly. I
will have another chance probably. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. We will see. Mr. Diaz-Balart, you did not have
a question. Mr. Womack.

HIGH SPEED RAIL

Mr. Womack. Thank you. I have just got one more question.
And not to kick the high-speed rail issue much further, but it
is hard to convince people in my area about the merits of high-
speed rail. I understand that my area is not like some of the
other areas, such as the Northeast corridor, even in Florida
where they have turned back money on high-speed rail. So it is
hard for me to go through my district and tell people the
advantages of it.
And as it concerns Amtrak, if you want to catch that as it
goes through Arkansas, you have got to get up between 1 and 3
a.m. It is just a matter of population density. I get all of
that.
Mr. Szabo. Right.
Mr. Womack. So is this rail concept feasible in the middle
of our country where there is low population density? And if
not, how can we, at a time of crushing debt and deficits that
our country continues to rack up, divert money away from known
contributing pieces of our vital economic development
initiatives, like road and bridge construction, to projects
like high speed rail? Help me address that issue with my
constituency.
Mr. Szabo. Sure. I think it comes back to a point I made
earlier about congestion already costing our Nation $130
billion a year and that cost continuing to go up. You compound
that with the fact that our Nation is going to see about a 33
percent growth in population over the next 35 years.
And then it is important to note that our program is
targeted to give states this option as a tool to meet their
mobility needs. Our existing investments have been primarily
focused in 5 mega regions that hold 65 percent of the Nation's
population. The population and congestion in these areas are
significant: the Midwest, Pacific Northwest, California, the
Northeast corridor, and the Southeast. It is not a matter of
saying, Arkansas, you have to move forward with passenger rail.
But it gives your state DOT another tool, another option,
that if it meets the needs of your state, provides mobility to
your citizens. Of course, people today are looking for choices,
transportation choices, so they are not trapped into paying
escalating fuel costs. It is just a matter of bringing some
balance to the transportation system, providing people choices,
and giving options to the DOTs.
Mr. Womack. Well, I will end with this. It is not a
question, it is just a statement. The fact is that congestion
is a quality of life issue, and the more congestion you have,
the more frustrating it is for people.
And given the fact that if we put a little more money into
some of the projects, such as those I articulated earlier in my
series of questions, that it is possible that the future
population growth of this country may indeed not be in some of
the more metropolitan areas because it does become a quality of
life issue.
And indeed, maybe a good portion of this population growth
will happen in areas of our country that are primed and ready
for that type of population growth, but for the need to improve
their ability to move traffic under more traditional means.
So I will just kind of leave that as a thought because I
have seen that in my district, and I think you will see more of
it. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and I still
have faith in bipartisan reauthorization. I have not given up
on my colleague, Steve LaTourette. So, I hope that----
Mr. Latham. We are all eternal optimists. That would be
wonderful.

GROUND-BASED AUGMENTATION TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Pastor. It would be a great thing.
Mr. Huerta, congratulations on your appointment, but let me
talk a bit about the ground-based augmentation system
technology. As I understand it, you are evaluating it to see
how it enhances and improves the air traffic control
capabilities. Now, where are we on the evaluation? And then the
question is, if it is going well, are you going to expand it to
what airports?
Mr. Huerta. We are still evaluating what its performance
is, and I think the principal question and concern that we had
is the potential interference issues we ran into during some of
our early testing relating to GPS jammers at adjacent
facilities. We have successfully been able to shield it with
that, and I think that it does provide a very good augmentation
using ground-based systems of aircraft position, which greatly
enhances safety and performance.
As the evaluation continues, we do have a further rollout
plan that we will be developing and, at that time, I would be
happy to share it with you.
Mr. Pastor. Do you have a timeline more or less?
Mr. Huerta. I do not.
Mr. Pastor. You do not. Okay. I know that a lot of the
lamps you are replacing in the PAPI system, you are bringing in
the LEED lamps, and, obviously, that is saving a lot in terms
of energy use.
Mr. Huerta. Correct.
Mr. Pastor. Where are we on that in the replacement
throughout the system?
Mr. Huerta. I will need to get a current report on where we
are. I had a briefing on it in a recent visit to our
aeronautical center, but I do not have a good feel for exactly
where it is nationwide.
Mr. Pastor. Well, if you could let me know----
Mr. Huerta. I will.
[The information follows:]

Ground Based Augmentation System (GBAS)

There are two areas of FAA GBAS technical evaluation, Category I
(CAT I) and Category III (CAT III).
GBAS CAT I was given a System Design Approval (SDA) in September
2009 by the FAA as a non-Federal system. Excessive Radio Frequency
Interference (RFI) on the Global Positioning System (GPS) was
identified at the first installation location, Newark, New Jersey. The
preliminary finding is that it is possible to mitigate GPS interference
at GBAS ground installations. The work is in the final stages and the
FAA expects to issue a revised GBAS SDA by mid-July 2012, which would
allow FAA to approve GBAS for operational use by August 2012. GBAS is
currently not scheduled for CAT I deployment by the FAA. However,
several domestic airports have pursued non-federal GBAS installations
based on airline requests.
On GBAS CAT III, the primary focus of FAA efforts is validating the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Standards And
Recommended Practices (SARPS). The FAA GBAS program is leveraging the
CAT I system, and identifying how that system either meets or can be
modified to meet CAT III requirements. Several contracts are in place
for this work, which the FAA and it is expected to be completed in June
2014. A non-federal approval of that system is currently expected to
take two years, making GBAS CAT III available in July 2016. While
engineering and standards work on GBAS CAT III continues, no investment
decisions have been made on deployment and implementation.

Mr. Pastor [continuing]. Where we are at and where we are
going, I would greatly appreciate it. I think it saves energy
at many of these airports.
Mr. Huerta. Oh, yes, it has great cost-saving potential.
How we roll that out and how it is managed is something that is
very significant benefit to us.
[The information follows:]

Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) Lighting

The program to replace the Visual Approach Slope Indicator (VASI)
with the Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) lights in the
National Airspace System (NAS) is progressing. There are 793 federally-
owned commissioned VASIs remaining in the NAS. In fiscal year 2012, six
replacement projects have been completed to date. Twenty-seven
replacement projects were completed in fiscal year 2011. On average,
the FAA completes 25 of these projects per year. All six runway ends
(08, 26, 07L, 25R, 07R, and 25L) at Phoenix Sky Harbor International
Airport have a commissioned PAPI. All VASIs there have been replaced.
A contract was awarded in August 2010 to New Bedford Panoramex of
Claremont, CA for development on the Light Emitting Diode (LED)-based
PAPI. A Critical Design Review was conducted successfully in August
2011, and we are planning on conducting the Design Qualification
Testing starting in May 2012. The current schedule calls for an In-
Service Decision (ISD) in July 2013, with production equipment
available for installation in August 2013. The ISD authorizes
deployment of the equipment into the NAS. After demonstration of
initial operational capability at the key test site.
The waterfall schedule for LED PAPI sites will be developed in
August 2013 after the ISD is reached.

Mr. Pastor. I thought I heard in your statement, Airport
Improvement Grant, that in the airport improvement grants you
were concentrating on the smaller airports.
Mr. Huerta. That is correct.
Mr. Pastor. And the question is, what happens to those of
us with bigger airports? Because we also have needs, as you
well know, because we have most of the traffic.
Mr. Huerta. Sure. The President's proposal has two parts.
It is a reduction in the base AIP program and focuses on the
smaller airports. But central to it, is increasing the PFC cap
authority for the larger airports so that they would be able to
generate local revenues through passenger facility charges that
would support their capital program. You need both pieces of
that to make it work.
I think if you talk to virtually all of the large airports
in the country, they would love to have that flexibility. They
feel it gives them a more predictable and local source of
revenue that enables them to support their capital
improvements. The important point is you need both components.
In order to reduce the AIP allocation and concentrate it
towards smaller airports, you have to have the increase in the
PFC to go with it.
Mr. Pastor. Well, I will check with Sky Harbor to see where
they are on this and I will get back to you.
Mr. Huerta. Certainly.

COMMUTER TRAIN

Mr. Pastor. Mr. Szabo, in the past, you have been working
with ADOT and some of our efforts to connect commuter train
Pima County and Maricopa County, which is Phoenix-Tucson metro
areas. And I know that we have had a number of studies and you
have been working with ADOT, the Arizona Department of
Transportation. Where are we and how is that going?
Mr. Szabo. I would have to get back to you on that, but we
can set up some time to talk about it. I know staff was just
out in the Southwest here last week working with the leaders
out there on their planning efforts and we can set up a
briefing for you.

ARIZONA INTERSTATE II

Mr. Pastor. Mr. Mendez, how about I-11? How are we doing
there?
Mr. Mendez. Well, as you are aware, that has been an
ongoing issue and----
Mr. Pastor. That is why I asked the question. [Laughter.]
Mr. Mendez. The Secretary has been very clear. We are
prepared to work with all the states to make that happen in
Nevada and Arizona. Other than having discussions about it,
there is no formal proposal on the table. So, as soon as the
states approach us with some formality, we are ready to work
with you and make that happen.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.

HIGH SPEED RAIL

Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Kind of following up with Mr. Womack, Mr. Szabo, what is
the definition of high-speed rail for the purpose of the
Committee here? What is high-speed?
Mr. Szabo. Under our program, it is a three-tiered program,
three components. There is core express service, which is
speeds of 150 to 220 miles per hour or higher; and then there
is regional service, which operates from 90 to 125 miles per
hour; and then you have your traditional service, what we call
emerging service for emerging markets, which is 79 miles per
hour. Under Federal statute, Congress defined it as those
speeds over 110 miles per hour, but our program is three-
tiered, essentially based on what they do in both Europe and
Asia. It is based on the international experience.
Mr. Latham. So why last year, the week before the
elections, did the Secretary come out and make a $230 million
grant for a ``high-speed rail,'' yet the average speed was 53
miles an hour?
Mr. Szabo. Which particular project was it?
Mr. Latham. Chicago to Iowa City.
Mr. Szabo. Chicago to Iowa City. I mean----
Mr. Latham. Fifty-three miles an hour.
Mr. Szabo. Yes, the award was based under the High-Speed
and Intercity Passenger Rail Program that we have. So that, at
this point, the initial operating speed----
Mr. Latham. So, does that fit the definition?
Mr. Szabo. That particular one would be regional. So, it is
in the second tier of our program, and I think the speed that
you are coming up with is talking about initial construction,
not where it would be at full build-out.
Mr. Latham. That is what you said.
Mr. Szabo. Yes. So, that is not a full build-out. It is not
a full build-out, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I do not know. Those are your numbers. Okay. I
do not want to leave anyone out here.

TRANSIT SAFETY

Mr. Rogoff, the budget proposes an increase in transit
personnel by a whopping 117 full-time equivalents, 47 new for
the base program, 45 for an unauthorized Office of Safety, 25
more for an unauthorized Rail Transit Safety Initiative, and
that is a 22 percent increase. I do not know any other agency
that is getting a 22 percent increase in FTEs. The budget
states that the 47 new ones in the core program are currently
being paid by stimulus funds, primarily to do environmental
work.
Are those must-have employees, or I am sure you would like
to have more employees, and how many actual positions are you
funding with the 47 FTEs?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, let me just say, you may recall, I
touched on this briefly in my opening statement. We understand
that this is not the best environment in which to come forward
for more people. Frankly, it was not an easy sell given that
environment to get it in the President's budget, but there is a
reason that it is there, twofold.
One, on safety, this is a huge unmet need. As I said in my
opening remarks, we have a very weak and ineffective oversight
regime on safety, specifically in transit, that I do not think
anyone of any political stripe wants to defend. We have some
common sense measures that would not create a huge, new
bureaucracy to try to address that. And that is where those
positions come from.
As it relates to our core program, here again, it was not
easy to get additional people in the President's budget, but
the reason we were successful in making the case is when you
look at the size of our program and how it has expanded and the
size of our staffing and how it has not expanded. I do not want
to get into comparisons with my other colleagues at the table,
but we have hundreds of grantees that we have to deal with,
some of whom are not very sophisticated and need a lot of hand-
holding in order to put good money to work on transit dollars.
We want to make sure that those dollars are spent according to
all law and regulation. And when it comes to this, I have
challenges where I do not have enough staff to send a staff
person to every one of the triennial audits that we do with our
agencies, and that is a real problem. I would love to have a
chance, give me 10 minutes in your office, I will walk through
with you what the most critical needs are. But both on safety
and on our core mission, we really are short-staffed and the
President's budget recognizes that.
Your question on positions, I am happy to provide that
separately for the record.
[The information follows:]

FTA estimates the 47 FTE equates to approximately 69 positions. The
out-year costs will be determined by a range of factors including
government-wide pay raises, promotions, and within grade increases that
are not known at this time.

Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Olver, I will give you chance here.
Mr. Olver. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just
to follow that little piece for a moment.
You had mentioned in your opening statement that on this
safety issue for transit, that the two positions on the Senate
and then the House authorization proposals were both better
than nothing.
Mr. Rogoff. Indeed.
Mr. Olver. But in one minute can you sort of give me what
are the essential differences and what is the minimum of
resources that you would need for that safety program, which
was 70 new full-time employees, $45 million, or something like
that in order to achieve either of them or each one of them?
Mr. Rogoff. The core differences between the House and the
Senate bill, sir, is the Senate bill importantly reverses a
provision that has been in law since 1964 that prohibits my
agency from issuing any safety regulations of any kind. And the
House bill does not do that, but the House bill does call on us
to certify the state agencies that do this. These state
agencies are very underpowered and do not have the expertise or
training they need to do this function. So, there is a core
difference between the House and the Senate. We think the
Senate bill is much more comprehensive, but, yes, the House
bill does significantly expand our area in safety.
We right now are starting with a very small safety staffing
component. We have situations right now where you have got
three railroad tracks side by side, two of them are inspected
by the FRA with a voluminous rulebook and have Federal
inspectors looking at the facilities and the third track,
whether it is in Denver or in Washington, D.C., as was
happening with WMATA, is inspected largely by nobody. And a
one-person state office is supposed to be looking at this
question.
Mr. Olver. But if you were to go in the direction that you
have described of a ``voluminous rulebook----''
Mr. Rogoff. We do not want to go there.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. It would be a serious problem.
Mr. Rogoff. We would be playing right at--we do not want
to. I mean, we have always said that we do not even want this
initiative to be more than 1 percent of our budget and it does
not need to be. We have some common sense safety proposals that
are not a new bureaucracy. We do not want to create Mr. Szabo's
rulebook for rail transit agencies. We really want to install a
high-level safety management system approach. But we need to
move on with it, and we need people to help us do that, and we
need the authority in the law to help us do that, and the
administration has formally asked for this in legislation back
since 2009.
When you look at the comparison on how many passengers are
in the regulated safe area, and then the many, many-fold more
passengers that are in the unregulated area, it really does not
make sense and it is not a status quo that people want to
defend.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Well, I think that is a very cogent
description of what the situation is because you need some
safety and some authority. If you have the authority, then you
have to have some resources in order to exercise the authority.
Mr. Rogoff. If I can get all the new resources, I would
like to work with the Committee on how we can redirect some
existing resources to really get on this.
Mr. Olver. Okay. We have already been called on votes, is
that correct?
Mr. Latham. Yes, we had a call.

SURFACE REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. Olver. All right. Well, let me just finish. I want to
make a bit of a statement that relates back to this idea of
short extensions and so on.
The efficient movement of people and goods around this
country by all of your modes and whatever else we do in
transportation ends up really being something like 20 percent
directly and indirectly, with the supply systems for all of
those organizations, the manufacturing, the products that are
involved, represents at least 20 percent of our total economy.
I can really think of nothing that would be more effective at
slowing down the economic growth, at slowing down the recovery
from this enormous recession that we have lived through, more
effective at keeping the unemployment rate up at a totally
unacceptable level, than a series of simple, short extensions
of the authorization legislation. It keeps the whole industry
from managing to move on and plan and get their work done.
That is all I want to leave you with today. That is my
belief in what is at stake here at the moment. Thank you very
much for being here.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Olver. I could not
agree more that we need to get the reauthorization done.
Mr. Olver. Well, thank you. We agree. We agree. [Laughter.]

FAA REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. Latham. We always agree with each other, on everything.
I just have one quick question here. In the reauthorization
for FAA, the programs are significantly lower than the levels
in your budget request and the President just signed and agreed
with what the levels were, but then the request comes out to be
considerably higher. How do you justify that? Are you going to
be able to go by what the President just agreed to or I do not
understand?
Mr. Huerta. Well, I think that there are two dimensions to
that. What the President's request reflects is what we think we
need to maintain the system, to operate the system, as well as
to----
Mr. Latham. He did not know that when he signed it?
Mr. Huerta [continuing]. The transition to--let me finish.
Mr. Latham. I am sorry.
Mr. Huerta. To manage the transition to NextGen. However,
the timing of these two things, they crossed in the night, as
you know, when the reauthorization was signed and the
preparation of the budget request. What we need to do now is
work together and come up with what is the appropriate resource
we need to dedicate to FAA programs and the investments we need
to make in the years ahead.
Mr. Latham. Yes, he agreed at the authorized levels, right?
Mr. Huerta. As I said, the President's request reflects
what we think we need to maintain the system----
Mr. Latham. It is different than----
Mr. Huerta [continuing]. And to invest in the system going
forward.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. Huerta. We all want to work together and come up with
the right number.
Mr. Latham. That is good, I like that. [Laughter.]
I think with that, unless you have anything else, Mr.
Olver, we thank the panel very, very much. We look forward to
working with you very closely to continue your modes in the
best possible way to fund them properly and within the budget
constraints that we have.
So, with that, we will adjourn the hearing.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.171

Thursday, March 29, 2012.

HUD AND DOT MANAGEMENT ISSUES

WITNESSES

HON. CALVIN L. SCOVEL III, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION
HON. DAVID A. MONTOYA, INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
PHILLIP R. HERR, MANAGING DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES,
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
MATHEW J. SCIRE, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MARKETS AND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT,
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
VALERIE C. MELVIN, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY
RESOURCES ISSUES, UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Latham. Let's call the hearing to order.
As you are probably well aware, we are going to have some
votes that will interrupt us today, so, we may want you to
shorten your opening statements.
Today, we welcome HUD's Inspector General, David Montoya;
DOT's Inspector General, Calvin Scovel; Matthew Scire, GAO's
Director for Financial Markets and Community Investment;
Valerie Melvin, GAO's Director for Information Management and
Technology Resources; and Phillip Herr, GAO's Director for
Physical Infrastructure.
This subcommittee looks to your offices to help us conduct
critical oversight to ensure our tax dollars are well spent and
actually go to meet our Nation's housing and transportation
needs. This oversight is even more important at a time when we
must shrink the Federal budget and deal with our mounting debt.
Waste, fraud, and abuse should never be tolerated, but this is
especially true in today's budget climate.
We look forward to your testimony, and we will look closely
at your work as we make the tough decisions that will be
required as we put together this year's Transportation-HUD
funding bill. This is our last subcommittee hearing for fiscal
year 2013, so we will soon be writing our bill with the hope
that the authorizers finish their work and make it to
conference with the Senate by September.
I would ask each of you to limit yourselves to 2 or 3
minutes, whatever you can do.
And, with that, I would like to recognize the distinguished
ranking member, Mr. Olver, for our last hearing--and his last
hearing.
Mr. Olver. I am looking forward to it.
Mr. Latham. Oh, come on.
Mr. Olver. Our last hearing.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is a pleasure to speak with all of you today. Your
organizations play a key role in supporting this subcommittee's
oversight of the Department of Transportation and the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and we greatly
respect the work that you do. This is especially true this
year, as our accelerated schedule has limited the number of
oversight hearings that will be held, making your work
particularly informative. For this reason, I thank you for
instilling within your respective organizations a culture that
facilitates open communication and cooperation between our
staffs.
I would also like to commend the Chairman for holding this
hearing and continuing the practice of holding the hearing with
GAO and the respective IGs during each Congress. We started
this practice in 2007 when I was Chairman of the subcommittee,
and I believe it has been very valuable. I hope it continues
after I leave.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
We will begin with HUD's Inspector General, Mr. Montoya.
Your full written statement will be included in the record, but
you are recognized.
Mr. Montoya. Good morning, sir. Thank you.
Chairman Latham, Ranking Member Olver, and members of the
subcommittee, I am David Montoya, the Inspector General for the
Department of Housing and Urban Development. Thank you for the
opportunity today to discuss HUD's management challenges. It is
my first opportunity to testify before this subcommittee, and I
thank you.
Since becoming the Inspector General 4 months ago, I have
personally met with Secretary Donovan and his Assistant
Secretaries on a regular basis. These meetings have been honest
and open dialogues about the many management challenges that
they face, and I find the Secretary to be genuine in his
interest in addressing many of the issues that you will see in
my written testimony in detail.
Certainly one of the top management challenges for the
Department is maintaining the health of the FHA's Mutual
Mortgage Insurance Fund, and my office continues to be
concerned the FHA fund has not been able to obtain the capital
reserve ratio of 2 percent for the past 3 years. While we
commend the Department for taking action to address the Fund's
finances, we remain concerned that these actions may not be
enough to make up for the losses.
The other major area for the Department is within the HOME
program, the largest Federal block grant to State and local
governments for affordable housing. Our previous external audit
work focused on high-risk grantees. We have commonly found a
lack of adequate controls. While HUD focuses its monitoring
activities at the grantee level through its field offices,
grantees, in turn, are responsible for monitoring their
subgrantees, and we have found on many occasions that little or
no monitoring is occurring.
My office is firmly committed to working with the
Department and the Congress to make sure that HUD's important
programs operate effectively for the benefit of all American
taxpayers now and into the future.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to speak to you this
morning, and I am willing to answer any questions you may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.185

Mr. Latham. Very good. Thank you for your brevity.
We will now hear from Mr. Scovel, the DOT's Inspector
General.
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Chairman Latham, Ranking Member
Olver, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me
here today to discuss DOT's top management challenges.
The Department's 2013 budget requests over $74 billion for
a wide range of programs and initiatives. While the
Department's efforts clearly demonstrate its commitment to
ensure a safe and reliable transportation system, we identified
opportunities for DOT to achieve greater efficiencies and
improve program outcomes. The nine challenges we reported last
September point to the need for effective planning and
guidance, a capable workforce, reliable data, an increased
oversight, and accountability.
Mr. Chairman, my written statement addresses those four
topics in somewhat more detail. I would be happy at this time
to yield and to be ready to respond to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.207

Mr. Latham. Thank you very much.
We have a vote on the floor now. So, Mr. Scire, you have
drawn the short straw to cover three GAO testimonies in one
statement and limit it to about 2 minutes. So, you have got a
big job.
Mr. Scire. I will try to be brief.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Olver, members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of my colleagues, Phil Herr, who
represents GAO's team covering transportation issues, and
Valerie Melvin, who represents GAO's IT team, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
Let me begin with a summary of my colleague's statement
concerning transportation, starting with funding issues.
Highway Trust Fund revenues are eroding as inflation has
decreased the purchasing power of the gasoline tax, and fewer
revenues are expected with more-fuel-efficient vehicles.
Maintaining current spending levels plus inflation will be a
challenge and require $125 billion more revenues than are
projected.
There are also several key policy issues concerning surface
transportation that need to be addressed, including the Federal
role in relation to other levels of government and linking
transportation funding to performance.
DOT also faces challenges to improving safety, and my
colleague's statement highlights examples from recent reports.
And, finally, we highlight several NextGen management
challenges, including delays experienced by 15 programs.
Turning now to HUD, in particular FHA, last fall, HUD
reported that the capital ratio used to measure the fund's
financial soundness had declined to 0.24 percent, well below
the 2 percent minimum, and this is the third year that has
happened. We think there is much more that FHA can do to more
reliably estimate the fund's financial condition, and I can
talk about that.
From a budgetary perspective, this worsening loan
performance for FHA has caused increases in estimated costs,
including $9 billion for this year alone.
And, as with FHA, Ginnie Mae faces a number of challenges
in managing its rapid growth, including limited staff and risk
management.
In the technology arena, HUD has been working to modernize
its IT systems. It has been working with this committee. We
have reported that in 2009 the Department lacked sound
management controls, and we also made recommendations that they
make improvements in these areas. They have made some progress
ensuring that expenditure plans meet conditions required by
statute, and the most recent expenditure plans provide better
information that is needed for continued oversight.
We look forward to helping the committee in its oversight
efforts, and that concludes my remarks. We would be glad to
take any questions you have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.263

Mr. Latham. When we move to questions for GAO, Mr. Scire
will discuss HUD management and issues in FHA, Ms. Melvin will
address HUD information technology, and Mr. Herr will cover the
DOT. As we go into questions, I encourage the GAO witnesses to
comment on questions asked to the IGs and also the IGs to add
comments if you have relevant information.
Mr. Montoya, your report last May on the Philadelphia
Housing Authority's use of stimulus was startling in its
findings of total mismanagement and lack of accountability. You
looked at a random sampling of 10 scattered housing capital
improvement projects and found that each and every project
lacked documentation on how the funds were spent. Further site
inspections of these properties found dozens of violations of
basic codes for electrical, plumbing, and more.
Most disturbing, however, was that the PHA spent over $5
million in taxpayer funds to obstruct the audit itself and
misused funds in other ways, such as to pay for lavish
entertainment.
I would just ask you, if that Philadelphia PHA is now in
HUD's receivership, and hopefully being turned around, can you
tell us what the study revealed about HUD's oversight of the
PHAs in general and how things could get so bad at one of our
Nation's largest PHAs without anybody at HUD noticing?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir, absolutely.
You are correct, Philadelphia is probably on the very bad
scale of housing authorities we have seen. Unfortunately,
because of capacity, there is not a lot of oversight coming
from HUD. Keep in mind that, for many of these public housing
authorities, the oversight is really left to them. In
Philadelphia's case, they are under the Moving to Work program,
which even requires less oversight. The Moving to Work program
is a program designed to allow the housing authority more
flexibility on how they spend their funding.
We have argued with the Department since probably 2004 that
we did not feel that we had certainly the confidence, if you
will, in the Philadelphia Housing Authority to go under the
Moving to Work Program. Because of the lack of more stringent
oversight, we have encouraged HUD to take them off of that
program and provide more of the stringent oversight they
otherwise would have.
Our concern with a number of issues there falls into the
use of Federal monies, if you will, housing monies to pay
outside legal firms. In the particular case you mentioned, it
was actually $1.1 million that they spent on an outside legal
firm, in fact, to fight our oversight. They fought our subpoena
requirements because they would not provide us the information
we originally requested and which we have the right to have as
the IG. They have even gone so far as to put attorneys with our
auditors and follow them while they are doing their audits.
This is money that is spent on what we believe to be frivolous,
unnecessary items when it could very well be used for housing
issues.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you. And you have given
recommendations to HUD as to how to address this?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir, we have, one of them being taking
the Philadelphia Housing Authority off of the Moving to Work
program.
Mr. Latham. I think, Mr. Herr, your key issues and
management challenges submission notes in the high-speed rail
segment that project sponsors find it difficult to secure
upfront investment for construction costs and indicated that
project sponsors will need Federal funding to develop these
projects. Why do you think it is so hard for these sponsors to
find it difficult to secure private upfront capital funding?
Mr. Herr. Some of the work that we have done in the past
suggests that the costs to get into high-speed rail are quite
high, and the private sector finds it difficult to make some of
these upfront investments.
There are also the long timelines associated with some of
these investments in terms of the long build time, getting the
environmental review process done, and then also to get them
under way. So there is the potential uncertainty associated
with some of those investments and the large costs.
Mr. Latham. Is there anything that we could do, other than
appropriate an awful lot of money, to bring outside investment
on?
Mr. Herr. I think that is probably more on a case-by-case
basis in the sense of looking at the demand and the potential
use of particular segments of rail.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Scovel, the FAA has a responsibility to
ensure that all revenue collected by airports are used for the
airport itself, recognizing that any diversion of those funds
for nonairport use is a violation of the law. We have been made
aware of diversion of airport funds at LAX and New York City.
In the case of LAX, those diversions have been occurring for a
number of years. Can you tell me if you have looked at the
diversion in those sites and what are your findings?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have done work in the revenue diversion field regarding
airport revenues for a long, long time. Specifically, regarding
LAX, dating back to the 1990s, we did several revenue-diversion
reviews and found in one, for instance, that, of $12 million
billed for police services, $9.8 million was improperly billed.
We have done more recently revenue-diversion studies with
regard to Denver last year, and found over $40 million
improperly diverted.
Venice, Florida----
Mr. Latham. $40 million in Denver?
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir.
And with regard to Venice, Florida, on a much, much more
minor scale but still some questionable diversions of airport
revenue from that local airport.
We are in receipt of communications from Members of
Congress, Members Gallegly, Miller, and Lungren from
California, regarding the LAX situation. We have received those
last fall.
We referred a couple of these issues initially to FAA for
their initial review. FAA has been, frankly, slow in getting
back to us. They have requested an extension until June 5th to
address the LAX situation.
We think, as we have learned more about it, that we will
need to do more work in the revenue-diversion area, and we are
prepared to embark on that quickly with regard to LAX.
With regard to New York City, which you mentioned as well,
sir, our office has not done work with regard to New York; but
we are of diversions perhaps exceeding $500 million,
approaching $600 million in excess of the statutory cap that
New YorkCity and some other airports were granted when the FAA
grant program was first initiated in the 1980s. We will be prepared, as
we tackle LAX, to look at other airports as well to try to get our arms
around the magnitude of that problem.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much. We will be of any
assistance that you need to push this forward. We will be more
than happy to help.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Finally.
Mr. Olver. You have quickly gone through three totally
different questions with three different people here. So I have
a feeling--I thought you were going to at least cover
everybody, and then we would close the hearing.
Mr. Latham. We can do that.
Mr. Olver. We can do that. My mind is not quite as flexible
as yours, I think, on these sorts of things.
Mr. Montoya, I want to simply ask you, on this Philadelphia
situation, in your discussions with HUD, do you have the
feeling--how much staff would they need to really do the
oversight that you now believe was necessary in the case of
Philadelphia? In other words, they deal with 3,000 housing
authorities, some of them quite small, some of them quite big,
and apparently it is possible for this to happen because they
are not focused upon the oversight. What kind of staff would
they have to have to do what you feel was necessary here,
integrated over the whole of the system?
Mr. Montoya. Thank you for the question, Mr. Olver.
There are, in fact, over 4,000 housing authorities, and I
do not know that HUD would ever have the amount of capacity to
properly do oversight on every single one of them is the short
answer. So I do not think there is any number I could possibly
give you.
Mr. Olver. Do you think that they have the staff that can
be moved from other places without taking seriously from their
other activities?
Mr. Montoya. I do not believe that would be the case.
But what I would say to you, sir, is that having a housing
authority under this Moving to Work program, which allows for
even less oversight, would be a start in the right direction,
i.e., getting them off that program, providing more of the
stringent oversight that HUD would normally be giving to a
program like that.
Our concern since 2004 has been why are you not asking the
right questions? Why are you putting Philadelphia Housing
Authority, given the years of information we had provided with
our concerns, why would you still put them under a program that
offers less oversight?
Mr. Olver. So you think that they ought to have not put
them under it in the first place probably?
Mr. Montoya. That would be the first thing I would say.
Mr. Olver. Okay. They should have done more oversight
before putting them into this new program?
Mr. Montoya. That would be correct, sir.
Mr. Olver. Let me ask something else.
Since 1991, HUD OIG has indicated--this is tough for you
maybe because you have only been there 4 months--that the OIG
has indicated that HUD needs a more sophisticated financial
management system. Funds to modernize this system have been
provided as part of the Transformation Initiative since fiscal
year 2010, and I am concerned about the slow progress on that
project. Could you elaborate on the current limitations of
HUD's existing financial management infrastructure?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. They currently have five financial
management systems, none of which are integrated with each
other. Their plan all along has been to build a system that all
five would be in, if you will, where they can actually do
better budget analysis, better staffing analysis, these sorts
of things. Because of a number of hurdles, to include whether
they could include FHA and Ginnie Mae in the IT transformation
process, there has been some delay.
My understanding is that sometime this year two of those
financial management systems will be integrated with each
other, if you will. We are still concerned that that is
actually going to happen. You still would have three other
outlying systems that are not integrated.
Mr. Olver. Okay. So you have five management systems that
do not communicate. You are saying that you have been having
conversations with the Secretary and his staff, and they are
working on getting two of them to--is that good enough
progress?
Mr. Montoya. No, sir.
Mr. Olver. What are they saying about how they intend to--
--
Mr. Latham. If I could interrupt, we are down to zero on
the time, and I would like to have you continue this line of
questioning when we come back.
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Mr. Latham. Keep that answer in your mind.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Mr. Latham. We will be in recess here.
Mr. Olver. This is just one vote, as I understand it.
Mr. Latham. There is a possible second one, but I do not
think so.
Excuse us. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Latham. Go ahead, Mr. Olver. Complete your questioning.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Montoya, you were in the midst of an answer
to the question of my elaboration on the existing financial
management infrastructure as you understand it from your
discussions with them.
Mr. Montoya. Right, sir.
Well, what I would like to stress is that there has been
steady improvement over the years. We will give HUD that. There
has been a steady improvement. From our audit standpoint, we
had ranked them as a material weakness for their IT
infrastructure, and that has been upgraded, to significantly
deficient. So it is still deficient, but they are moving in the
right direction.
With regards to the five core financial management systems,
the first phase of this new financial management improvement
project that they have going on would replace two of these
systems. What we are not clear about is how that is going to
function and integrate with the other systems that are not yet
at that point. So, our concern continues to be that it is not
moving as quickly as we thought it would, given the number of
years that the program has been in effect.
Mr. Olver. Well, we have funded money for some time. If it
takes 3 years each time to get one more system, do they need to
be all five of them integrated?
Mr. Montoya. That might be a question that GAO might be
able to better answer for you. But, from our perspective, yes,
it would help us and we believe help them to have all their
core financial management systems on the same platform.
Mr. Olver. Well, then let me ask Ms. Melvin--Mr. Melvin,
good for you. I just noticed it. Okay.
From what you have observed during your engagement with
HUD's transformation initiative, what can you tell us about the
status and future of that project?
Ms. Melvin. What we understand about that particular
initiative at this point is that it has been halted and is
under reassessment. There are some concerns going forward, kind
of building on what Mr. Montoya was saying, in terms of not
really knowing at this point what will happen next with it.
It appears that, based on a CIO review, they did find some
concerns relative to this particular initiative lacking a
number of key elements relative to an integrated master
schedule, and certified project management professional. So
there are a number of deficiencies in the IT management of that
particular initiative. And as we understand right now, they
have some go-forward alternatives that have been presented to
the Secretary, and the Secretary has not yet made a decision on
how they will move forward with this particular initiative. So
it is on hold at the moment.
Mr. Olver. Waiting for the Secretary's decision?
Ms. Melvin. Yes.
Mr. Olver. Do the proposals, in your opinion, address the
concerns that Mr. Montoya is expressing?
Ms. Melvin. Unfortunately, we have not seen them. We have
not done an in-depth review of this particular initiative yet.
Our work has been at a much higher level, looking at the
expenditure plans for the transformation initiative.
But from what I do understand, several of the alternatives
that have been given to the Secretary for going forward are in
terms of maintaining the status quo, meaning continuing with
the project as it is, or making some revisions and course
corrections. Presumably, those course corrections would deal
with some of the weaknesses that were identified through that
assessment, but I do not have specific details that I could
provide on exactly what those proposals look like.
Mr. Olver. Do you folks work hand in glove, the GAO and the
IGs? Is it expected that there will be strong cooperation and
collaboration on these issues?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir, I believe GAO, again, is looking at
it at more of a 60,000-foot level. We are talking more
specifically about how these core financial systems are
actually going to help on the day-to-day function, not so much
the oversight of the expenditures of the larger picture.
Mr. Olver. Okay, Mr. Chairman, I have beaten that one for a
while.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Scovel, I have asked this question over the
last couple of years but recently asked Secretary LaHood about
the proposed cut to the contract tower program, which would
harm not only my district but I think compromise aviation
safety in general, I understand that you have looked into not
only the effectiveness of the program from a safety standpoint
but also the savings created by the program. Can you share with
me your most recent work on this program and what your findings
may have been?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Womack, and we are aware of your
keen interest in this subject.
Sir, I am sure you will recall that at this committee's
request we have ongoing work into FAA's contract tower program.
We are not yet in a position to indicate in detail what our
findings and recommendations might be. We anticipate reporting
to the Secretary and to this committee sometime this summer on
that.
However, if I may refer back to our previous work, which
dates in the period from 1998 to 2003, we conducted a couple of
audits of FAA's contract tower program, and at that time we
noted, of course, 248 contract towers in 46 different States.
We found generally that those contract towers could be operated
at a lower cost than a typical comparable FAA-operated tower.
We found an equivalent level of safety, and we also found that
the users and the local communities, of course, generally
accepted and appreciated the services, that the services were
comparable to those of the typical FAA-operated tower.
We have progressed far enough, I think, in our work at this
point on behalf of the committee that I can say generally that
we do not see our previous findings changing dramatically. We
will be refining our data and providing all of that to the
committee, but I think generally we will come down to where we
were before. The picture has not changed a whole lot because
the number of contract towers has not grown much. They have
continued to be operated, we think, fairly well, just as they
were 10 to 15 years ago.
We understand that part of FAA's budget request calls for a
change in the funding ratio to increase the cost share, in
fact, that the local communities would be required to pony up.
That has not been part of our ongoing study. Rather, we have
addressed the safety and use and cost aspects for the contract
tower program.
Mr. Womack. You mentioned audits. What is the methodology?
As I recall back when the city where I was mayor first got into
the contract tower program, somebody from FAA shows up, or
maybe it was a contractor, and they sit in an area where they
can observe the runway, and they count operations. Is that
still the methodology? Is that how they base this funding
formula?
Mr. Scovel. How FAA does it? I do not know, sir. I would
need to get back to you. And I do not know that my staff has
sat down with that----
Mr. Womack. But when you refer to audits, what specifically
are you looking at in the audits?
Mr. Scovel. Right. We are looking at the performance of the
contract tower program. We are looking at anecdotal evidence
that we will take from the users as well as from the
contractors. We are also comparing costs between FAA-operated
towers of comparable size and complexity with those under the
contract tower program. We are trying to establish a series of
measures between the two sides of the program, one FAA
operated, the other contract tower, so that we are evaluating
or attempting to reach conclusions based on apples-to-apples
comparison.
Mr. Womack. One of my concerns--and I am only recounting
from memory. There was not a weighted factor in this program
toward airports that had a lot more jet engine operations, the
number and type of jet aircraft that are coming in and out. My
city was unique because I happen to have a pretty sizable five
and dime company there that has its fleet of aircraft based
there and a lot of vendor traffic coming in and out of that
airport. And I always thought it was a pretty good deal because
it was very close to where they are trying to work, and it did
not compete with the passenger issues over at Northwest
Arkansas Regional.
So do they ever look at the type of aircraft using the
airport? Does that go into the formula?
Mr. Scovel. I would need to check with my staff, sir, to
see whether we have looked into FAA's decision-making process
to see whether that is, indeed, a factor that they would
consider.
Mr. Womack. Very good. I will come back.
Mr. Scovel. I would be happy to come back to you, sir, with
a question for the record.
Mr. Womack. Thank you very much, but it is still on my
mind, as you know.
Mr. Scovel. We understand.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, sir.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.264

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Womack.
Mr. Scovel, the Federal Transit Authority's fiscal year
2013 budget once again requests $45 million for new,
unauthorized rail safety oversight activities. We denied the
request last year, and the reports by both the DOT IG and GAO
regarding FTA's ability to simply compile reliable incident
data do not give me a high degree of confidence that the FTA
even knows how to go about setting up this organization. And
based on the IG's January, 2012, report and GAO's January,
2011, report, FTA is still trying to figure out the accident
universe and how exactly they would create a safety office.
In your opinion, does the FTA have the ability to mandate
the quality and type of data the States enter into the rail
accident database? And, if so, what is hindering them from
doing it now?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We did report in January, 2012, on what FTA could do now
using its present authority to position itself should Congress
give it extended authority in the rail transit safety area. We
homed in on a couple of things, and they had to do with data.
We looked at the national transit database to see what
elements FTA should be including in that, and recommended FTA
identity data gaps. They agreed and are working with an
advisory group on a near-miss/close-call data element, similar
to what FAA uses as it evaluates air traffic incidents.
We also recommended, because in addition to the quality of
the data in the database, in order to have any hope of making
improvements in any safety program, you need to have a baseline
as to what incidents are. And one data element that we
considered essential in establishing a baseline was the number
of fatalities attributable to rail transit accidents. GAO has
reported, I believe, 13 fatalities over the period roughly mid-
2000s to current. Certainly that is an important element. But
we would recommend as well that FTA in its performance plans
and reports include that.
FTA declined. While they accepted our recommendation on
identifying data gaps in the transit database, they declined
this recommendation. Because they do not have enhanced
authority, they declined our recommendation to start separately
reporting rail transit fatalities.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Herr.
Mr. Herr. I would just like to add, Mr. Chairman, that in
doing this work we do think that FTA needs to do a much better
job of improving the quality of the data. When we looked at
this in 2011, as the Inspector General mentioned, we could not
even examine trends because there were so many inaccuracies. So
certainly a good starting point is looking at the data, getting
that cleaned up.
We understand there is some work under way to improve some
of the data screens. We have not gone back to look at that, but
that is certainly an important base for any sort of safety
initiative.
Mr. Latham. In the IG's report, a number of parallels were
drawn between the safety oversight done by FAA and FMCSA and
the FHWA and what could or might be done at FTA. I would note
all those agencies have responsibility because they have
interstate transportation in these modes, and it would be next
to impossible or it would be very expensive to require 50-plus
identical oversight agencies for commercial aviation or motor
carriers. Very few transit rail agencies cross State lines.
I think we are all in favor, certainly, of safer systems,
but in light of the lack of interstate commerce as applied to
transit and the other issues identified in your report, what
specific reason can you give for requiring a Federal oversight
office?
Mr. Scovel. Well, from our discussions with the
administrator and others on the Secretary's staff, they believe
that, given albeit a limited number of transit systems that do
cross State lines, that there is a clear Federal role.
They also see at the local and State level serious
deficiencies in the quality of oversight provided by--for
instance, just to use the crash here in Washington as the most
recent example--the very limited oversight that the safety
office for that system was able to provide. There is a gap, and
in order to bring consistency and to raise the quality of
safety, sir, they would indicate a Federal role.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We will keep you on the hot seat for a bit, Mr. Scovel.
Your budget requests adding 27 FTEs to your permanent
staffing mode. My understanding is that you had a much larger
number to deal with the Recovery Act and that funds from the
Recovery Act, which were not necessarily yearly as
appropriated, were carried over to allow you to do that so that
now you are asking for 27. Are these 27 for ongoing Recovery
Act work or do they relate to just being able to continue the
rigorous oversight that OIG conducts of the general agencies
under transportation?
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir, thank you for the question, and we
appreciate your and the entire committee's keen interest and
strong support of our office over the years.
We do, first, wish to acknowledge the very difficult fiscal
environment in which all of us are forced to operate these days
and the difficult decisions that this committee must make.
Sir, as I sit before you today, I must say that I am in
fear, and I would be remiss in my duties as Inspector General
if I did not tell you that I fear for the ability of my office
in the future to conduct its statutory mission to keep you
fully and currently informed.
We have had the benefit over the last couple of years of an
additional appropriation, specifically under the Recovery Act,
so that we could hire staff as needed to accomplish the extra
oversight that the Recovery Act responsibilities entail, and we
did that. We are in the process now of seeing that staff walk
out the door, and our recovery funds have diminished greatly,
and they will either expire or be totally expended within the
next year or so.
Given that situation and where we look at where our
baseline appropriations are, we see our FTE level, our strength
level at the lowest it has ever been historically, since 1978,
since the Inspector General Act was enacted, and we also see
the Department's funding and safety responsibilities and fiscal
programs expanding.
Mr. Olver. Well, how long do you expect to do oversight on
the Recovery Act project?
Mr. Scovel. Some of our Recovery Act oversight will
continue as long as those programs continue.
Mr. Olver. Until all the money is expended or far beyond
when the money is expended or what?
Mr. Scovel. Until 2015 or 2016, for instance, on some of
the high-speed rail projects. Some of the Secretary's TIGER
program grants will continue as well.
Mr. Olver. Well, I am hearing, then, that you need this in
order to do the Recovery Act because those monies are running
out.
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir, but----
Mr. Olver. But also you need it for your regular programs;
is that right?
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir. And, in fact, I would weight my
answer, if I could, more strongly on the latter, and that is on
our ability to conduct oversight Department wide.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Well, let me go on, then. Your top
management report notes, among other things, that there is
great need for transit FTA to exercise more oversight on rail
transit, that the NHTSA, the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, needs to improve its processes for identifying
vehicle defects, that the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration must strengthen integrity management
programs and ensure that States carry out their pipeline safety
responsibilities.
Each one of those agencies has asked for additional money.
The chairman pointed out that FTA had asked for $45 million, 70
FTEs. GAO, you have said that they have to have better quality
of data. They are asking for 70 new FTEs there and $45 million.
Well, the processes of getting--gathering data and so forth
go far beyond. The actual costs of the employees may only be 7
to 10 million bucks out of the 45. It is a much larger request.
The pipeline and hazardous waste has asked for an increase
of 75 FTEs, and NHTSA has asked for 45 FTEs. You, GAO, and I
think they have problems that they ought to be addressing.
Do you then support--either or both of you--support the
needs for those additional FTEs in those other places?
Mr. Scovel. Sir, we have identified the need. In some of
those instances, we have not been able yet to pin down what
analysis has gone into the request for a specific FTE number
from some of those agencies.
Mr. Olver. Do you have a comment on that, sir?
Mr. Herr. We have not looked at these individually, but we
did a recent report dealing with FMCSA and we highlighted where
several more FTEs could allow them to do quite a bit more
oversight of the trucking sector, as one small example.
Mr. Olver. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. We will come back. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Montoya, I would like to follow up on Chairman Latham's
question about Philadelphia and the spending there. I guess I
heard numbers about $5 million in attorneys' fees to
essentially obstruct HUD investigations and that particular
problem. Could you elaborate a little bit on what has actually
been going on in Philadelphia? Is this really relevant to their
public housing entities?
Because, as you know, we have had problems over the years.
We have had problems with the housing authority that were,
let's just say, well documented. If you could just expand on
your answer.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Well, to clarify, over a period in 2010 our acting IG at
the time had sent a memo to the Assistant Secretary for Public
and Indian Housing and the general counsel, and at that time he
identified over a 40-month period where Philadelphia Public
Housing Authority had actually expended something on the order
of $30 million in legal expenses.
Subsequent to that we went into----
Mr. Dent. Over what period of time?
Mr. Montoya. Well, this would have been November, let's
say, of 2010, so the 40-month period before that. So we are
talking maybe 2007 or 2008 to about 2010. They had expended
about $30 million in legal fees. We are not sure what all of
that was for.
So we went in and did an audit. Out of about a $5 million
number we had picked to audit, $4\1/2\ million of that was
unsupported. They could not support really what the
expenditures were.
But as part of that audit and as part of subpoenas we had
issued, they expended $1.1 million to basically fight us on our
own subpoena. We had requested information from the housing
authority. They refused to give it to us. We then issued a
subpoena, and it was the $1.1 million that they used to not
only fight the subpoena but to argue on our authority to do the
audit and oversight.
Mr. Dent. So they used Federal money to fight the subpoena?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Now, in fairness to the Department, as the receiver of the
housing authority, they have indicated to us that Philadelphia
will be making re-payment of that money. That is supposed to be
decided sometime in July this year. So we expect that that
money would come back to the Department using non-Federal funds
to pay for it.
Our concern is that with the $4 million that was not
substantiated, what exposure then does that leave for the other
$30 million. We have expressed concerns that some of this money
for outside legal expenses, is really what it amounts to, is
being used to have attorneys shadow my auditors as they are
doing their work. Clearly unnecessary we believe, and in some
cases it is two attorneys per auditor. These are funds that we
have elaborated on that could be very well used for housing
issues for the low income there in Philadelphia, but they are
being used for outside legal firms.
Mr. Dent. So I guess you are making all sorts of attempts
to recover that money, clearly, and I guess that is what we
need to be doing. But it is just a sad state of affairs when
the Federal monies are being used like this to fight.
You are right. This is money that should be going to help
lower-income individuals seek housing.
Does anybody else have any comments on this?
Mr. Herr. Actually, I would just like to second what Mr.
Montoya said.
I led GAO's work on the State of Pennsylvania on the
Recovery Act, and we did work on the Philadelphia Public
Housing Authority, and we had this same experience. Our
auditors were shadowed by attorneys, they were present at all
meetings, and it added to the cost, and I think ultimately took
away from what the Recovery Act funding could be used for, an
issue we communicated to our housing folks. It was part of what
I think was a broader pattern that was in place at that time.
Mr. Dent. Is work actually being done--I mean, are you
satisfied that the money that they are receiving is being spent
appropriately by various contractors to do work? That was an
issue years ago, a big issue years ago.
Mr. Montoya. Well, we are still looking. We still obviously
have concerns over where a lot of this money is going. We are
still continuing to look and do audits in Philadelphia.
What I would like to say is the Department has forced the
housing authority to use their own in-house counsel now and not
expend money for outside counsel. So that is a step in the
right direction.
Unfortunately, at the time the board, which should have
really been providing the oversight for the executive director,
was really, from what I have been told, dysfunctional. They
were disbanded. The Department became the board for a short
time, and I know they are working on new rules to strengthen
HUD's enforcement authority, for example, the ability to make
PHAs pay for mismanagement of funds.
Mr. Dent. I can go back into the early 1990s, and I
remember looking at the housing authorities all across the
Commonwealth, and we saw atrocious situations in the city of
Philadelphia.
Where I live up in Allentown, we actually had housing
authorities that actually were clean, livable units. In
Philadelphia, we just had the most deplorable situations. We
had civil service employees up in Allentown and other
communities, and we had a better-run system. Philadelphia that
was not the case.
I will not get into all the inside city politics as to why
I think it was horrible, but I just hope the situation has
improved. I thought it had gotten a bit better. That is why I
am a little discouraged, not by you but just by what I am
hearing down there. Thank you.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Just one other question, and it is kind of
related to what the subject matter has been, and that is an
oversight question.
On Section 8--and my situation pales in comparison to the
millions of dollars that are going--Federal dollars going to
fight Federal Government. But a recent example in my State, we
had some Section 8 homes taken back by HUD where 14, I think,
of the 15 homes inspected failed suitable living standards,
which would be a good catch except for the fact that this was
over a cumulative period of time of several years.
And so my general question--and I do not know if this is
for Mr. Montoya or Ms. Melvin or whomever--but what can we do
to improve the oversight or the policies and protocols that
would be able to ensure that these living standards are being
met and not be exacerbated over a period of time where some
drastic action has to take place?
Mr. Montoya. From the standpoint of HUD, sir, the authority
does extend down to the housing authority to be doing the
inspections. The Department right now is currently working on a
standardized inspection protocol so that there is some
standardization across the country on how these things are
inspected and what they would be looking for. We are doing some
work now with Maine housing and a couple of others. There was
some news articles about a lot of the same issues that you are
discussing, living conditions, lack of running water and some
of these sorts of things.
Mr. Womack. Not to interrupt, but you talked about
standardization. Running water--and I do not know if the cases
I am talking about here are running water, but that really
should not be a standardization issue, should it?
Mr. Montoya. Well, to the extent that your inspector is
going to go in there and only going to look at what is on his
sheet to look for and maybe not use some common sense in just
making sure the overall unit is functioning the way it should
be, I believe that is what they would be looking for, sort of a
checklist, if you will, that requires you to check all these
different things to say you checked it at least.
In some of the audits we have seen, you have an inspector
that might go in there for 10 minutes, look around. As long as
he does not see a wall falling down, he writes it as a clean
bill of health and walks out, really does not do any checking
per se.
Mr. Womack. That is kind of lazy.
Mr. Montoya. I could not agree with you more, sir.
Mr. Womack. Are there punitive actions that occur when
things like this happen? I mean, is there an accountability
trail?
Mr. Montoya. I do not know, sir. I would have to get back
to you.
I think part of what the Department has faced with regards
to its IT system is their systems are not robust enough to
allow, for example, an inspector to go in, go back to the
office, upload a report, maybe even pictures, and so there is
none of that going on. So from a standpoint of clear oversight,
unless you are going to take the hard copy file of what the
inspector filed, you may not have the opportunity to really see
what he or she has seen and be able to sort of do the checks
and balances.
What I can tell you is that at least the Department is
working towards, again, a standardized sort of view. We are
continuing to work on that and providing recommendations on
what we think they can do to sort of firm up the concerns, but
it all does fall back on the inspector doing the quality work
that you would expect him to do if you are paying him to do
that. So some of that is human--sort of the human condition on
what you will or will not do for a paycheck, if you will.
Mr. Womack. You mentioned common sense in there a minute
ago.
Mr. Montoya. Quite lacking most often, sir.
Mr. Womack. I would agree with that. Thank you.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Womack.
I want to go back to the question of money being diverted
at the airports, and you mentioned Denver and how much was
being diverted there or had been diverted?
Mr. Scovel. A little over $40 million, Mr. Chairman, over
the course of a number of years dating back to the closure of
Stapleton and the building of the new Denver International
Airport.
Mr. Latham. How were they doing it?
Mr. Scovel. A lot of it had to do with real estate
transactions, sir, and how Stapleton real estate was valued and
disposed of and what happened with that money and how Denver
International did or did not come into those funds so that it
could apply them to airport operations.
Mr. Latham. Is there a means of recovery or anything of
those funds?
Mr. Scovel. Generally not.
Mr. Latham. Is it not illegal?
Mr. Scovel. It is illegal, sir, and the FAA on occasion
does make requests or demands of airport authorities. Success
varies. Put it that way.
Mr. Latham. Why?
Mr. Scovel. The inability to restore and recover those
funds and to apply them, not to return them to FAA but at least
to generate those funds and apply them to future airport
operations. Many airport authorities find that difficult.
Mr. Latham. Okay, we again want to support you in your
efforts to find out what diversions are taking place and how
much and what we need to do.
Your office has also done some very helpful work on the
FAA's En Route Automated Modernization, ERAM, program, and you
found slippages of 4 years and cost overruns of about $330
million. This is a $2 billion system that FAA says is a
critical building block for the NextGen air traffic control
program. What has caused the delays, the cost overruns, and
have they taken steps to ensure ERAM gets on budget? And, also,
are they going to be able to meet their goal of complete it by
2014?
Mr. Scovel. Mr. Chairman, the ERAM story is a long and
tortured one.
Mr. Latham. I did not want to hear that.
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir. We are prepared to meet at length
with your staff; and, in fact, we have a meeting coming up in a
couple of weeks on that.
But many of the problems date back to the design and
structure of the original contract, and FAA's inability to
manage starting from day one. I have termed it a contract that
was hobbled coming out of the gate, because it focused solely
on development and not actual deployment.
In addition the testing process that FAA used to receive
the initial offering from the contractor of the ERAM product to
test it at the tech center in New Jersey and then to place it
in the two test bed sites in Seattle and Salt Lake City--that
testing process was flawed. The contractor turned over a
limited version of the product to the tech center that did not
yet account for all linkages to a wide range of systems needed
to manage aircraft.
As it turned out, the tech center, even with an incomplete
product, was unable to test comprehensively the ERAM system
because it needed to be tested in a robust operating
environment that can only be done in the field. But because the
contract was written at the time and FAA's procedures at the
time called for Government acceptance after test center
testing, the Government accepted it coming out of the tech
center, put it into Salt Lake and Seattle and quickly ran into
significant problems.
It is a very complicated system, sir. It is software
intensive, and if we have learned anything from DoD's
experience over the years, anything having to do with software
is bound to run into problems, and ERAM has done that. As they
have tried to fix software problems--it is much like a pinball
or a domino effect--other software problems are created,
indeed, by the fixes. So it is a long and involved process to
try to bring it up to 100 percent.
Mr. Latham. Have they learned any lessons? I mean, we are
talking about 2016, another $5 billion as far as NextGen. Have
they learned from this or are the new contracts going to be
something that will work?
Mr. Scovel. We hope so, sir. My office has gone to great
pains to point out the lessons learned based on ERAM.
Your question in the last section, sir, was can we be
confident in 2014? Can we be confident with only a $330 million
overrun? I write those numbers in pencil, quite frankly, sir.
Because not only the results of our office, but FAA's
independent study that it commissioned with Mitre points out
the next case scenario would be 2016 and upwards of a $500
million overrun. So it remains to be seen.
Right now, ERAM is on pause. It has been fielded to six
more additional sites in addition to the first two. FAA does
not intend to proceed with any more fielding for the rest of
this fiscal year so that they can try to identify the current
state, which is a wise move on their part. Because two of the
newer sites, Chicago and Los Angeles, are exceedingly complex,
complicated air space, controllers will need to be trained. We
will see how the agency handles all of that over the rest of
this year, sir.
Mr. Latham. Do you have any comment, Mr. Herr?
Mr. Herr. Yes, I would like to just add two things.
One thing, a lesson learned that came out of some of the
early work was that they were not involving controllers in the
testing, and that I think was really an Achilles heel.
Mr. Latham. They were prohibited.
Mr. Herr. That is, I think, a common-sense point that Mr.
Womack made earlier. But it is our understanding that has been
corrected, and they are being brought in to do some of that,
which makes a lot of sense.
The other thing in some recent work that we have done on
NextGen has suggested they need to address is the ping-pong
effect of some complexities with the software is integrated
scheduling so they understand if a slippage in system A has
implications for other systems. That will help you as an
oversight committee do a better job of seeing where they are
going and what the likelihood of success is.
Those are two things that we have in recent reports.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you very much.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. I would like to try to engage Mr. Scire in this
endeavor, along with you, Mr. Montoya.
As part of the Nation's response to the housing crisis,
there have been a number of new programs at HUD that focus on
reducing the number of foreclosures, restructuring existing
mortgages, and stabilizing communities in distress. At the same
time, HUD is expected to carry out its core mission areas and
maintain the integrity of these core programs. What effect have
these new programs, particularly in the single-family area, had
on the oversight of core programs?
And I would like you each to give us your perspectives.
Mr. Scire. Right. So I think you are talking about the
emergency homeowner loan program and the HAMP programs as it
relates to FHA. We have not looked specifically at what sort of
resources the Department is devoting to the development of
these, and I would add to that the Hope for Homeowners program
and the FHA short refi program.
We are currently doing some work taking a look at
foreclosure mitigation programs across the Federal Government,
including FHA, VA, USDA, as well as the Treasury programs, and
so we think there is some things that could be done to improve
how those programs operate, and we are working on that right
now. So I think that there are things that they could do to
more effectively and efficiently operate these programs.
There is some benefit potentially for effective foreclosure
mitigation, because it could reduce, for example, potential
claims, ultimately. So although there may be some resources
devoted to this, there could be some payback to it as well.
But we have not looked specifically at what resources were
devoted to development and management of these particular
programs.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Montoya.
Mr. Montoya. I would echo the GAO's position, sir.
We have taken a look at really how that relates to the
staffing and what they are doing specifically to oversee it. We
certainly see the benefit to that.
Our major concern is to ensure that we do not have any more
claims coming to FHA as are necessary, and we are continuing to
work with them on risk-management types of issues and to be
more aggressive and to look into these claims before they are
paid out to ensure that there is not a way to come back and
indemnify them with the lenders.
Mr. Olver. But I think you both clearly know that they have
a number of these programs which are designed to stabilize the
housing market. Do you think that they have the core human
resources, human capital to do these kinds of oversights when
they do a bunch of new programs like that? What is the damage
to the core programs in the process?
Mr. Montoya. I do not know what that number would be, sir.
I could tell you that, they are obviously going to be spreading
themselves pretty thin, but I could not give you an exact sense
on how we would see that, because we have not looked at that.
It is certainly something that draws an interest in me about
whether we should do that or not.
Mr. Scire. The concern I would raise is whether or not FHA
has assessed its resource needs--and we believe FHA has not
done a sufficient job of looking at what its workforce needs
are. So it would be difficult for us to say whether what they
have is sufficient or not. The FHA itself has not gone through
and done a rigorous assessment of what resources it needs, what
skill gaps it has, and then taken actions to fill them. We make
recommendations in this regard in our November report.
I would also point out that FHA is facing a potential for a
lot of retirements, and so we made recommendations there for
FHA to do more in terms of succession planning.
Mr. Olver. Are there programmatic reforms that they have
applied in these new programs that ought to apply to others
that would give them--to the older programs that would give
them capacity?
Mr. Scire. I do not think that the newer programs are
instructive for how they are running the older programs. FHA
has done a lot in response to the----
Mr. Olver. This was a crisis. This was not part of the
regular programs.
Mr. Scire. Right. Even before the advent of Hope for
Homeowners and all these others, FHA took a lot of steps to try
to be more effective in use of its existing resources and to
use more risk-based approaches in terms of lender oversight,
appraisal reviews, and things like that. But, still, what we
have not seen is for them to rigorously take a look at what
their needs are.
Mr. Olver. Do either of you have comment on how HUD and FHA
are managing the record number of HUD-owned foreclosure
properties?
Mr. Scire. We actually are just beginning an engagement to
look just at that, looking at not only at FHA but also the
GSEs, all of which have tremendous portfolios of REO.
Mr. Montoya. Sir, what I can tell you is that I have
actually met with the other inspectors general from not only
the FHFA but Agriculture and VA to talk about that very issue,
to sort of combine our resources just to see what is going on
with all the real estate owned properties. We would like to see
from our standpoint whether there is any potential for fraud,
abuse, mismanagement in that, the sale of the properties,
maintenance until they are sold, those sorts of things.
So we are trying to do a collaborative effort for all of
our programs, and we are trying to geospatially identify where
these are and where might be the biggest pockets and start with
those biggest pockets.
Mr. Olver. How much new staff will each of you need to do
these kinds of things?
Mr. Montoya. Like many, sir, I am just going to be
reassigning people.
Mr. Scire. Using our existing resources.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to focus on the HOME program for a moment.
I have heard a fair amount of comments about this program
back home, generally favorable comments, about the HOME
program. They see it as something that is an important program
but certainly needs better accountability. I know The
Washington Post did that story that was very critical.
I know HUD focuses a lot of its monitoring activities at
the grantee level through the various field offices. The
grantees then are responsible for monitoring their subgrantees,
and I know that the audits have found that in too many cases
there has been little or no monitoring and particularly at the
subgrantee level.
I should ask this of Mr. Montoya. What are we doing here to
ensure better accountability in the HOME program, particularly
in light of The Washington Post series?
Mr. Montoya. With regards to the Department, we are doing a
sort of roll-up, if you will, of the body of work we had done
over the last 5 years. What I want to ensure is that we do not
have any systemic sort of problems that we might have missed to
identify that to the Department.
What I can tell you is that, historically, they have agreed
with maybe, 99 percent, of our recommendations in change in
oversight, so that is actually a very good thing that we are
working with them on. I know they are developing new
regulations to enhance their enforcement capabilities. That was
asked for by Senators Murray and Collins, and I can certainly
provide you copies of what we would come up with as well, sir.
So I think they are moving in the right direction, but, at
the end of the day, as was the discussion with Mr. Olver, it
comes down to the oversight and just what capacity anybody has.
And to the extent that the local government, which has
responsibility for the structure of the program, it all boils
down to just being able to get in there and ask the questions
they need to ask.
Mr. Dent. I will yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Kind of on the same subject, but, Mr. Montoya, the
Integrated Disbursement Information System, the IDIS, in HUD is
supposed to track how CDBG and HOME grant dollars are used by
States and localities. However, both the IG and the GAO have
repeatedly found serious data integrity flaws at IDIS. They
cannot fully account for the full life cycle of a grant, nor
can it show the fiscal year in which the funds were provided.
Congress allows grant funds to remain available for a
certain period of time, and when that time expires leftover
funds should be returned to the Treasury. Because HUD is not
tracking funds properly, you recently found hundreds of
millions of dollars in unexpected balances that HUD failed to
recapture and redistribute in a timely manner. Some of these
funds were appropriated as far back as 1992, and some were
associated with contracts that were already expired. How can
HUD return expired funds to the Treasury if it does not even
keep track of where the funds are appropriated?
Mr. Montoya. Well, sir, that goes back down to the very
archaic information technology and core financial system that
they operate under.
Mr. Latham. Come on.
Mr. Montoya. Well, it does go to part of that, sir. Without
systems that can actually help you track money, it is very
difficult to be able to figure out where the money is going and
how you are spending it.
Our concern with regards to the IDIS system is that they do
use this First in, First Out, FIFO, system where monies that
would come in, irrespective of fiscal year identification, are
the first ones that are expended. And so you are right. There
is no identification by fiscal year.
We look at it from the standpoint of it not being in
compliance with Federal financial management system
requirements. They are looking at it more from a programmatic,
how do you operate the program.
Because they did not agree with our recommendation, our
findings, we have sent it over to GAO, who is now doing a
review. There actually may be more wide scope impact to other
government agencies, so they want to look at the entire thing
before they opine on which is it and what, if anything, HUD
should do to change it.
So it is at this point with GAO, and I know they are
looking at it closely to make that determination. I just do not
have any updates for you.
Mr. Latham. Do you have any comments?
Mr. Scire. No, that is with another group within GAO, but I
would be glad to get back to you with an answer on the status.
[The information follows:]

After GAO received the request for a legal decision from the HUD
Inspector General, we requested that HUD-OIG complete follow-up audit
work to demonstrate concrete examples of the problems that HUG-OIG
alleged were occurring. HUD-OIG completed that work in late November
2011. On January 11, 2012, GAO sent the Chief Financial Officer of HUD
a development letter to obtain HUD's legal views on the issues and
establish a factual record on the issues raised by the Inspector
General. On February 17, 2012, HUD provided its response. GAO is
currently analyzing that response, as well as conducting follow-up
meetings with both the OIG and CFO staff. After that analysis is
completed, GAO will issue a legal decision on the matter.

Mr. Latham. Okay. I think one of the most troubling things
is that all the data is self-reported by the grantees and
subgrantees and there is no verification at HUD. So, basically,
the grantees choose the data they will share with HUD, and they
can adjust or change that data at any time without permission
from HUD or without HUD even checking the data. And it is not
surprising that you found that many data flaws, including
unsupported contracts, inflated contract amounts, and
underreporting of program income by grantees.
To make matters worse, HUD relies heavily on this data.
They have no control whether it is good or bad, using it to
justify its budget to report how the CDBG and HOME programs are
working and to monitor the grantees.
When HUD uses the grantees for their basis of information,
can you have any confidence in what the IDIS data and what--
maybe either one of you or both of you could mention what we
need to do to improve it.
Mr. Montoya. Well, certainly as part of a lot of our
recommendations over the course of the last 5 years, that has
certainly been on the top of the hit parade, if you will, on
our recommendations. I know that they are making changes. The
new regulations that they are proposing will address many of
those issues.
You know, I must state I have actually met with that
Assistant Secretary. Again, they have accepted quite a few, 99
percent, of our recommendations, so it is not that they are not
trying and do not want to make these changes. Some of them are
a function of old systems and just nobody really looking and
coming in to ask, but those are being changed. We will continue
to monitor it. We will continue to work with them. We are
certainly looking forward to GAO's response.
Mr. Latham. But is the data--can you rely on anything?
Mr. Montoya. Well, I guess it would go down to the
integrity and the ethics of the person putting in the data. But
you know the old saying, sir, garbage in, garbage out. Unless
we can really satisfy ourselves to the validity of the data,
its ability to be changed at anytime, obviously we would always
question that.
Mr. Latham. Right, so they can adjust it themselves
whenever they want?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Mr. Latham. Yes, Ms. Melvin.
Ms. Melvin. Thank you very much.
I would just add that as one of the seven transformation
initiative projects that HUD is currently undertaking, their
HEARTH IDIS system, there is a release that is related to
improving the grants management effort, and that is currently
under way in terms of their overall efforts on IT management.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you.
We are now about to start a quick process I think since
votes are now being called again, so I am going to--I could go
on on other places, but I want to just ask you perhaps an odd
question for us.
Both you in your oversight responsibilities and your
organizations and this committee in our oversight
responsibilities, we often spend a majority of our time
focusing on the underperforming programs and agencies. I
wonder, are there agencies or programs that consistently
perform at a high level and demonstrate management strategies
that could be transferred to other places? Do you ever think
about that? Or is it so much not in your DNA that you could
judge that?
I would like either of the IGs and you at the GAO to make
short answers to that.
Mr. Scovel. Mr. Olver, I hope no one asks for me to
surrender my IG credentials as a result of my answer, but I
must acknowledge, as I constantly do with my staff, that we
want to give credit where credit is due. And while I would be
reluctant to give blanket approval to an entire agency within
DOT, I can certainly say, program by program, FAA, FRA, and
FTA, are doing many things quite well--starting with Recovery
Act implementation from the Secretary on down, the focus on
fraud prevention, Federal highways and establishing national
review teams to go out and look at State implementation using
recovery funds.
FTA had $423 million in recovery money invested in a major
transit center in New York City and put in extensive controls
to ensure that that was handled right. FMCSA is now focused on
bus safety like they never have before. Administrator Ferro is
like a dog with a bone on this one, and that is exactly what it
takes. They have data challenges, database challenges as well,
as we have talked about extensively this morning, but they are
trying to get their arms around it.
Mr. Olver. Well, you cannot take all of my time. Let
somebody else have a bit at that answer here, okay?
Mr. Scovel. Very well.
Mr. Montoya. I will promise to give you a short answer, Mr.
Olver.
Yes, and certainly within our audits we do pay credit where
credit is due, and we have acknowledged that there are some
best practices in some of the programs.
The biggest thing I would probably tell you in my short
tenure there is, having met with the Assistant Secretaries and
the Secretary, they really are in my opinion at this point
pretty open to these dialogues and discussions. We have had
some very poignant discussions on many of these issues.
I think the example of the HOME program, where they take
many of our recommendations and they are trying to better it,
shows me something good. It does not mean that it is all
perfect. But certainly we are willing to give credit where
credit is due, sir.
Mr. Herr. On the DOT side, a couple programs and efforts
come to mind. The TIGER grant program that was started under
the Recovery Act, one thing that we have noticed with
transportation, a lot of the programs, as you know, are formula
based, but this is an effort to identify programs that cut
across jurisdictional lines. We looked at it a few years ago
and gave it fairly good marks. There were issues about
transparency in some of the decision making, but that is a big
move away from the formula programs.
On the NHTSA side, we have seen establishment of
performance measures, working to improve some of the data,
sharing some best practices among the States.
On the FAA side, the airline fee disclosures that have gone
into effect, and the tarmac delay rules have certainly
benefited consumers.
Mr. Olver. Well, I am glad you could came up with something
relatively specific.
You folks for HUD?
Ms. Melvin. My perspective is from the information
technology side of things, and we have issued reports that have
identified a number of areas of concern--which Mr. Montoya has
already alluded to relative to their IT management controls--
which really pervade all of the information technology systems
that the department is either undertaking through the
transformation initiative or otherwise.
As a part of our work we have been reviewing expenditure
plans that the appropriations legislation required HUD to
develop to account for and explain its spending of money on the
particular initiatives that it is undertaking under the
transformation initiative; and what we have found is that,
through recommendations that we have made, they have made a lot
of progress relative to providing information in those plans
that have made them a valuable tool for oversight.
So it is one of the main things that is emphasized in our
statement in terms of seeing them take initiative to really
articulate in those plans how they are spending the money, and
how those particular initiatives are supporting or will support
their mission overall. So that is an example where we have seen
them actually taking some steps in a positive direction,
recognizing that there is more to be done.
Mr. Olver. Do you have a simple answer of one or two
agencies that you deal with or subagencies that you think are
high performance?
Mr. Scire. I will make it simple. I think that what we saw
in the Recovery Act implementation by HUD is that they moved
out very quickly in the public housing area and the TCAP area.
And TCAP is noteworthy in a way because it is a whole new
program. So they really put this together fairly quickly, and I
think we have reported they have done a fairly good job in
getting the money out the door.
FHA has served a real countercyclical role in the mortgage
market, and that has been, I think, an important role for it to
play. The ultimate cost of that is not yet known, but it is
difficult to say where the mortgage market would be if it were
not for FHA being there.
Mr. Olver. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. If you have some more questions, we will make
this your last chance unless you are----
Mr. Olver. It is okay.
Mr. Latham. You are done? Okay.
Just very quickly, Mr. Scovel or Mr. Herr, I wanted to just
ask you, does DOT do a good enough job in responding to your
findings and recommendations?
Mr. Herr. One challenge that we have had with our reports
is we often do not get a written response to our products. So
we will get an oral comment, and one of the things that makes
it difficult from my perspective is that we do not necessarily
get a departmental position on our recommendations. There is a
required 60-day letter that follows that goes to the oversight
committees. This is an area that we have been talking with the
Department about.
But I do think in terms of helping committees do oversight
and getting an articulated position on an area such as rail
safety data, some of the FAA issues, I think it would be
helpful to be able to pick up a report and get a clear picture
of what the agency's response is and a commitment to making
some changes or correcting things going forward.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
We will be submitting questions for the record here to each
and every one of you, but this is kind of a weird question
probably, but is there anybody here or would anybody like--is
there something that you would just like to scream to the
world? I mean, is there anything you really--that we have not
asked, that you would like to really bring up? Is there
something that really bugs you or something that really needs
to be aired?
Mr. Scire. Yes, I think that we have made some
recommendations to FHA for how it can better measure the
economic value of the MMI fund, and we think that is a very
important thing for FHA to move forward on. We have had year
after year after year of cost estimates of that have had to be
reestimated, and this year it was a $9 billion reestimate in
costs alone. So we think there is a lot more that FHA could do
to present what the economic value of the MMI fund is so that
the Congress would have more reliable information on the costs
that it faces.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Herr. One of the areas I would be remiss if I did not
mention, GAO has transportation financing on our high-risk
list. We have a list of agencies and programs that we very much
want to bring to the attention of Congress, and certainly you
are going into a vote now today on dealing with reauthorization
issues and pushing that forward. We have made tremendous
investments in our Nation's infrastructure. Going forward, it
is obvious we need to find ways to maintain and sustain that.
If there is something worth shouting about in transportation, I
think that is it.
Mr. Latham. Yes?
Ms. Melvin. If I may speak to HUD's information technology
again, I mentioned in my previous response that we had looked
at their expenditure plans at a high level. In those plans, we
were looking primarily to see the value added in terms of
information that HUD provided for oversight purposes.
What I would add from a significant standpoint is that
moving forward we do feel that there is a greater--a larger
need to look more in depth at what HUD is doing. While we see
them making progress relative to their information management,
information technology management, we do recognize that there
are a number of areas that they still have not implemented our
recommendations on relative to having policies to make sure
that they can execute against their enterprise architecture or
to evaluate the success of their information technology
projects.
So for fiscal year 2012 one of the things that we will be
doing is taking a more in-depth assessment of how HUD is
actually performing relative to evaluating some of its projects
from a project management and other IT management perspective.
Mr. Latham. Very good. Thank you.
Yes, Mr. Scovel.
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir, from Transportation, if I may, it has
been stated many times by the Congress and acknowledged by
every Secretary that transportation safety is the Department's
number one priority. We have three items that we commend to
their and your attention.
First, with regard to operational errors and how those are
counted, so that we can get an accurate count, establish the
baseline and then investigate it and analyze it, and identify a
key area for FAA.
The overall area of pipeline safety has attracted a lot of
attention. The agency has put in place a lot of rulemakings
over the last 10 years. Now it is looking for authority and
even staffing to enable it to move forward further in that
area.
Bus safety as well. I mentioned Administrator Ferro's
efforts. She is, frankly, stymied by this question of
reincarnated carriers. You close down one because of safety
enforcement action. They pop up with a new corporate identity
but operating with the same driver, same route, and same
equipment. They need to do a far better job with their
database. Rather than expanding what they intend to look at,
they need to refine so they can home in on those reincarnated
carriers.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Chairman, would you yield for a moment on
that point?
Mr. Latham. I would be honored to yield.
Mr. Olver. Do you believe that the FTA really needs
authority to--more authority than they already have to deal
with safety issues, to deal with the safety issues? It is a
question we dealt with earlier.
Mr. Scovel. FTA you mentioned specifically?
Mr. Olver. FTA, yes.
Mr. Scovel. Yes, I did not include that on my list of top
three.
Mr. Olver. Oh, I thought you did say on this one.
Mr. Scovel. FMCSA, sir, motor carriers. FMCSA certainly
needs to develop its database more fully so that it can address
the question of reincarnated carriers for passenger carriers
specifically.
Mr. Latham. Very good.
Mr. Montoya, do you have a burr under your saddle anywhere?
Mr. Montoya. You know, sir, with only 4 short months in
office and the reception I have received and the open dialogues
I have had, I do not think I am there yet. It does not mean I
will not get there, but I think at this point I do not, sir,
thank you.
Mr. Latham. I am glad everything is perfect at HUD, right?
Mr. Montoya. It is not perfect, sir. I maybe just have not
found it.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Olver. Again, this is your
last hearing and recognize----
Mr. Olver. All rise.
Mr. Latham. No, please, do not. You have been a great,
great partner, and I appreciate your great work.
To the panel, thank you on behalf of the taxpayers out
there, people whose lives depend upon the services and safety
and all of those issues, but you are the frontline as far as we
are concerned as to giving us the information we need to try to
do the right thing and to hold people accountable in the
bureaucracies that need oversight. What you do is
extraordinarily important, and I thank each and every one of
you for what you do.
So, anyway, with that, we will adjourn the hearing this
morning. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711A.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4711P3.001


