- AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 4

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Research, Education and Economics

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 4

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Research, Education and Economics

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-430                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\         NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\           MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia               PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia                NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey   JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                      ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama           JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri              JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                    ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho             DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas           MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida               LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana                SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                 JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana           CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California               STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                    SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio            BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                    ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                   MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida            BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------
\1\Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Wednesday, March 16, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

WITNESSES

CATHERINE E. WOTEKI, UNDER SECRETARY FOR RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND
ECONOMICS
EDWARD B. KNIPLING, ADMINISTRATOR, AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SERVICE
KATHERINE R. SMITH, ADMINISTRATOR, ECONOMIC RESEARCH SERVICE
CYNTHIA CLARK, ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL STATISTICS SERVICE
ROGER BEACHY, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
MICHAEL YOUNG, BUDGET OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Introduction of Witnesses

Mr. Kingston. Okay. The committee will come to order.
And I would like to welcome back Dr. Catherine Woteki, who
is a veteran of speaking to this committee on all things
agriculture, good and evil and political.
And Dr. Knipling is back with us again, and we will try to
come up with some hard questions for you and make you feel at
home. We want you to have that.
Dr. Katherine Smith is with us and Dr. Cynthia Clark and
Dr. Roger Beachy. So, Mr. Young, that leaves you the only one
without a Ph.D. on the panel, but you know where all of the
money is.
But we are glad to have you guys with us, and your
testimony has been submitted. So you are welcome to read it
verbatim or summarize it. Mr. Farr and I probably have a
preference, and I bet you can guess which one, but you do
whatever you feel comfortable with because actually I do know
bouncing around this is very difficult.
And with that, Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. This is an area that is very keen and important
to me and certainly the State of California and the Nation and
my district. I really look forward to some interactive
discussion here today.
Mr. King. Dr. Woteki.

Opening Statement

Dr. Woteki. Well, thank you, Chairman Kingston, Congressman
Farr.
We have provided written testimony from all four of the
agencies as well as my testimony, and we appreciate your
putting that into the record.
I will summarize briefly my testimony.
The team of scientists that are sitting before you really
do represent the expertise that we have within the Department,
as well as the dedication of this administration to invest in
science to keep our nation and our economy healthy.
From providing nutritious food for children and families
and supporting the productivity of our farmers, to helping to
use our natural resources to create jobs and to mitigate the
effects of climate change, the work that the Research,
Education and Economics Mission Area does improves the lives of
the American people and also has an impact that is felt around
the world.
USDA has a very long history in supporting research and
providing for education, and since we're testifying about the
2012 budget request, I would like to bring to your attention
that 2012 actually marks the 150th anniversary both of the
establishment of the Department of Agriculture and also
Congress' enacting the Morrill Act that created the very
historic partnership between the Federal Government and the
States in support of the land grant universities.
Since that time, our State colleges and universities have
graduated more than 20 million students, produced countless
scientific breakthroughs, pursued solutions to problems shared
across society. They have vastly increased agricultural
productivity and improved the lives of people everywhere.
Today, however, there is a growing recognition that
agriculture and natural resources really sit at the heart of
the world's most critical problems: increasing sustainable food
production, providing clean and abundant water, responding to
climate change, developing renewable energy, and improving
human health. And the challenges that are facing agriculture,
human as well as animal health, natural resources and
conservation are immense, and they need to be faced with the
most robust research enterprise that we can muster.
This anniversary year in 2012, however, is going to come at
a time of very difficult financial challenges for the entire
Federal Government, including the Department of Agriculture and
the research agencies. To be able to make the strategic
investments in the food and the agricultural sector and our
economy in the long term, we recognize that we have to make
some cuts to programs that we care about, and the President's
budget for this mission area, Research, Education and
Economics, proposes reductions in programs and terminations of
projects because these tough budget times call for very
difficult choices to be made, focusing the budget on the
highest priority and our most productive programs.
The food and agriculture sectors of the economy have proven
to be very strong. Focusing on and enhancing the high priority
programs in the budget is critical to keeping them strong and
continuing their contributions to the future economic well-
being of our country. The food and agriculture economy is a
huge engine for our country's economy. It contributes jobs. It
contributes also to the positive balance sheet for our country
when it comes to international trade.
Last year in 2010 that positive trade balance for
agriculture related to a total of $33.9 billion, and
agriculture has maintained a surplus since 1960.
In maintaining this advantage, we must never take for
granted the scientific insights needed to combat the next
animal disease or plant disease that may emerge or the next
weather anomaly that can impact these important commodities and
products.
In keeping with the President's commitment to start the
country on a path to eliminating the deficit, the budget
requests $2.6 billion for the four REE agencies, or a reduction
overall of $244 million in discretionary funding. Within the
total, a request for increases in programs addressing some of
the greatest challenges to the country, including nutrition and
obesity, renewable energy, climate change, food safety, as well
as maintaining the very important scientific collections.
It also proposes to develop the capacity to use a new
analytical tool, behavioral economics, to provide valuable
insights to policy development and program design, and also to
enhance the department's flagship competitive grants program,
the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative, which goes by the
acronym AFRI.
These increases are offset by the elimination of
congressionally designated projects and decreases or
terminations of lower priority programs.
Mr. Chairman, my colleagues and I are happy to answer any
questions you might have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

APPLIED VERSUS GENERAL RESEARCH

Mr. Kingston. I wanted to ask you a question. This is
opening up to really any of the scientists on your board, in
terms of applied versus general research. Because one of the
questions that I have is, well, general research kind of does
not lead to things necessarily that are on a fast pace. Applied
research, you come out and you say, ``Okay. This is what we
figured out.''
But then applied research approaches corporate welfare, and
along that line a lot of scientists now, particularly in the
medical field, go to universities, not so much to USDA, but to
a lot of your university partners, and they say, ``Willing to
relocate. Here are my requirements. You know, I want the lab to
look like this. I want to have the following associates, and
then I want ownership of some of the things we discover.''
I just wanted to ask a general question on that. How do you
guys see that?
Dr. Woteki. Well, Mr. Chairman, the research agencies in
this mission area support a range of research from very
fundamental inquiries through to applications, development of
tools of use to farmers in making decisions, as well as in
providing technologies that can be then further developed by
the private sector into real products.
So the approach that we take is, it is important to do that
investment in some fundamental areas of inquiry because that
long term is going to pay off in insights that are going to
actually develop approaches that are going to be----

APPLIED RESEARCH AND CORPORATE WELFARE

Mr. Kingston. Well, I understand the philosophy. I am just
saying how do you as scientists who see this in the next lab
over, you might say, how do you feel about it? Where do you
see, okay, this is now entered into corporate welfare or
enrichment of somebody who actually works for a State
university and suddenly they have got a side deal that is going
to make them a lot of money?
And I am not saying it is necessarily a bad thing, but I
also say it seems like it can be one of those things that you
have to control.
And I am not holding you responsible for controlling it
necessarily either. I am just throwing this out.
Dr. Woteki. We do not view the research that we sponsor
either in universities or that is conducted in our intramural
agencies as being corporate welfare. The vast majority of the
research that is supported by research, education, and
economics--REE--falls into two areas. One is what would be
considered to be pre-competitive research. So it is the kind of
research that private companies are not going to support. It is
the kind of research that farmer organizations are not going to
be able to support either. So it is very important research. It
is more fundamental. It is long term.
The second category of research that we do is research that
has applications in many different areas, but it is also
research, again, that farmers are not going to be able to
support through their associations, or it is for sectors of the
agricultural industry that are relatively small and also are
not going to be able to pull it together.
These research agencies also provide an infrastructure for
research. The Agricultural Research Service, for example, has a
very important function in maintaining collections of germ
plasm that are of importance to agriculture. It is those germ
plasm collections, plants and animal species that provide to
the research community and to the private sector the
possibility for identifying genes that are going to have traits
that will protect against pests, protect against disease when
they are then bred or using the new genetic technologies
introduced into plants and into animals.
The other aspect of our research is that it is inherently
governmental. There are responsibilities that we have for
providing support to the action agencies within the department,
the science base for their program and policy decisions. So we
view that as being our large second role, as providing this
infrastructure as well as scientific evidence base for the
other agencies within USDA and also beyond USDA. The Food and
Drug Administration, for example, looks to the research
agencies here to provide answers to their questions that form
then the basis for their program and policy decisions.
Mr. Kingston. Well, I am out of time, and I would like to
explore this further with you when we get back, when the time
comes back.
Mr. Farr.

IMPACT OF BUDGET REDUCTIONS

Mr. Farr. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Doctor, for being here and your very competent
staff. I appreciate your service at a time when people are very
critical of all of us in this service. And I think it is a need
to kind of re-educate the public as to what the value of our
services are.
The H.R. 1 bill that passed, which was this $60 billion cut
to have to be taken before the end of the year, it was not
successful in the Senate, but it certainly drew the line in the
sand because it came out of this committee as to what the game
plan was here on out.
And I think we need to look at that and realize that that
is a goal that if you cannot achieve it in the first instance,
you may achieve it, and now we are going to be passing another
or we have passed another CR that if you add it all up, it has
been about $2 billion a week, and with 30 weeks left, that adds
up to $60 billion if we keep going this way, and that is
exactly what H.R. 1 did.
So I am very interested, and I think other members are of
trying to figure out what is the trickle down effect of that
cut. In that bill there was a rescission of $585 million in the
Agriculture Department. That cut unobligated balances.
Within NIFA have you determined what those accounts are
that have unobligated balances and what would be the impact if
the Secretary's knife were to cut those provisions?
Specifically, are they ongoing research awards and projects
that would be stopped midterm?
What is going to be the impact of these cuts?
Dr. Woteki. Mr. Farr, we recognize that in order to reduce
the deficit and to address the debt issues that there are some
very hard choices that are being made. We do believe that in
order to be responsible in the way that we are approaching our
budgets, that we really have to make some very hard choices.
At the same time, we have to be also focusing on making the
investments that are going to bring the economy back to life
and----
Mr. Farr. Well, we had hoped that all of the research is
investments, but I mean, what about the cuts? You cannot avoid
them.
Dr. Woteki. That is true, and the----
Mr. Farr. So where are the impacts going to be?
Dr. Woteki. The 2012 budget actually did make the proposals
to eliminate earmarks, and my understanding is that that is
included.
Mr. Farr. But that is not my question. My question is we
have ordered these cuts. If they come to your department and it
is unobligated, you are going to have to offer up something.
And what is going to be the impact?
Dr. Woteki. Well, I can tell you that the immediate impacts
are going to be largely felt by universities; that the funding
that would not be allowed would be funding that goes to support
research and various other activities that have traditionally
been earmarks in our budget.
Mr. Farr. So the priority is earmarks first. They go first.

EARMARK TERMINATIONS

Dr. Woteki. Correct.
Mr. Farr. How many earmarks were in your budget?
Dr. Woteki. In total it adds up to about $141 million in
NIFA and $42 million in the Agriculture Research Service.
Mr. Farr. And how many research projects is that?
Dr. Woteki. I would have to get back to you with an
absolute accounting of how many research projects are involved.
Mr. Farr. Well, do you have any guesstimate? Does it affect
every State?
Dr. Woteki. Well, I can tell you within the ARS budget,
about a third of that is passed through to universities, and
for NIFA, all of it is.
Mr. Farr. do the universities know that?
Dr. Woteki. Yes, they are acutely aware.
Mr. Farr. They are on alert?
Dr. Woteki. Yes.
Mr. Farr. Well, they certainly have not been here. I really
would appreciate if you could give the Committee the list of
eligible victims.
Dr. Woteki. And we will be happy to provide that to the
Committee.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Farr. For example, and I wanted to just see how you
handled these because one of our very successful competitive
grant programs has been the Viticulture Consortium, which has
been out in California. It is a, you know, modest investment on
an annual basis. Approximately $2 million has leveraged over $5
million in industry investment in research. The funds have
employed scientists, technical staff, graduate students working
on improving the efficiency and sustainability of specialty
crop industries, which is developing in every State in the
Union, and improving much of the vitality of many rural areas,
which the Secretary has been very keen on trying to sustain
because rural America is really at risk.
And I wondered what solutions you are going to offer to
continuing important work like that. You know, this is a very
valuable, successful project. It has got a lot of private
sector investment. How do you make your priority decisions?
Dr. Woteki. Well, the Viticulture work that you have cited
is a successful project. There are quite a number of them that
have been successful and long-term projects that have been
supported through earmarks.
And as I indicated in my summary of my testimony, by
zeroing out earmarks there are some very good programs that
will be affected. What we are proposing is that the university
communities that are being affected, that they compete under
the competitive grants program, provide a proposal to AFRI, and
if it is meritorious, it will compete well and has a chance of
getting funding within that competitive grants program.
Mr. Farr. Well, in the next round, I would like to follow
up on that. Let me just set the stage here. You have and I
think this committee believes, but maybe it is not true, that
over time a lot of traditional research projects have been
funded by the department. I have always heard that some of
those projects are not even relevant anymore, but they come out
of formula funding or come out of anything.
I am very interested in how you use the best professional
decision making and what is the relevance of these research
projects to really dealing with today's problems.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired, but we are,
I think, moving toward the same subject. First of all, I want
to say we actually do have a list of those earmarks so that we
can save the Under Secretary time, and we will submit them for
the record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FORMULA VS. COMPETITIVE PROGRAMS

But what I am concerned about is that on research, where
does it become corporate welfare in that you have a small group
that is going to benefit the most and profit from that
research. And in terms of competitive grants, how does that
play into it?
I do know that the Council for Agriculture and Science
Technology has released a report on this. So the question is
going to be, and I will read this, but competitive versus
formula grants. How do you make a decision and what is the
philosophy on it?
But what the Council for Agriculture and Science Technology
report said is they made a case for public investment in
agriculture because it does help the output, but they also have
said in there that funding should be taken from the competitive
grant programs and allocated to the formula funds.
So just talk to us about formula versus competitive.
Dr. Woteki. Sure. I am happy to do that.
Mr. Kingston. And I do want to know also, getting back to
the first round in terms of when you are looking at research,
when does it become something that you do not feel that the
public should be funding?
Dr. Woteki. As I started to say, I am happy to do that, Mr.
Chairman. And I can comment both from the perspective of being
a former dean as well as now administering these research
programs.
The way that funding of agriculture research at
universities has traditionally been done has been through a
combination of formula funds, which also leverage a State match
that goes to the agricultural experiment stations within the
States.
In more recent years, the department has also had a
competitive grants program. For many years it was called the
National Research Initiative. Now it has been renamed to AFRI
that I referred to earlier, and the competitive funding
approach reflects the thinking that is largely post World War
II about what is the best way to go about stimulating science
that is going to lead to new insights and innovation.
So we continue to support research through the formula to
States. As a former dean, I used those funds really to focus on
what the issues were that were mostly very much local, were
problems that were facing Iowa farmers, and for which using
those funds, we could provide, you know, really site specific
research and solutions for in my case Iowa farmers, and also
the funds helped to support the link between the extension
program and the research that was going on on campus so we
could get the word out to farmers as quickly as possible.
The competitive funding approach is really looking to
identify the most innovative, most cutting edge scientific
aspects towards really fundamental questions. And what we have
done within the AFRI Program, and I would like to ask Dr.
Beachy to give you a bit more background on the approach that
we have been taking within AFRI, is to try to link up that
fundamental kind of research with higher education as well as
extension in new ways so that those insights that are coming
out of the laboratory are going to get into extension and into
the farmers' hands as quickly as possible.
So that is the approach that we have taken on formula and
competitive funds. And we believe that the competitive research
in the agricultural sciences really has been severely under
funded, and our budget proposes an increase of about 23, 24
percent to bring the total in the AFRI Program up to $325
million.

AGRICULTURE AND FOOD RESEARCH INITIATIVE

So, Dr. Beachy, would you like to talk about the approach
that you are taking?
Dr. Beachy. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Dr. Beachy.
Dr. Beachy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Maybe the best way to do this would be to give an example
of one of the programs that is being started. We spent the
last--over the last five to ten years we have funded projects
in wheat and barley because wheat and barley were not be
approached by the large companies, and the investments led to a
better understanding of genes and the genomics of wheat and
barley, but it did not get us a product.
So this year we asked that team to come together and work
across 20 different States to address all of the genetic
variation in all of the wheat and barley, and put that
information with the genetic information to develop varieties
that could then be grown by those farmers in that region or
could be then licensed out to seed companies.
Well, the challenge here is that those are very complex
organisms and the United States has a pretty wide range of
growing conditions, different diseases, different insects, and
different soil types. And this group has come together in a way
that includes the researchers and the geneticists, coupled with
extension agents and with teachers and are going to be training
plant breeders at the same time they are doing the development
of varieties that would then be useful in those regions.
And that is something that the private sector would not
have done. So we are taking our prior investments and current
investments to develop products that then would be licensed
outward.

AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH RESULTS

Mr. Kingston. Okay. Let me ask you. If I was to say what
were the five best research projects that you did last year,
would you be able to rattle them off quickly?
Dr. Beachy. Well, the issue is how long----
Mr. Kingston. And I am going to ask Dr. Knipling. I am just
putting him on notice.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Beachy. And I guess my usual response is that between
the research that we do in the laboratory and when it makes a
product is between 10 and 15 years. So that the research that
we would have sponsored in wheat and barley earlier and what we
are doing now will in 5 to 8 years develop those varieties that
would go outward. So we are looking at that window of 10 to 15
years.
And, again, we provided the information that a private
sector then could take on their shorter term and develop what
they would like. But research really is a long-term investment,
and if we did not invest, we would be subject to----
Mr. Kingston. Well, one of the things that the folks at
NASA always have been decent about is, okay, Space Station,
maybe you do not like the idea of space shuttles and, you know,
that sort of thing, but you know, we brought you the calculator
or Tang. I am not sure that was an advancement in the cause,
but you know, things like that that says, okay, here are some
of the by products of our research.
I think agriculture need to be in that position.
Dr. Beachy. I think it is. The advances that have led to
the higher yields in corn that we are seeing now is an
investment that we made 10 to 15 years ago.
Mr. Kingston. What was the yield and what is it now because
of that?
Dr. Beachy. Well, when I was a kid it was 40 bushels an
acre, and about 8 or 10 years ago it was 160 on average, and
this year the average was someplace north of 240.
Mr. Kingston. Well, think about it this way. We are writing
your obituary, and you know, we want to put some bragging point
in it on great things, and the reason why this is important to
all of us is because I as a Member, public servant, you, too,
we need to be able to go out in public and say, ``This is the
difference we made. This is some of the stuff that we did.''
Dr. Beachy. I think if we did not point----
Dr. Kingston. She is writing your obituary. What did you
put on it? ``Great guy.''
Dr. Beachy. She wrote what I said earlier, and that is we
result in higher productivity, which at the end of the day is
what leads us to the economy that we have in agriculture.
Whether that is better application or knowing how to apply
fertilizer more effectively with less runoff or whether it is a
better variety that does not succumb to the leaf disease in
wheat or the corn blight that hit us 30 or 40 years ago, those
were big milestones.
What we are seeing now are the annual increments, and we
are challenged now because the annual increments of
improvements or what we call total factor productivity is not
on the same trajectory as it needs to be to meet the world's
needs.
Mr. Kingston. Well, I think that that is one of the things
that we do need to talk about, is the production per acre and
the fact, as your testimony stated, that we have not just a net
surplus in agriculture exports, but a hugh, and you also said
that there is no prediction that that will change in the future
either, and that is one of the things that we should talk
about.
My time has expired. I look forward to hearing what Dr.
Knipling is going to tell me in terms of----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kingston. You know, I like to hear what the bugs are up
to and all kinds of other things.
So, Mr. Farr.

RESEARCH FUNDING MECHANISMS

Mr. Farr. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. this is a
dialogue we are both having, and I think it is essentially a
learning process for us.
But what I have found, and I am sure it is true, that when
universities do research, if there is some value to come out of
it of, you know, a product to be sold, universities and I hope
the Federal Government also protects themselves so that have
the patent or the copyright on it so that when there is a
return on that investment, that it insures to the public
benefit as well.
That is typical in all universities. I mean, that is how
Stanford gets so rich, with the genome project and things that
they were doing, and the biochemical that came out of a lot of
the laboratories there that I am sure somewhere in the
background had public support as well.
But you essentially manage, as you said, three programs.
You have a competitive grants program, a formula program, and
an earmark program or have had an earmark program. Which of
those drives it?
I mean, you are the smart scientists. We hire you to make
these decisions. Taking all of the world crises and each State
crisis and every kind of invasive species that is coming in,
and trying to make a decision as to what of these pressures for
research are really relevant and important, and you have got
three pots to pull from, but two of them are totally driven.
I mean, the formula, it just goes out and there is really
no quality control with that, it seems to me. The earmarks,
they come from us, not from you. Competitive grant sounds like
the most marketplace driven. I am sure there is some politics
in that, too, but if we do not have earmarks, is it smart to
continue the formula grants? Should we just have one? Should it
all be competitive?
I know, Jack, it would be interesting because I do not
think we could ever get the political support because for some
of these universities, this is a cash cow to them, and they are
not going to give it up. They are in that formula
What I am just interested in is your perspective of sitting
on high of all three of these systems, and frankly, I think
earmarks in many cases are relevant. I know in the things I
have gotten involved in relevance because we have had a
breakout. There is no way of getting money there fast. It is
sort of emergency money, and we need to kill this pest or
figure out how to eradicate it or keep it under control, and
that is where the earmarks have been. You know, it is going to
be tragic when we do not have them.
Dr. Woteki. Well, Congressman, we have been doing two
things to address the underlying concerns in your question.
Since I have joined the department 5 months ago, I have been
working with the administrators here, as well as with many
different stakeholder groups, to come up with a plan that
involves the expertise that all of the agencies bring, along
with the university community, to addressing these really big
challenges that are facing agriculture.
We call it an action plan, and it essentially identifies
what the role is going to be for the REE agencies and the
funding mechanisms that we are going to use for addressing
these, whether it is going to be through an intramural program
at NASS or ERS or ARS, or whether we are going to seek the
answers in the university community.
So I would be happy to spend some time, you know, talking
with you about that action plan and how we envision that
working.
Mr. Farr. When do you think that plan will be out?
Dr. Woteki. Well, actually we have it now available for
comment. We are seeking comment and would very much, as I said,
like to sit down with you and go through it.
Mr. Farr. Well, does it essentially move the formula
program into a competitive grant program? Is that what it-
Dr. Woteki. No. It recognizes that we continued to have in
law the responsibilities for providing funding to the
agriculture experiment stations and to extension through
allocation of formula. But it does recognize that there are,
because of these different funding streams, different ways of
accomplishing our research agenda, and it recognizes that the
intramural agencies provide infrastructure, and part of that
inherently governmental function that I talked about earlier,
and also recognizes that the experiment stations and extension
have specific expertise that they can bring.
And then on top of that, the competitive grants program
provides us the opportunity to be more agile in addressing
emerging problems and in the planning cycles for the agencies,
we are trying, in all the meetings that we are having with our
various constituent groups, to identify where is the best
place; which of these mechanisms is the most appropriate for
funding research.

EARMARKS

Mr. Farr. Now, that sounds like a lot of process. What I am
interested in, I guess, the bottom line here is all of these
earmarks that we just wiped out, how many of them are really
relevant and really should continue to be funded.
Dr. Woteki. Well, as I had indicated earlier, some of them
are very meritorious, but because they were earmarked----
Mr. Farr. Yes, we are throwing the baby out with the bath
water.
Dr. Woteki [continuing]. In that category that we are
proposing to be eliminated.
And the investigators can apply through the competitive
grants program for funding.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired, but I want
to continue on that same vein. Because my question is, and I
see Dr. Beachy wants to say something, but in your comments, if
an earmark has been, say, even though they are one year at a
time, a lot of them have been going on for 2 to 3, maybe 4 or 5
years. Does the grantor or grantee have to reapply through the
competitive process?
If you are kind of halfway through the stream, would they
get more favorable treatment in order to continue, particularly
the ones you feel are meritorious?
Dr. Woteki. My understanding of the way that this will work
is that if in the appropriations the earmarks are zeroed out,
we will be notifying the universities to that effect, that
there are no funds to continue further support of that work.
Mr. Kingston. But on some of the stuff that is meritorious,
will you be in a position of telling us, hey, this is, as Mr.
Farr has just said, throwing out the baby with the bath water;
are you going to be in the position of saying, ``Here are some
of the priorities we have, and it would be a good idea if these
were continued, and we want to have an open communication with
Congress on some of these matters''?
Dr. Woteki. Well, we will certainly be investigating other
options, but my understanding is if we do not have an
appropriation to support them, we do not have the funds to
support them. We would encourage the investigators, who have
been supported through earmarks, to take advantage of the next
cycle of the competitive grants funding and to apply through
that program.
Mr. Kingston. Is there enough money in it?
Dr. Woteki. We are proposing an increase that would bring
the total up to $325 million.
Mr. Kingston. How much are the earmarks total?
Dr. Woteki. Well, as we have talked about, the amount in
NIFA is $141 million.
Mr. Kingston. Dr. Knipling, I wanted to hear what are your
five favorite accomplishments that you guys have had.
Dr. Woteki. He has had a lot of time to think about it.
Mr. Kingston. He has had more time than he deserves, I
think.
[Laughter.]

ARS RESEARCH ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Mr. Knipling. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Coincidentally, we often describe the total ARS program as
five major components: natural resources, crop production and
protection, livestock production and protection, food science,
food technology, and human nutrition. And, in fact, I think I
can cite an example in each of those five areas that is very
current and contemporary.
I would just say quickly if we look historically, many of
the consumer products that we are all very familiar with have
been derived from previous USDA research that, although
developed in the pre-commercial phase, have gone on to be
adopted by the private sector to develop consumer products.
Orange juice, cotton fabrics, clothing that we are wearing
every day, food products in the grocery store, there is a
science story behind every one of those.
But more contemporary, if I were to cite an example in the
natural resources area, we have supported other agencies of
USDA, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, and
incidentally, that is one of our mandates, is to serve the
other agencies of USDA. They are one of our major customers,
but the past several Farm Bills have tasked USDA to
definitively define the outcomes in support of conservation
investments, and we have done the research through the so-
called Conservation Effects Assessment Program to show that
these conservation programs do, in fact, save soil erosion,
improve water quality, contribute to the wellness of the
environment.
In the plant science area, I would quote some of the
fundamental genomics work that we have done in partnership with
other agencies that have laid the foundation for advancements
by other scientists in the private sector, the corn genome, the
maize genome.
In the plant health area, a very successful program that is
continuing after about ten years is control scab disease in
wheat, Fusarium. We have diminished the impact of that disease
and also the toxins that are associated with that disease,
which has both food, human health, and animal health
implications.
Right now we are working actively on this so-called UG-99,
the wheat stem rust. We do not have this problem, but it is an
international threat, and I think our success will be measured
by the avoidance of a problem that never reaches the United
States.
Mr. Kingston. Well, thank you.
My time has expired, and I actually did have a question on
UG-99, but, Mr. Latham, your turn.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome. It is good to see you. I guess my first
question would be representing Iowa State, which obviously you
are very familiar with, and I have heard a lot from my brother,
as you well know.
Dr. Woteki. I imagine so.

HATCH ACT REDUCTIONS

Mr. Latham. He is very interested in agriculture research,
certainly the dean and everybody, the president. With the Hatch
Act cuts of about $11 million, and with Mac-Stennis cuts doing
away with the ability of any Member to provide funding for
research programs, certainly with extension being cut about $15
million; what am I supposed to tell the people at Iowa State
with the ongoing research that is going to be eliminated?
Dr. Woteki. Well, I think that you recognize that the
budget that we are proposing in 2012 is designed to address
both the deficit and needed debt reduction. We have had in
preparation of this budget to make what are really some very
hard and I know painful choices. And the best advice that we
can give to people in universities who are being affected by
these proposals is to prepare proposals and submit them into
the competitive grants program, for which we are requesting an
increase, a significant increase in the 2012 budget.
Mr. Latham. But what about the ongoing, long-term, basic
research at the universities? You are keenly aware of how
important that is for agriculture.
Dr. Woteki. Yes. Most keenly aware. The very fundamental
research, a lot of that--most of it, actually--is being
supported through the competitive grants program. So again we
would encourage people with that outlook to prepare proposals
and to submit them.
We recognize that the universities, through the experiment
stations, make very good use of their Hatch Funds. And under
the budget constraints that we're facing, though, we've
recognized that we have to make some cuts, as much as we might
not want to do so.
Mr. Latham. Didn't we used to team up to stop the kind of
cuts that you're talking about today?
[Laughter.]
Dr. Woteki. We would certainly like to do that.
Mr. Latham. Well, I think it's obviously a real concern
with anyone, with ongoing long-term research, what the effect
is going to have.

COMPETITIVE GRANTS

And you know very well that with the competitive grants,
you're not going to have continuity; you're not able to hire
people; you're not able to keep the known funding levels there,
so that you can have the kind of basic research that we need in
agriculture, that the private sector, you know, will not invest
in, or can't afford to.
And you know, I obviously have real concerns about that.
And also, I guess the whole priority the Secretary was in--
was that a week or so ago--and the priority issues are now:
Child obesity, climate change, global food security, food
safety, energy, and biofuels.
I just don't see where the basic kind of research that we
need is anywhere in the priority list. Where is it on the list?
Dr. Woteki. Well, first of all, to address your question
about the model of using competitive grants to support long-
term fundamental research, if you look outside agriculture, at
the other fields of science, whether it's biomedical research
or physics or chemistry, I mean, that's the approach that other
Federal agencies have used to fund research that's largely
performed at universities or other research organizations
outside of government.
In agriculture, we have had the experience now with the
National Research Initiative, and now named AFRI, and with a
major emphasis on trying to increase that funding.
We think the model will actually work well with
agriculture, and are encouraging faculty to apply for
competitive grants for those projects that were earmarks in the
past.
Mr. Latham. Okay. I don't know, am I out of time?
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Farr.

RESEARCH FUNDING MECHANISMS

Mr. Farr. Thank you.
I just got a breakdown: The formula grants are about 42
percent, the competitive grants are 40 percent, the earmarks
were about 15.6 percent, and administrative grants about 2
percent, 2.3.
We have wiped out the earmarks, so now, I mean, the formula
is the biggest release of money. And that formula--and formulas
always have windfalls and wipe-outs--I mean, people who were
there at the time the formula was written usually get
protected. And the newest or latest concerns don't get into the
formula funding.
And I understand what you've said so far is that a lot of
this in formulas were there to protect the colleges who were
around in 1862. The Hatch Act was 1887 it was written. So this
is a pretty old law.
And it does other things. It protects Black colleges, and
so on. And I think the question is that if we're going have a
limited amount of research dollars, whatever that amount is,
that we really out to make them more competitive. And I can
see, you know, Mr. Latham, he's right about the continuity.
But at same time I hear from my universities that they'd
much rather be in a competitive process than in a formula
process, or in an earmark process.
And, you know, for the leading--these are University of
California statements, with big Ag universities, they think
they'll get their fair share in a competitive process. It seems
to me, if indeed this earmark's going to be, if we're going to
ban them and not have them again, and the only way we can get
access to new money is going to be in a competitive grant, then
we've got to start checking on whether this formula process,
which is almost 50 percent of all the money going out.
And if it's a formula, you don't have to prove anything.
You're on that list, you get your money. You just get a check.
There's no competition, there's no relevancies, essentially.
How serious are you looking at what we could do? It could
be a huge blow-back politically, because to a lot of the
universities, this is a check they don't want to give up.

ACCOUNTABILITY OF FORMULA FUNDING

Dr. Woteki. Well, first of all, let me address the question
of accountability within the formula funds. Each of the
universities that receives funds through a formula is required
to put together a plan that is approved by NIFA.
Mr. Farr. Can you veto it? Have you ever vetoed--once they
have the plan, is it kind of measurable for quality, or
anything?
Dr. Woteki. Let me ask Dr. Beachy to describe to you how
they review the plans, and the kind of interaction that goes on
with the universities.
Dr. Beachy. Thank you, Congressman. Each of the funds that
would go to a State is broken down to individual projects.
Those, then, come in as individuals through a Grants.gov
process.
They are then reviewed by a national program leader--an
NPL. There's a lot that we can't say, but if it's a bad
project, we simply send it back and say that's not an
appropriate use.
So there is some monitoring, but it is not nearly to the
extent that it would be in a competitive grant. You're correct
in that----
Mr. Farr. The reason I'm doing this line of questioning is
that it really got down to--I mean, when when I first came on
this committee, I was told that there's just an awful lot of
money flowing out there to do irrelevant research.
And I think Mr. Kingston's raised that also. And I mean, if
we have a limited amount of funds, we don't want to spend it on
irrelevant research, when there's really cutting edge research
that we ought to be doing. We're in a competitive world. We got
to get outproduct to market.
America's greatest economic asset is its seed corn of
creativity, it's intellectual capacity. Nobody's been able to
rob that from us yet. They maybe build what we invent somewhere
else, but we invent it.
And so this is so cutting, I mean, in agriculture still
being a huge part of our economy, if we're going to stay ahead
of the world, we're going to have to put a lot of money up
front, right where you are.
And if we're going to limit that money, we got to make sure
that that money is going to the most worthwhile or essential
research.

AGRICULTURE AND FOOD RESEARCH INITIATIVE

Dr. Beachy. We believe that that's what AFRI does. AFRI
receives input from stakeholders, and they help us to identify
what the key priorities are.
And then we formulate our RFAs, or our calls for proposals.
And then the competition starts.
And we do keep this clear of as much politics as possible.
We try to rate the best grants, and then award those to those
that are most deserving.
And it's our ability to identify the important needs,
whether it's in a viticulture genomics, or it's in aquaculture
or another area of high priority, we want to be able to put
those out to bid to the best scientist.
And so by growing AFRI and identifying the important
components, those things that are important for the success of
American economy and agriculture, we then can put these calls
out for the best to compete.
And we find that that brings out the greatest creativity,
it brings out the best teamship that we could possibly find
between sciences and different disciplines, where the economist
talks to the bench scientist, and he talks to the field
scientist, and they come up with a project that solves a
problem for American agriculture in regional ways that these
other funds don't.
That said----
Mr. Farr. The other funds, this is competitive grants that
you're talking about?
Dr. Beachy. Competitive grants.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time is expired. And now that
we have more members here, we're going to have to get back a
little more formally to the five-minute rule. So.
Mrs. Emerson.
Mrs. Emerson. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, all of you. I
apologize for being late.
Let me follow up on this discussion of research. And it is
very frustrating for all of us who represent ag districts, to
see that the NIH spends $170 for every one dollar spent by USDI
and competitive fundamental research.
And I mean, it's pretty lopsided funding, if you ask me.
And certainly, given the fact that the very essence of life
science begins with the food we eat, this is a problem.
But that being said, let me follow up, Dr. Beachy, with
what Mr. Farr was asking you. What's the total amount of
research grant applications received by AFRI for last year? Or
total amount you've gotten----
Dr. Beachy. Congresswoman Emerson, it's nice to see you
again.
The amount that we received this year end for AFRI funding
was $4 billion in requests, from 500 research institutions.
Mrs. Emerson. So you had 500 research institutions apply?
Dr. Beachy. Yes. Including our land grant colleges and
universities. These are from medical schools, and from research
institutions that are private, and that are public.
It's an enormous degree of interest of scientists around
the country in all of our institutes, who want to solve these
problems of obesity, of fertility of our crops, and
productivity of lands.
It's an amazing interest.
And so we had $4 billion of requests, and our award level
would be something around $250 million.

AGRICULTURE-RELATED SCIENCE AND AFRI

Mrs. Emerson. And what percentage of that was spent on
agriculture-related science and--I mean, because I consider
obesity to be--I mean, questioning as to whether I would say
it's agriculture-applied science.
But you know, we used to do soybeans and nematode research,
and you know, snail-darter research, or whatever. I'm being a
little facetious about snail darters. But seriously.
So how much is spent on just good ag research as it applies
to making crops more resistant, I mean, to actually coming up
with seed varieties that would be more tolerable in a dry
climate and those things, versus obesity and other things?
Dr. Beachy. Now see, I'd have to get back with the exact
numbers. The amount that would be in our Institute for Food
Production and Sustainability, compared to those that would be
in the area of climate, which includes new drought tolerance
work----
Mrs. Emerson. Okay.
Dr. Beachy. So a lot of the drought tolerance work that
would be in that institute would also feed over into the Food
Production Institute.
I don't have----
Mrs. Emerson. Well, if you can get me that information.
Dr. Beachy. I'd be glad to.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Emerson. And I'd love to see just a breakdown of all
of the money that was given out to each institution.
Dr. Woteki.
Dr. Woteki. Yeah. We're happy to supply that. But I would
respond that all of the research that's sponsored under AFRI
does fit within the mission of the Department of Agriculture.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

HUMAN NUTRITION RESEARCH

We have from well over a hundred years supported human
nutrition research. A lot of the identification of essential
nutrients for human health has come out of research that was
funded by the Department of Agriculture.
And our mission is to identify what aspects of nutrition
are necessary for maintaining good health. And NIH's
responsibility is to fund research that really focuses on the
role of nutrition in disease.
So we have, you know, identified a very appropriate role
for the research that we fund in human nutrition.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, and I'm not--I think it refers back to
what some of our land grant colleges were doing. And so we just
want to be sure that they're getting their fair share.
Can you tell me currently how much of the aggregate U.S.
investment in agriculture research is made by the private
sector, in comparison to the public sector, both federal and
state governments? And in your opinion, why is it important to
make sure the federal investment in Ag research, particularly
competitively-awarded research, is strong?
You know, why don't we rely exclusively on the private
sector?

PRIVATE SECTOR VERSUS PUBLIC SECTOR RESEARCH FUNDING

Dr. Woteki. Yeah.
Well, the private sector does fund over half of the food
and agriculture research. The best figures that I have are from
2006, when the Economic Research Service did an in-depth
analysis of private sector food and agriculture research and
government research. And at that time, the private sector's
contribution was about $6.8 billion, the Federal contribution
was about $3 billion, and the states' $1.3 billion.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
To follow up on the line of questioning from Mrs. Emerson,
isn't it true that quite often the Federal Government partners
with the private sector, where specifically identified needs
are ascertained with regard to research?
The research may be too expensive for the private sector to
do it alone, and try to look after their bottom line.
And it also is driven by identified needs that the private
sector has, in terms of better food and nutrition products, for
example.
And so there's a combination of both that, in working
together. For example, the peanut industry works very closely
with various land grant universities, Baylor University, even
on the issue of nutrition and obesity. The Peanut Institute has
worked very closely for a number of years with Baylor
University on obesity research, which has been very, very
promising.
I was going to ask you about your proposal, which includes
$7.5 million of research on nutrition and health, which
includes obesity.
And of course, obesity is one of the number one health
threats, that triggers a plethora of diseases, including
diabetes, heart, kidney, and other diseases; but can be
prevented with proper nutrition and a healthy lifestyle.
Can you share with us whether ARS is involved with the
First Lady's initiative on obesity? And are there other
government initiatives in this area? And what impacts will the
reductions that were contained in HR 1 have on the agency's
obesity research?
Because our kids are growing too fat to fight. And that's
becoming a national security issue. And of course, the
Department of Agriculture has always, in fact, started the
school lunch program, to make sure that our youngsters would be
fit to fight, if necessary.

HUMAN NUTRITION RESEARCH

Dr. Woteki. Well, I think you've asked two different lines
of questions.
With respect to the work that's being done by the
Agricultural Research Service, and the Let's Move campaign of
the First Lady, there's a lot of research that's done, that
supports not only the understanding what the nutrient
requirements are for children during growth, but also that
supports the dietary guidelines for Americans, which is the
best synthesis that we have of the research that's supported,
not only by USDA agencies, but also by the National Institutes
of Health.
The increase that is requested in the President's budget
for ARS in human nutrition is specifically to identify what the
barriers are for the public in achieving those dietary
guidelines.
So that is, I think, going to provide us with a lot of
insight, so we're going to help the First Lady and the Let's
Move campaign to be more effective in helping parents in
managing the nutrition of their children, as well as the
activity levels, so that they maintain a health-supporting
diet, and a healthful weight.
So the budget request does specifically include that in it.

EARMARKS

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much for that answer.
I'm very, very frustrated by the loss of earmarks, because
a number of rural communities, 1890's, 1860 land grant
universities have historically continued the valuable research
with the use of earmarks. And Mr. Farr pointed out that it will
eliminate quite a bit.
And I'm looking at the research now with competitive
grants, which is going to place the 1890s at a very, very
competitive disadvantage, because they have been historically
underfunded over the years.
And we've just gotten to the point, through earmarks and
through some cooperation, that has allowed them to start
participating.
Now with the cutback and going to the competitives, you're
going to undo what was a process to remedy the effects of past
discrimination.
So I'm very concerned with that. And I'm hoping that you
can, through USDA's leadership, offer some kind of incentives
for the major 1860s and 1890s to work together cooperatively on
some of the research projects that are funded, and that you'd
look favorably on that.
Mr. Kingston. And the gentleman's time has expired. So
you'll need to respond in writing, or on the next round.
Mrs. Lummis.

BRUCELLOSIS RESEARCH

Mrs.  . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The gentleman just teed up
my remark. So thank you.
My question is about Brucellosis funding. You know, I'm
from Wyoming. And APHIS recently implemented this interim rule
on Brucellosis regulations. So it's refocusing Agency
researchers to the area of prevention and control of the
disease in the Greater Yellowstone area.
Now I did a little stint on the GYIBC, the Greater
Yellowstone Interagency Brucellosis Committee, representing my
state, Wyoming. And we knew 15 years ago, when I was on the
GYIBC, how to control and manage its temporal and spacial
separation of bison and elk from cattle.
But the real issue that we need is an effective vaccine.
Because we all vaccinate our heifers for Brucellosis. But it's
not an efficacious vaccine, especially when it comes to the
transmission from elk and bison to cattle.
So we need a better vaccine.
What authority do you need from Congress to expand the
efforts to get a better vaccine? What are you doing now to
develop a better vaccine?
And then I want to follow up with a question about the
formula funding versus the competitive grants that follow on
the line of questioning of the gentleman.
Dr. Woteki. Well, with respect to the formula, and the
earlier question, we have taken steps in our budget proposal to
essentially protect the 1890s colleges and the 1994s--the
tribal colleges.
So the formula allocation to those entities remains flat
constant. And in the case of the tribal colleges, there's a
slight uptick. Because we recognize that they're very
important. I could just say parenthetically that actually the
1890s have been competing very well within AFRI.
To the question of Brucellosis in the development of an
effective vaccine, the Ag Research Service has worked many,
many years with APHIS on research on Brucellosis for the
purpose of developing a more effective vaccine.
And I'd like Dr. Knipling to comment on that work.
Dr. Knipling. Yes. Brucellosis, as you've already
acknowledged, is a very old but still very important continuing
problem.
The vaccine development actually goes back more than 15
years, probably 25. It's very effective on cattle.
Mrs. Lummis. Mm-hmm.
Dr. Knipling. It's called RB51, as you may know.
Mrs. Lummis. Yes.
Dr. Knipling. Very effective on cattle. But the challenge
is the wildlife interface with bison and elk.
Mrs. Lummis. Yes.
Dr. Knipling. It is also effective on bison. But the
delivery problem is difficult. It actually takes two
inoculations for bison, even if we could effectively deliver
it.
It is not effective on elk.
Mrs. Lummis. Right.
Dr. Knipling. They have a different immunology system.
But anyway, we do have a continuing research program to
support the cattle and swine industry, also the wildlife
interface, and of course, technical support for APHIS.
This work is carried out at Ames, Iowa, at the National
Animal Disease Center, where we're investing about $3.5 million
per year. It is focused on understanding the interaction of the
vaccine with the immunology of the wildlife species.

ANIMAL HEALTH AND DISEASE RESEARCH PROGRAM

Mrs. Lummis. Thanks, Dr. Knipling. A followup question. Do
you expect if funding goes for the Animal Health and Disease
Research program, and becomes competitive versus formula-
funded, do you think it will go under an existing account in
NIFA? And would Brucellosis vaccine research be eligible to
compete for grants under that account?
Dr. Woteki. Perhaps I could answer that.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
Dr. Woteki. Yes, the Animal Health and Disease Research is
a candidate for funding in the competitive grants program. And
just to illustrate that it is included already in AFRI, this
week, there is a request for applications that has been
announced from NIFA. And within that, Brucellosis research
towards improved vaccines is included.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay. Great. Well, we've noticed that a lot of
these grants have been awarded for dairy cow diseases, like
tuberculosis and mastitis and pneumonia.
Dr. Woteki. Mm-hmm.
Mrs. Lummis. But this remains a huge problem in the Rocky
Mountain area. So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. No questions.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr.

FORMULA FUNDING ALLOCATION

Mr. Farr. Let me get back to--I really want to know if
we're shaping some new policy. I mean, the formula grants, the
responsibility for your department is--well, it's essentially
research. Right?
Dr. Woteki. Research, education, economics, yes.
Mr. Farr. So I guess the question really goes down to: What
is the value of the formula of funding in today's competitive
world?
Because the formula funding essentially gets 20 percent to
each state, equally. Not less than 52 percent of the states as
follows: One-half in the amount proportionate to the relative
rural population of each state, to the total rural population
of all states; and one-half in the amount proportionate to the
relative farm population of each state, and to the total farm
population of all states;
Not less than 25 percent for multi-state, multi-
disciplinary, multi-institutional research activities to solve
problems concerning more than one state; and three percent for
the administration of the Act.
I mean, I'm not going--but it's not based on what's the
fire that needs to be put out today?
Dr. Woteki. From a national perspective? That may not be
the case. But from the state perspective, the formula--and
again, I'm speaking as a former dean, as well as an
administrator of formula funds now in my present capacity.
Mr. Farr. What state were you a dean in?
Dr. Woteki. In Iowa.
Mr. Farr. Iowa? Okay.
Dr. Woteki. And----
Mr. Farr. Third largest Ag production state in the country.
Dr. Woteki. Right. And so the formula funds played a very
important role in providing the infrastructure for the research
that we did, that was very specific to the needs of farmers in
Iowa.
The additional requirement that you mentioned that related
to multi-state research, was actually very important in
bringing together the land-grant universities not only in a
specific region, but also across the country, to address some
common problems.
So dairy science, for example. A lot of research that
supports finding solutions for the dairy industry is not so
site-specific. But under that requirement for the formula, it
has encouraged the dairy science departments in the land grant
colleges to work collaboratively.
Mr. Farr. So for the infrastructure to be maintained, which
is important for academic reasons, then you need to have some
of this grant money.
But on the other hand, I mean, I'm from California, I'm not
from Iowa. California produces three times more agriculture
than Iowa. We produce twice as much as the number two state,
called Texas.
And yet in the formula funding, Iowa gets more money than
California. So I see where you would be very supportive of
formula funding.
But from a fairness standpoint and from a critical issue on
productive agriculture, why should it be that way? Why should
we grandfather in a formula?
I mean, first of all, we've taken away our only flexible
tool, which is earmarks. And I'm a big defender of earmarks. I
tell people, ``If you don't like earmarks, the next time you
write a check, just leave it blank. Put the money in, sign the
bottom, and send the check in.'' They'll figure out how to cash
it.
``Well, I can't do that. I don't trust where it will go
to.'' I said, ``Well, that's what earmarks are. We put the name
on the check.''
So and I'm trying to find out if we follow through, and
we're not going to have any more earmarks, then all this
committee is going to do is be able to decide how much money we
put into the formula account, and how much money we put in the
competitive grant account.
And I think we're in a lot of hurt, if we don't figure out
how to do this a little bit more relevant to modern times.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman has 30 seconds, if you want to
respond in that time.
Dr. Woteki. I think it was a rhetorical----
Mr. Kingston. Oh, it wasn't rhetorical. But it was a
statement.
Mr. Farr. Well, I'm interested in finding the intellect
that's going to come out of the USDA on these challenges. I'm
asking this big----
Dr. Woteki. And as I've said earlier, the formula funds
provide a very valuable infrastructure within states, that
allows them----
Mr. Farr. But are they fair?
Dr. Woteki. They have----
Mr. Farr. Is it fair that Iowa gets more money than
California?
Mr. Latham. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Woteki. I would very politely like to point out that
the formula is actually determined in our legislation. So it's
not an issue that I can opine on at this point; but we would
certainly like to look forward to a dialogue about the future
funding of agricultural science.
Mr. Farr. There's no Harkin in that formula?
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time is expired. But on that
line of questioning, I would like you to submit for the record
how some of these institutions which did not get a reduction,
how they are contributing to the research?
I'd like to know if this is a political decision not to
reduce certain funding flows, or if it's a scientific decision.
And it looks to me that it could be political.
[The information from USDA follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I wanted to ask Dr. Smith a question. You've researched the
various agriculture programs, correct?
Dr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Kingston. And would that be crop programs included?
Dr. Smith. Yes, sir. We're looking across the board at
marketing programs, programs that support production, and
conservation programs. Yeah, the whole gamut.

FARM PROGRAMS

Mr. Kingston. As we go into Farm Bill, it would be very
helpful for us to know how you rate certain programs. Because
often, our testimony comes from people who are the users of it,
who think it works great.
And you know, there's nothing remarkable about free money.
It always works for the recipient.
Dr. Smith. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Kingston. And that's how often programs are presented
to us. ``Oh, this is a really good program.''
Farm programs particularly, do some come to your mind that
are probably marginal and some are great?
Dr. Smith. I'm not prepared to rate them right now. But
what we do attempt to do is look at variations on a theme. What
are different alternative ways of achieving a particular goal?
Mr. Kingston. Mm-hmm.
Dr. Smith. And provide information on effectiveness and
cost for a variety of options, and let the raters----
Mr. Kingston. Well, you would look at, say, the Peanut
Program or the Dairy Program. Correct?
Dr. Smith. Correct.
Mr. Kingston. And you would be in a position to say, ``Some
of this is great, some of this is not so great''?
Dr. Smith. We can talk in terms of the consequences of the
program. Whether they're good or bad I think is in the judgment
of the person who's----
Mr. Kingston. Well, for the dollar spent and the dollar
returned, and whatever impact, I think that would be very
important.
What do you think of the Market Access Program?
Dr. Smith. I don't have an opinion on the Market----
Mr. Kingston. It does come under you, though, right?
Dr. Smith. No. I mean, it doesn't come under----
Mr. Kingston. That's not one you look at?
Dr. Smith. Actually, I believe we do look at that, yes.
Mr. Kingston. I don't expect a specific answer right now.
But I think if you could submit something to the record, and
help us make some determinations.
Also CRP comes under you?
Dr. Smith. Well, it's an FSA program, but yes, we do
examine----

PROGRAM ASSESSMENT RATING TOOL

Mr. Kingston. I think we would be interested in looking at
some of this.
You know, there's something, and I can't remember what it's
called--somebody might know--that rates government agencies--
it's like BEST? Or the PERC Program? Or something like that?
PARK, PARK. You're familiar with PARK?
Dr. Smith. No. No, sir.
Mr. Kingston. What does PARK stand for? I can't remember.
Dr. Smith. Oh, PART, oh, yes. Yes, I am familiar with----
Mr. Kingston. I don't know why when I say ``K,'' you know,
I mean a T. But do you have a PART-type rating that----
Dr. Smith. No, typically the agencies that conduct the
programs do their own assessment of performance and results.
But we are likely informing their assessment through the work
we do on the implications of different alternatives.
But I can certainly provide for the record----
[The information follows:]

ERS research on farm programs can show the economic implications of
alternative ways of achieving a policy goal. For example, conservation
programs such as the Conservation Research Program (CRP), Wetland
Reserve Program and the Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP)
produce a variety of environmental benefits--they reduce cropland
erosion--leaving our air and waters cleaner and soils healthier. While
these non-market environmental impacts are difficult to monetize, we
estimate that reductions in soil erosion by the CRP are provide more
than $380 million in water quality benefits, $68 million in air quality
benefits, and $120 million in soil productivity benefits, annually. The
CRP's annual wildlife-related benefits exceed $720 million. ERS would
be happy to provide you and your staff with a briefing on questions
concerning the economic evaluation of USDA programs.

Mr. Kingston. Is there an assessment of these programs in
terms of dollars spent, which ones are good and which ones
aren't so good?
Dr. Smith. Not in terms of good and bad. But----
Mr. Kingston. Can you help us get to where we need to be?
Dr. Smith. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Kingston. Because really when we go into the farm
programs and all these things are under scrutiny, some of them
do work better than others. And I think if you can help shed
some light on that, it would be enormously helpful for this
committee, because every time we go to the House floor, there
is somebody who wants to eliminate a program, and then suddenly
we're in this position of trying to defend something that, you
know, we weren't ready for that debate.
Now I know this isn't a program, but the WTO found the USA
in violation for subsidizing cotton. And part of the settlement
was $147 million a year to Brazil. And if not, they would have
slapped on over $800 million in tariffs to us.
But one of the critics of the program on the House floor
said, ``Okay, I understand this now. What we're doing is we're
bribing the farmers in Brazil, in order to continue subsidizing
farmers in America.''
And those of us, trying to defend the expenditure, we're
kind of out there on a limb--you know, somebody has a little
clever slogan like that, and we get caught off base.
And so it would be very helpful, before this bill goes to
the floor, to have some of your ideas, and know what we should
fight for and what we should not fight for.
Dr. Smith. Well, I appreciate the opportunity to inform the
whole Farm Bill process, with respect to programs. And we'll do
whatever we can to do that. And I invite you and members to
request through the USDA any particular kinds of programs on
which you have economic questions.
Mr. Kingston. Well, thank you. Mr. Latham. Or Mrs. Emerson?
No, it is Latham, excuse me. It's going by looks. No, I'm going
to go by subsidies, and you go first. By research dollars, Mr.
Latham is granted one hour.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Latham. Mr. Farr, you're welcome to move to Iowa.
That's fine. But----
Mr. Farr. Without subsidies?
Mr. Latham. Sure.
Mr. Farr. It wouldn't be a state.
Mr. Latham. What else could I have done this morning?
Something, anyway.
Mr. Kingston. Would it be a good time to talk ethanol? I
don't know.

ANTIBIOTIC USE AND PATHOGEN RESISTANCE

Mr. Latham. Okay. Just for the gentlewoman from Wyoming.
There is elimination of university funding for animal disease.
And it's a small amount, but you do get some funding at the
University of Wyoming that's into their budget proposal, which
should be eliminated.
But the big issue in livestock production, mostly with
hogs, is the use of antibiotics as far as keeping animals
healthy, and so we have safe, healthy animal food and have a
healthy food supply.
And the Department, I think is you're asking for $10
million increase for food safety research. Some of this money
is to be used to address and evaluate alternatives to
antibiotics in food animals.
I don't know who wants this, whether it's ARS or as far as
what the intent is, what are the priorities, what are you
trying to find out?
Whoever wants it.
Dr. Woteki. So the Department does participate and our
research agencies do participate with the National Institutes
of Health, Centers for Disease Control, Food and Drug
Administration, in a taskforce that is focused on appropriate
antibiotic use, both in animal as well as in human health.
And I'd like to ask Dr. Knipling to address the specific
role that ARS has in this.
Mr. Latham. Good. And give the purpose of the research. Are
you trying to eliminate antibiotics? Or what are you charged
with?
Dr. Knipling. Okay.
Yes. Of course, antibiotics, as you say, are used to
prevent infectious diseases, or prevent pathogens that would
cause food safety concerns. And of course, the issue is the
fairly widespread use of this is then leading to resistance of
these pathogens, which also then have implications for human
health.
So that's the basic issue.
We have dual approaches. Actually the USDA is participating
with CDC and APHIS, and even the private sector, to actually
monitor this activity, particularly in swine.
This work is really centered at Athens, Georgia. But it
certainly has national application.
But in terms of the proposed budget enhancement that's in
the fiscal year 2012 budget--to look at alternatives--and it
basically would focus not only on the monitoring of the trends,
but also to support some of the more traditional food safety
prevention technologies, the animal health infectious disease
prevention technology, so that the antibiotics would not have
to be used to the extent they are now.
Mr. Latham. And are you taking into consideration I guess
the economics, but also the fact as far as having a safe food
supply, of allowing animals to get sick, and then treating
them? Or is there an equation that says: Having healthy animals
to begin with is going to be much better as far as safe food
supply for humans, rather than to wait until they get sick and
then really load them up?
Dr. Knipling. Yes. Very much so. The focus would be on
prevention or avoidance of the problem in the first place.
Other forms of nutrition supplements, probiotics, and so forth
would be another approach to the alternatives to the
antibiotics themselves.
By all means, the approach is on prevention and avoidance.
Mr. Latham. So when will we have results? When will we know
if there is an equation or a comparison? Or what the benefit
is?
Dr. Knipling. Well, the monitoring that's been underway for
some time, already there are significant results coming out of
that work. And we could provide some of that information.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Dr. Knipling. It does suggest that yes, in some cases,
there are problems and concerns. But also that data shows that
this is not as severe an issue as it might be otherwise
portrayed.
In terms of----
Mr. Latham. Do you want to say that again? Would you repeat
that again, that this is----
Dr. Knipling. Yeah. Some of that data and trends show that
the resistance is not developing to the extent as otherwise
might be portrayed. In other instances, yes.
It depends on the antibiotics themselves, the type, and the
animal and the whole combination of factors.
In terms of the new initiative, of course, any new research
initiative is a fairly long-term investment. So we won't
suggest instant gratification. But it's important to invest in
this line of work----
Mr. Latham. We don't get much of that around here anyway,
so----
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Latham. If I can, I am going to have to leave. I am
going to be submitting questions for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Do you yield your time to Mr. Farr
permanently?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Latham. Not the money.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Bishop.

BUDGET CUTS AND PRIORITIES

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
I note that the Research Education and Extension Programs
are funded at a total of $2.274 billion in the proposed budget
for fiscal year 2012, which is $472 million less than fiscal
year 2010 or 16.6 percent less. H.R. 1 reduces the research
area by a total of $415 million. The President's budget reduces
ARS in 2012 by $113 million or 9 percent; the Institute of Food
and Agriculture by $141 million or 10 percent; and ERS gets a
bump up by about $4 million, approximately 5 percent.
Do you really think that you will be able to do what is
necessary to keep the United States on the cutting edge of
producing the highest quality, the safest and most abundant
food and fiber and fuel now in the industrialized world, and
the most economical, if you have the cutbacks, if as we go into
the farm bill the Economic Research Service has not had the
adequate funding to inform us for the policy decisions that we
have to make going forward to make sure that we are competitive
in the global marketplace, given the WTO and given all of the
other restraints we have in supporting our research as compared
to our competitors?
Do you really feel like you have what you need, or are you
really restrained by having to just cut back because you have a
mandate to cut the budget?
I mean are we cutting back essential research as opposed to
just optional varieties of research that we really do not need
to do to remain competitive?
Dr. Woteki. Congressman Bishop, we recognize that we are
being asked to contribute to helping with the deficit as well
as with the debt. In putting together this budget we have
identified the areas that we believe are of the highest
priority to keep American agriculture competitive and to meet
the needs of farmers, as well as consumers, in the United
States.
So we have proposed shifting some funds into these higher
priority areas, and we at the same time, as we have been
talking earlier through this hearing, have proposed one of the
ways to make some savings is to eliminate earmarks that are
currently in the budget for this mission area.
So that is the approach that we have taken, and we, like
other research agencies, are being called on to make some very
hard decisions about what our priorities are.

EARMARKS

Mr. Bishop. Well, the truth of the matter is that what we
are doing is rather than having congressionally directed
funding, we are now having agency directed funding because the
agency will decide what the earmarks are, as opposed to the
Members of Congress.
And I feel Mr. Farr's pain, and perhaps you are not quite
as sensitive to that pain being from Iowa, but that is where--
--
Mr. Kingston. If the gentleman will yield.
Mr. Bishop. I will be glad to yield to the Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. It may be of interest to the people on our
side of the aisle that the administration may make some
decisions that tilt blue State politics rather than red State
politics, and I do not know that people have quite grasped that
as much.
Mr. Bishop. Reclaiming my time, I thank you.
I also am sensitive to the fact that much of the policy on
agriculture is driven by the politics of the region as opposed
the red/blue States. The southeastern region has peculiar needs
and difficulties with the portfolio of crops that are grown
there, which are quite different from the Midwest and the West.
Of course, the earmark process allows the Members of Congress
who come from those areas that have unique needs to address
those, when those are the major policy makers on the executive
branch side may or may not be sensitive or even knowledgeable
of the peculiar needs of the particular region's agriculture.
And that troubles me very much with regard to the research
funding and the other funding.
Dr. Woteki. Congressman, in developing the priorities that
informed our budget, we have done a lot of consultation. The
agencies that are represented in front of you meet frequently
with the different commodity organizations. They hold listening
sessions where they bring together from across the country
representatives of not only the farmers groups, but also the
industries that are part of the wonderful agricultural economy
that we have in this country.
So the planning that went into these budget priorities was
informed by a lot of consultation with stakeholders.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Emerson.

HEALTHY FOOD FINANCING INITIATIVE

Mrs. Emerson. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Smith, my question goes to you with regard to the
Healthy Food Financing Initiative. And as one who has a very
rural district that would have any number of what you would
consider to be food deserts, this is very much of interest to
me.
But I am a little confused. So perhaps you can clarify
things. Your all's budget included a request for $2 million for
ERS to support the initiative, and I think in your testimony
you state that the additional funding would be used to gather
and analyze data about communities and help answer questions
about how the development of local food sources would affect
food choice and diet, quality, et cetera, and that would then
supplement the information that you already have on the Food
Environment Atlas, which has 168, yes, indicators of
communities' food environment.
So this information is being gathered to technically
support the initiative for which the administration requested
$400 million last year, of which $50 million more or less goes
to the USDA, $275 to the Treasury Department, and the rest to
HHS.
So since you did not get the money or no monies were spent
at least on Healthy Food Initiative, I was worried that you all
had, in fact, spent money on something and now you are
gathering information after you have already spent money. So
explain to me how this is going.
Because there was a request last year, but this year you
are requesting money for more research, I suppose. Why would
you ask for money for something or why would the department ask
for money for something if you did not have the information or
data necessary to implement a policy?
Dr. Smith. What we are doing is working closely with the
Department of the Treasury and HHS to use the knowledge we have
about the food environment to develop metrics, indicators that
could be used to judge the success of a healthy food financing
initiative or any other initiative to improve food access
within a region.
Mrs. Emerson. So the research that you would do would be
not only for USDA, but for Treasury and HHS at the same time.
Dr. Smith. Yes, we are working collaboratively.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. And after looking through all of the
criteria or the different indicators, if you will, is it
possible that at any point in time anyone in administration at
the university--it does not matter who it is--could actually
have so much data available that they can manipulate it to
produce any results they want?
Dr. Smith. I would find that unlikely that the data could
be manipulated. They are public data. They are all well
grounded. If individuals went to pick and choose indicators, I
suppose that could present a different picture than picking
other indicators.
But they are all there to inform local governments, county
governments, and sub-county areas actually about the state of
their area.

FOOD DESERTS

Mrs. Emerson. So with all of the indicators that you have,
168, do you know how many counties do not show some indication
of being in a food desert?
Dr. Smith. I am sure I could get you that information. I do
not know that off the top of my head though.
[The information follows:]

Eight of the 168 indicators in the Food Environment Atlas are
measures of grocery store access and proximity. These indicators--which
are from the ERS food desert report to Congress--provide count and
percentage numbers of the households in a county that live more than a
mile from a supermarket or large grocery store (for urban areas and
urban clusters) or more than 10 miles from a grocery store (for rural
areas) and do not own a car.
Based on these indicators, USDA estimates that there are 6,500
census tracts that are food deserts--low-income census tracts where a
substantial share of residents has low access to a supermarket or large
grocery store. There are 1,851 counties in the U.S. that contain at
least one of these food desert census tracts, so 1,290 counties (41.1
percent of all U.S. counties) do not have at least one food desert
census tract.

Mrs. Emerson. Okay. I would appreciate it because, I mean,
you have got a million ideas, some of which are important. I
mean, I would grant you that, but it is interesting that only
one among the 168 indicators indicates persistent poverty
counties, and I have 14 of those out of 28 in my district, and
I would think that that would be far, far bigger, should carry
much more weight, I guess, than some of the things that you
have already got on here, like the number of fast food
restaurants and/or full service restaurants.
Dr. Smith. We also have employment rates and other
indicators of the health of the area.
Mrs. Emerson. But if a county is a persistent poverty
county----
Dr. Smith. It is a big deal.
Mrs. Emerson [continuing]. Then to me that is an indicator
in and of itself.
Dr. Smith. Agreed.
Mrs. Emerson. All right. I would like to get some more
information if you would not mind.
And, Mr. Chairman, I have other questions to submit for the
record.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DUPLICATION OF STATISTICAL DATA COLLECTIONS

I am concerned about the duplication of statistical
collections. Is the National Agricultural Statistics Service
the exclusive data collection agency for USDA, or does the Risk
Management Agency collect data, or the Farm Service Agency? Do
they collect data independently?
Dr. Clark. Those agencies that you mentioned collect
information as part of program participation. Our data is
collected to provide statistical information, and we use their
data to the extent that it is possible in producing estimates
and forecasts.
Much of our data is produced as forecasts, which is ahead
of the time in which the program participation data is
available.
Mrs. Lummis. So are you suggesting there is really no
overlap?
Dr. Clark. Not in terms of the data that is used for
producing statistics between those agencies that you have
mentioned.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay. Are there terms where there is overlap?
Dr. Clark. We are working very closely to use their data to
the extent possible to minimize the respondent burden on our
respondents, the farm operators and producers, so that we do
not have to ask questions and ask for information that we can
get from alternative sources.
Mrs. Lummis. Good, good. That is good to hear.

HEALTHY FOOD FINANCING INITIATIVE

Now, switching to this Healthy Food Financing Initiative,
the administration has proposed an over $400 million
initiative, and we have been talking about this, and it looks
like you are planning the research to justify the initiative
after it is already begun. So my question is: why weren't these
studies conducted beforehand?
Dr. Smith. Well, some studies were conducted beforehand
that did inform that. For example, the Economic Research
Service did the first study of and made a definition for areas
with low food access, food deserts. So that was done prior to
this.
And what we are doing now is linking food access in food
deserts and elsewhere with health and nutrition of the people
in those areas.

AGRICULTURE AND FOOD RESEARCH INITIATIVE

Mrs. Lummis. One more question now going back to this
competitive funding versus formula funding. Fiscal year 2012
budget, that proposes funding of $325 million for AFRI. So that
is a 24 percent increase of $62 million. How much of the
increase in the AFRI Initiative can be attributed to the
transfer of funding from other budget lines, and how much will
go to increase the number of AFRI awards?
Dr. Woteki. Would you like to address that, Dr. Beachy?
Dr. Beachy. Thanks. It is a good question.
In fact, much of the increase, if you look at the higher
education, the graduate fellowships and institution challenge
grants are up in AFRI so that they can enhance and will grow
our education portfolio. So there are roll-ups of several
programs like that to put them in a competitive end or a
competitive initiative.
It will result in additional grant awards, of course, as
the amount of funding in that category goes up.
Mrs. Lummis. And do we know how much of the increase in the
AFRI Initiative is attributed to the transfer of funding.
Dr. Beachy. Well, there is some roll-up that came from the
consolidation of some of the formula funds--I mean, I am sorry,
some of the earmarked funds--so that we could initiate new
programs in AFRI.
Mrs. Lummis. When you use the term ``earmark funds,'' is
that synonymous with formula funds?
Dr. Beachy. No.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay.
Dr. Beachy. There are some authorities that are designated
in what is called Section 406 authorities. These are sections
in water quality, food safety and pest management, and so some
of those have also been rolled up into AFRI and then will be
awarded through the AFRI Programs as designations in those
topic areas or will be covered in those topic areas.
Mrs. Lummis. And what was the goal of rolling them
together?
Dr. Beachy. To simplify the process of management. We know
that these are very important programs because stakeholders
have told us that, and so we know we want to maintain them.
Each of these grant awards requires a management by an
individual. They cost money; they cost management fees, and by
combining them, it gives better management oversight, but it
gives also a greater opportunity in the competitive process, as
Congressman Farr mentioned, as a way to select the awardees and
then make those grants available.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay. Thank you, Dr. Beachy.

WORLD HUNGER

Mr. Kingston. Dr. Clark, I want to ask you a question that
you may be able to answer or you might be able to point me in
the right direction. You did some international work in the
U.K., and so you have a good background on this. I was
wondering if there is any information on food supply in a
country and the form of government in the country, hunger
versus form of government.
Is there anything like that out there that you know of or
can you point me in the right direction?
Dr. Clark. If there were, it probably would be available
through the Food and Agriculture Organization that is part of
the U.N. I do not know specifically of information on that, but
there is currently a United Nations initiative to improve
statistics, agriculture and rural statistics throughout the
world, and they are trying to get comparable data. It is more
extensive than what you would consider production agriculture,
but it is extending into other data items.
But I do not recognize that hunger was one of the data
items that is being looked at. The World Bank also would have
information.

ARS LOCATION CLOSURES

Mr. Kingston. Okay. Dr. Woteki, you have a number of lab
and facility closures listed. Can you put a dollar amount on
those, the total, and tell us what your timeframe is?
Dr. Woteki. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Those are all within the
Agricultural Research Service, and I would like to ask Dr.
Knipling to provide that information.
Dr. Knipling. The program reduction--it is ten locations
and entire programs--totals $38 million in terms of their
annual budget.
Mr. Kingston. And will they be closed this year? Because
some of these like have been out there.
Dr. Knipling. Yes, of course, they are proposed for----
Mr. Kingston. They look like trial balloons more than
definite decisions.
Dr. Knipling. No, they are intended to be definite
proposals. Of course, if those are concurred with in the budget
process, we would then implement or initiate the closure of
those in fiscal year 2012 in terms of stopping and terminating
the program.
The actual disposal of the real property is a fairly
lengthy process and would probably take at least a year to
actually do that, but in terms of the staffing and the research
activity underway, we would stop that on October 1st, at the
beginning of the fiscal year.

HEALTHY FOOD FINANCING INITIATIVE

Mr. Kingston. Okay. Dr. Woteki, let me ask you this. In
terms of some of this research question that I asked earlier
and the answer being that it took 10 to 15 years to get the
results from it, which I certainly understand, but how is it
when it comes to healthy food we could develop metrics in a
year's period of time?
Dr. Woteki. I think the Healthy Food Financing Initiative
is actually taking advantage of research that has been going on
for a number of years to identify what are the indicators of
need. So it is essentially drawing on the past experience and
research findings to develop metrics.
Mr. Kingston. But you would have that also on research
dollars. Because you have a snapshot and then you have a moving
picture, a developing picture, if you will, and it seems odd to
me that you can say, okay, this is what is going on with
Healthy Food Initiatives right now, but on agriculture it is a
little bit more nebulous, that, well, it is developing; it is a
work in progress.

EVALUATING RESEARCH PROGRAMS

Dr. Woteki. Well, we actually do use a variety of different
measures to evaluate our research programs, and we would be
happy to share those metrics with you.
We also are very actively engaged with other science
agencies within the Federal Government in trying to identify
what are the metrics that have a good evidence base that
indicate that they really are good at evaluating scientific
research programs.
So it is actually a field of inquiry in and of itself. What
are the best ways to evaluate research programs?
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESEARCH FUNDING MECHANISMS

Mr. Kingston. And I think we are all interested in this
because with the earmark and the formula versus competitive, I
think all of this is going to be extremely important to us.
I am going to give you an example. Under the Hatch Act,
scientists in North Dakota have developed three barley
cultivars and have recommended for malting and brewing by the
American Malt and Barley Association, and I was wondering if
that would come close to corporate welfare in your opinion
because it is for a specific group, the American Malt and
Barley Association. I assume these are beer creator of some
sort.
Dr. Woteki. But the research actually goes to support the
farmers who are the ones who are producing the barley that will
then feed into the industry. There are a lot of areas in which
we do provide research. I think Dr. Beachy earlier in
responding to one of the questions talked about the competitive
grants program that is in support of wheat and other grains.
So there is a lot that we support that----
Mr. Kingston. Well, it resulted in more money for farmers.
I understand that, but that is still corporate welfare. I mean,
farmers are making money from it. It specifically benefitted a
small group of farmers and specifically benefitted a particular
industry association, as opposed to the general application of,
well, we all are better off from that.
Dr. Woteki. As I testified earlier, a lot of the research
that we support is in the what we call pre-competitive area. It
is in research that the farmer organizations are not able to
fund because it is a relatively small group, and that also
though is over the long term a public good, and it is what has
provided for incredible increases in agricultural productivity
across the board, many, many different crops, some of them big
ones, some of them small ones, and it has had a benefit, as
well, for the American consumer.
You know, the food prices that we pay are actually at this
point less than 10 percent of income. So it is an incredible
amount of food security that we have in this country that is
largely a result of this investment in agriculture research.
Mr. Kingston. My time has expired, and I thank you.
Mr. Farr.

AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT VS. RESEARCH FUNDING

Mr. Farr. I want to ask Dr. Clark, who is the scorekeeper
here, of agriculture receipts, where does the State of Georgia
rank?
Dr. Clark. Oh, I will probably have to ask. It is around
tenth I would guess, but I can get back to you on the actual
place where it ranks.
Mr. Farr. What about the State of Ohio?
Dr. Clark. I do not know those rankings off my head. I can
get that information for you.
Mr. Farr. Do you know in Pennsylvania?
Dr. Clark. No.
Mr. Farr. Well, I Googled it. So I am at an advantage.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Farr. You are pretty good. Georgia is 12th, not 10th.
Dr. Clark. Okay. Tenth was not too bad then.
Mr. Farr. But number 28 is New York. Number 32 is
Tennessee. Number 22 is Michigan. Number 20 is Pennsylvania,
and number 17 is Ohio, all of them way behind Georgia.
Dr. Clark. Right.
Mr. Farr. And all of them get a lot more formula money than
Georgia gets.
Dr. Clark. I do not allocate formula money. That is totally
out of my----
Mr. Farr. Well, shouldn't formula money be related to
agricultural output?
Dr. Clark. That is probably a question for my colleagues
here.
Mr. Farr. Where does California rank?
Dr. Clark. Oh, I think it is either 1 or 2.
Mr. Farr. It is number 1. Do you know how many crops
California produces?
Dr. Clark. A huge number.
Mr. Farr. You do not have a number?
Dr. Clark. I do not; 100 and something.
Mr. Farr. You have got to get a better scorekeeper.
Dr. Clark. Maybe so.
Mr. Farr. do you know how many crops Texas produces?
Dr. Clark. Less than California.
Mr. Farr. Far less, and yet Texas gets a lot more money.
The point is if you go through these rankings of states by
agricultural output, by diversity of crop, then you go through
the formula funding; it does not match.
That is the whole point of this last hour or so. If we are
left with only 2 choices of how we are going to fund
agricultural research, formula and competitive grant, it is
interesting because the states that actually are big production
states do much better in the competitive grant category.
So I would be moving more of my--if I was administering
this and trying to bank it; the trouble is this formula, Mr.
Chairman. These formulas were written back in the last century.
Mr. Kingston. If the gentleman will yield, I am wondering
if this comes to Dr. Smith's category. Do you have some
thoughts on that because you evaluate these things.
Dr. Smith. What I was just writing down was it would be
interesting to look at how the allocation among states would
change given different criteria for judging that, just for
information.
Mr. Kingston. That would be helpful.
Mr. Farr. But see, I think if you were going to write a new
farm bill, and that is where they authorize these formulas,
then obviously those who have got some are going to be there to
protect it. But if we are going to go into a new era of
essentially disbursing Federal tax dollars for the purposes
which you are in charge of, it seems to me that we want to
argue some equity that ought to be related to need, to need of
this country to remain in a competitive global climate.

ARS LOCATION CLOSURES

I think you answered the question, but I have another one.
In your testimony you said that you have reductions and
terminations totaling over $100 million in funding and 182
staff-years. It includes terminations in research projects at
dozens of locations across the country and wholesale closure of
10 research universities.
We never approved those things when they came before in the
past, but this year we are facing a different situation and a
great deal of uncertainty. How do you determine those
termination? Do you have a plan for it? Is it orderly? what
goes first? How long would it take to close them? Is there
funding asked for for the closing process?
Dr. Woteki. Mr. Farr, those relate to the Agricultural
Research Service, and there is a very rigorous set of criteria
that were used to identify which programs were going to be
stopped and which facilities would be closed.
And as to the process that would be used, I would like to
ask Dr. Knipling to describe what ARS will have to do.
Dr. Knipling. Yes, as I mentioned earlier in response to
another question, the annual savings from the research program
itself is an aggregate of $38 million. Once we start to
implement the closure, we encounter two types of expenses. One
is the disposition of the real property, and then the other is
relocation of personnel or severance of personnel. In each
case, that would take the better part of a year, and we
estimate that those costs would be on the order of about $25
million in that first year.
And, no, we are not requesting funding for that. That would
be a cost that we would have to absorb elsewhere throughout the
agency.
About half of those costs are personnel relocation or
severance costs, and about half of it is disposition of the
real property.

ARS FACILITIES STUDY

Mr. Farr. How long is it going to take you to do your study
on facilities, the needed facilities to be expanded or new ones
to be built?
Dr. Knipling. That is underway now. We would hope to have a
product by the end of this fiscal year, calendar year for sure.
We did request in the fiscal year 2011 budget funding to
support that as an external professional outside study. Those
monies not forthcoming, we are initiating that with in-house
resources, personnel and staff. So that is, in part, underway
already.
Mr. Farr. So you would expect that the decisions made after
you have made this priority list, that you would have
recommendations to Congress for appropriations when, next year?
The next fiscal year? The next President's budget?
Dr. Knipling. Yes, we would assume for the fiscal year 2013
budget that the results of that study would be available. As to
how that would actually translate into funding proposals, we do
not know yet, but we would have the agency-wide assessment of
our entire portfolio of facilities, over 100 different
locations and, of course, multiple facilities at many of those
locations.
Mr. Farr. Could you share with us? I do not have to do it
here on the time of the Committee, but I would like to see the
criteria you are using and how you will be making your
judgments.
Dr. Knipling. Yes. We have outlined an approach and
criteria, and of course, in simple terms, it would be both a
facility assessment in terms of condition of the facility, as
well as linked to the program priority not only now, but for
the investment for the future, what programs those facilities
would provide the capacity to undertake on a sustained basis
Mr. Farr. Yes, I would be really keen on that because I
have an interest in a joint facility with FDA and maybe
Homeland Security.
Dr. Knipling. Yes.
Mr. Farr. All right. Well, I have no other questions, Mr.
Chairman. I thought this was a very good hearing.
I think it opens up more questions than we got answers for,
but so is this entire fiscal process we are going through. So
you have a big burden on writing your bill.
Mr. Kingston. We will get there.
Dr. Woteki and members of the panel, thank you for being
here, and this meeting stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


