- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia, Chairman
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas               CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama               ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio                       JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Mike Ringler, Stephanie Myers, Leslie Albright,
Diana Simpson, and Colin Samples,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 5
Page
U.S. Department of Commerce......................................    1
U.S. Department of Justice.......................................   99
National Science Foundation......................................  157
National Aeronautics and Space Administration....................  231

S

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 5--COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
FOR 2012

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia, Chairman
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas               CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama               ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio                       JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Mike Ringler, Stephanie Myers, Leslie Albright,
Diana Simpson, and Colin Samples,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 5
Page
U.S. Department of Commerce......................................    1
U.S. Department of Justice.......................................   99
National Science Foundation......................................  157
National Aeronautics and Space Administration....................  231

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-531                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\        NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\          MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia              PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia               NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama          JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri             JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                   ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho            DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida              LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana               SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana          CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                   SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio           BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                  MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida           BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

----------

Wednesday, February 9, 2011.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

WITNESS

TODD ZINSER, INSPECTOR GENERAL
Mr. Wolf. Good morning. The hearing will come to order.
I want to welcome all the subcommittee members who will be
here shortly for the first hearing of the 112th Congress. We
have many familiar faces returning to the subcommittee and some
new members as well, our new ranking member, Mr. Fattah, who
has served on the Committee for nine years, and there have been
others who have served on it for a number of years. We have new
members, Mr. Austria of Ohio, Mr. Graves of Georgia, and Mr.
Yoder of Kansas.
The President's budget for fiscal year 2012 will be
released on February 14 and we intend to pursue an aggressive
hearing schedule through the months of March and April. And
this will be a year of severe budget austerity and the
subcommittee intends to have the hearings with heads of all the
major departments and agencies to justify their requests and
help us to identify areas in which spending can be reduced with
the least impact.
We are anxious to hear the agencies that come up because in
many respects they know a lot better than, quite frankly, we
will know. And we want to hear them to tell us from a priority
basis where they think we can make these cuts.
In addition, we will have a few selected thematic hearings,
the first of which will be a hearing on prisoner reentry and
recidivism this Friday.
Our witnesses this morning are Mr. Todd Zinser, the
Inspector General of the Department of Commerce, and Ms.
Cynthia Schnedar, the Acting Inspector General of the
Department of Justice.
Before I recognize the witnesses to present their
testimony, I would like to recognize my colleague, Ranking
Minority Member, Mr. Fattah, for any comments he would like to
make.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is an honor to serve with you on this Committee and
under your leadership. I look forward to working with you
towards the goals of the Committee, which over the years have
been bipartisan.
I came on to the Committee when you were in a leadership
role and you have returned to that role. And throughout, you
have remained consistently interested in a whole range of
issues covered by the Subcommittee.
So I look forward to working through it. There will be some
very tough decisions as we go forward, but I am convinced that
we can arrive at those decisions in a bipartisan way, keeping
the nation's interest foremost in our minds.
Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Welcome, Mr. Zinser. We want to thank you for appearing
before the Committee this morning to present the top management
challenges facing the Department of Commerce.
Your office issued a December 2010 report, Top Management
Challenges Facing the Department, which focused on a range of
issues including NOAA satellites, the $7.9 billion that
Commerce received under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act, the 2010 Decennial Census and IT security.
All these efforts include rather large sums of money, so
part of what the Subcommittee will ask you today is where you
think there may be opportunities for saving.
And, again, as I mentioned at the outset and when we met
with the Secretary of Commerce, we would like to hear their
comments. I guess in a real world if nothing had to be cut, it
would be one thing.
But based on the reality, and this Subcommittee has been
given an allocation, and based on the reality of where we are,
we in an open spirit want to hear from the Department to say
the same way that we would around our kitchen table if we were
being eliminated, okay, you know, maybe we will cancel the trip
to Disney this year or maybe we will not get a new car, but we
want to maintain the priorities of our family to make sure the
family stays strong and we do everything the same way we want
to do with the departments.
So there may be things that the departments would like to
have and maybe we would even like you to have them, too, but
under the circumstances. So how do we maintain the sciences,
maintain strong law enforcement, do what we have to do, but
still reach the budget numbers?
So we hope you will share with the Committee some of the
recent oversight work that you have done. Mr. Zinser, if you
would just summarize remarks, your full statement will appear
in the record.
Mr. Zinser. Thank you, Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member
Fattah, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting
me to testify this morning about our oversight of the
Department of Commerce.
The department is responsible for a highly diverse set of
technical and scientific programs that range from issuing
patents to operating weather satellites to conducting the
census and managing our ocean resources.
The President's budget request for Commerce for fiscal year
2011 was $8.9 billion. In December of 2010, we issued our most
recent top management challenges report. Our report discusses
eight areas.
Two of the areas, IT security and acquisitions and
contracts, are issues for all federal departments.

it security

In these two areas, the Department of Commerce is playing
catch-up. With respect to IT security, the department will
require additional resources compared to previous years. The
management reforms underway in the area of acquisitions and
contracts, however, should actually result in cost savings to
the department. For example, the department has set a target of
$50 million in annual savings through more strategic
purchasing.
Our December report identified six additional management
challenges.

noaa environmental satellite programs

First and most important are NOAA's two multi-billion-
dollar satellite systems that are part of the national critical
infrastructure. The Joint Polar Satellite System is a new
program transitioning from its troubled predecessor, called
NPOESS. NOAA is at a critical juncture in the transition and
delays in the program, which could result from any interruption
in funding, will further increase the risk of serious gaps in
satellite coverage for the collection of weather data and
forecasting.
The Geostationary Operational Environment Satellite Series
is at a less critical state in its development, but must avoid
a return to the cost overruns and schedule delays that the
program has suffered in the past.

american recovery and reinvestment act

The next item on our list relates to the Recovery Act. In
fiscal year 2010, the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration awarded 232 grants totaling $3.9
billion under the Broadband Technologies Opportunities Program.
The agency was successful in awarding the grants and obligating
the funds within the deadline, but only about five percent of
that money has been spent so far. This is a huge challenge and
presents a significant amount of risk for fraud, waste, and
abuse.
The second area of the Recovery Act that must be closely
watched are nearly 200 projects involving construction costing
an estimated $1 billion funded through grants or contracts
administered by NOAA, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, and the Economic Development Administration. As you
know, Mr. Chairman, construction projects are inherently
susceptible to cost overruns, schedule delays, and fraud
schemes.

u.s. patent and trademark office

The next management challenge included in our report is the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. It has an annual budget of
approximately $2 billion funded through a complex set of user
fees. Everyone agrees that the current backlog and pendency of
patent applications is unacceptable and that there is much work
necessary to improve the operations of the agency.
According to PTO, in fiscal year 2010, the backlog of
applications totaled 726,000 and it took an average of three
years from the time an application was filed to make its way
all the way through the process. Secretary Locke and Under
Secretary Kappos have a number of reform efforts underway and
Congress is working on reauthorization, but it is a significant
and complex problem.
One initiative that bears close watching is an IT
modernization project for processing patent applications, which
PTO estimates will cost almost $300 million over the next
several years. PTO does not have a very good track record when
it comes to IT projects and will require close oversight should
the project move forward.

2020 decennial census planning

The final three areas in our report include NOAA's
stewardship of marine resources, the nearly $900 million, 13-
year renovation of the Commerce headquarters building, and
planning for the 2020 decennial census.
Of these three areas, the most critical for this
subcommittee, Mr. Chairman, is the 2020 decennial. The 2010
decennial cost taxpayers approximately $13 billion. According
to estimates by the Census Bureau and GAO, the cost of the 2020
census, if it is done the same way, could possibly double to
between 22 and 30 billion dollars. Such costs are not
sustainable, and Census must develop more cost-effective
approaches to the 2020 count.
Even though all the 2010 results have yet to be delivered,
we strongly recommend that the department, the Census Bureau,
and the Congress treat the 2020 decennial with a sense of
urgency if we expect to develop the plans and systems necessary
to avoid unacceptable levels of risk and cost for the 2020
census.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my summary and I would be
happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

NOAA SATELLITE PROGRAMS

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
Your December 2010 report included a section on NOAA's
environmental satellites focusing on two programs, NPOESS or
the JPSS Program, and GOES-R.
Last year, the Administration proposed a major
restructuring of the NPOESS Program. According to the report,
when NPOESS was begun in 1995 as a joint program between DoD,
NASA, and NOAA, it was estimated to cost $6.5 billion and
included six satellites, the first of which was to launch in
2008. That is the history.
Now the JPSS Program is estimated to cost $14 billion. That
is an estimate from 2008. It may actually be even higher. The
first satellite will not launch until 2014. So here we were at
2008, now we are 2014. And now instead of buying six
satellites, the government is only purchasing four. In short,
the program cost has doubled. We are getting less capability
than originally planned and we are six years behind schedule.
Can you briefly summarize the problems with the NPOESS
program that led to its restructure and can you outline how you
intend to proceed with your oversight of the program?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. I think the problems date back a
number of years. I think that the plan was to merge governance
of the program between NASA, DoD, and Commerce because there
are Defense satellites as well as civilian satellites that NOAA
and NASA are interested in.
And the governance issues, I think, were a problem. The
satellites were not a priority for the Defense Department and
there were problems getting decisions made.
I think the complexity of the instruments was a huge cost
driver. There was one instrument in particular that ran into
problems in its development. And at the end of the day, this
marriage between Defense, NASA, and NOAA just didn't work. And
so to solve that, the decision was made to divorce from DoD,
and the increase in the cost to this subcommittee is basically
the result of cost shifting from DoD to the Commerce
Department.
As far as our oversight is concerned, right now the
critical issue is this transition to JPSS, the name of the new
program. And one of the things that is happening right now is
there is going to be a launch of what they call the NPOESS
Preparatory Project, the NPP. That is scheduled for a launch
this fall. It was originally going to be a test satellite to
test the instruments in orbit, but they have turned it into an
operational satellite to actually go up and serve in an
operational capacity. So we are watching that very closely.
One of the issues we identified, for example, was there are
problems right now with the ground system and the instruments
on the satellite communicating with the folks on the ground.
They are focusing on that issue right now and trying to resolve
it.
Assuming there is no further delay in resolving those
issues, that satellite will launch in October. We are watching
that very closely.
Mr. Wolf. Well, are you confident that they have everything
together now? I mean, this has been going on for quite a while
and the numbers continue to go up. Who is the contractor, the
lead contractor?
Mr. Zinser. The lead contractor was Northrop Grumman, and I
think Raytheon was also a contractor.
You know, one of the problems they had even in the lab, was
probably six or seven years ago. They were working on NOAA-19,
and the contractor, Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company,
dropped the satellite and damaged it. And that caused some
considerable cost overruns there.
Mr. Wolf. Do you believe that NOAA is on the right path
now? I mean, are you confident you would stake your reputation
on that, that they are on the right path?
Mr. Zinser. I do think they are on the right path, sir. I
think that it is an inherently complex program. It is very,
very critical and we have dedicated staff to overseeing the
program. I have staff embedded in this transition. We are
watching them very closely.
Mr. Wolf. This is about 25 percent of the budget for the
Commerce Department, maybe a little bit more.
How much of your staff is dedicated, 25 percent? How many
people do you have on your staff, how many do you have that are
dedicated to this and from a percentage basis?
Mr. Zinser. My staff is fairly small.
Mr. Wolf. So the answer is you do not have very many
people?
Mr. Zinser. I have two people who have been watching the
program on a daily basis. They are supplemented with audit
teams as we identify specific audit work that needs to be done.
Mr. Wolf. And how many people do you have on your staff?
Mr. Zinser. I have about 150 total. That has increased. I
have some extra on my staff because of the Recovery Act. I got
some supplemental funding for Recovery Act that has allowed me
to hire temporary people, but base is about 150.
Mr. Wolf. But if this is such a large portion of the
budget, should you have more people looking at it?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, we should. One of the things I had to do
last year was to dedicate a significant amount of staff to the
decennial census. And now that that is completed, we will be
able to shift resources over to some of these programs such as
the Satellite Program and PTO. PTO has got a lot of issues too.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Likewise, the GOES-R Program has
experienced difficulties with a $1.5 billion cost overrun to
$7.7 billion. And you can see why the American people get very
skeptical, $1.5 to $7.7 billion, fewer sensors, two satellites
instead of four, and a three-year schedule slip.
In addition, your report highlights additional areas of
concern, namely the infrastructure of the NOAA facilities to
accommodate another ground system.
Will you please provide us with a high level overview of
the GOES-R Program and the critical problems at this juncture.
Mr. Zinser. Well, the GOES-R Program, as I mentioned in my
statement, is not at such a critical stage of development as
NPOESS is. GOES-R has satellites up there. NOAA has set a
policy that they want three satellites in orbit at any point in
time. One covers the eastern part of the country, one covers
the western part of the country, and then they have a third
satellite up there as kind of an on-orbit spare. Those are all
in place, and there is not the risk of gaps in coverage that
there is with NPOESS.
The department very wisely has outside independent teams
that they have enlisted, experts in the field that come in and
do evaluations of the program on a regular basis. Those teams
have offered recommendations to NOAA in terms of managing the
program. We are following up on those recommendations to see
whether or not NOAA is implementing them.
Mr. Wolf. Are the same people running the program now the
people that were there at the beginning pretty much?
Mr. Zinser. Pretty much, sir, yes.
Mr. Wolf. Even though they may be wonderful people that you
would like to have part of your family, maybe you would put
different people in charge, because this has been going on for
so long.
I have one last issue and then we will go to Mr. Fattah and
the other Members. And then we have a lot of other questions we
will get to near the end.

EXPORTS AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE

The Administration is making a big play to have exports.
America is hollowing out. Our manufacturing base is pretty much
eroding. We are literally eroding before our eyes. We used to
think we were leading the world in high tech. We are no longer
leading the world in high tech.
So I support what the Secretary of Commerce wants to do.
Every time he talks to us, he talks about exports and exports
and exports because we want to create American jobs,
manufacturing in Philadelphia and Kansas and in Texas.
There is something I would like you to look at. I have been
meeting with a number of companies, and I wonder if you know
about this one company the other day said they have a product.
They are very aggressive in exporting abroad. And I am trying
not to name the product because they are afraid of having to be
the focus of the attention.
They were at a trade fair in Germany. Their competitors had
a coffee bar, meaning they were giving, I guess, Jacobs coffee
to someone, which is not exactly a bad thing to do. They were
prohibited, they said, by the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act to
even have a coffee bar. And so, therefore, they felt they
really--they almost cannot compete.
Since we have both the IG for the Justice Department and we
have the IG for the Commerce Department--the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act is administered in the Justice Department,
correct?
Ms. Schnedar. Correct.
Mr. Wolf. I would like to get both of you on a quick basis,
maybe a one week or two week basis so we are not pushing this
thing off, because if we want to create jobs in America, not in
China, not in Mexico, not in Timbuktu, but here in River City
where we live, and there is almost a ``de minimus'' thing like
``can I give you a cup of coffee,'' ``can I give you a pen with
the name on it,'' and if we are going to start prosecuting
companies under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, then you are
putting American companies who are creating jobs for Americans
at a disadvantage.
So without getting into too much detail, since both of you
are here, like Esther in the Bible, for such a time like this,
you both come together. If you can team up and look at this,
the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and we can get some people
to talk to you, I guess off the record. The company is afraid
to say anything because they do not want to get the Justice
Department to come in and crack down.
But based on different things that I am hearing, if you can
look at working with Mr. Zinser, you can look at your
commercial attaches and see what they do and come back to the
Committee in two weeks to give us kind of just a preliminary
feedback, is this really such a problem, because if we are
prosecuting for giving a cup of Jacobs coffee and they cannot
compete with the Germans and the French and the Italians, then
the Administration is not going to be able to create these jobs
that they're talking about and doing, creating jobs here in
America so we can make things here and export there.
I am tired of going into stores and seeing China, China,
China, China, China. Let's reverse it. But if we are really
going to do what we say, and the President said the other day
we are going to look at all these regulations, let's really
look at this and see.
So if both of you maybe in two weeks could come back to
us----
Mr. Zinser. Sure.

1. Commerce and DOJ IG should coordinate a quick review of the FCPA
regarding its implementation, particularly with respect to whether it
is being overly or aggressively enforced and thereby hurting U.S.
businesses abroad.
On March 2, 2011, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) delivered a
letter, dated March 1, addressing this matter to the subcommittee.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Just maybe both of you come up to
the Committee and tell us what you found. Is this a real
problem? We will give the information that we have. Are there
some changes that we need in the Foreign Corrupt Practices law?
Is the enforcement being overly aggressive?
So would you mind working together on this since Justice
enforces the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and you provide
oversight on the Foreign Commercial Service?
Mr. Zinser. We would be happy to do that.
Mr. Wolf. Very good. Thank you very much.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I concur with the chairman's concern about this, and I look
forward to your report on it.

2020 CENSUS PLANNING

But let me go back to the census projections because
obviously the census is a duty that we have as a government
given to us through constitutional mandate.
You say that in the next census in 2020 the cost could be
as much as twenty-two to thirty billion if we conduct the
census as we conducted it this time?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. That is the estimate.
Mr. Fattah. Assuming we did the same thing and it did not
cost us that amount this time, why would it cost us so much?
Mr. Zinser. Well, you are projecting the costs over the
next ten years, so you have somewhat of an inflation factor.
And when you are dealing in billions of dollars, those add up
pretty quickly. But the big cost driver for the decennial is
the cost of the temporary workers that the Census Bureau
employs.
So, for example, the non-response follow-up operation that
employed about six hundred to seven hundred thousand temporary
workers cost over a billion dollars itself, about a billion and
a half dollars itself. And those costs are going to increase
simply for inflationary purposes, number one.

NOAA SATELLITE PROGRAMS

Mr. Fattah. Now, on the Satellite Program, DoD is out
completely, right, so that raised the cost from about seven to
eleven billion, is that----
Mr. Zinser. Well, actually, even when the Defense
Department was involved, they had their own satellites in the
program. Those have been taken out. So the costs would have
been much more than $11 billion had the Defense Department
stayed in there.
Mr. Fattah. And so from a taxpayer's standpoint, there's a
need for the Satellite Program, right----
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. For early warning purposes for a
whole variety of reasons? But there is almost a profit center
involved in these satellites and the weather reports that are
generated because you have companies, right, that then sell
this data for weather forecasting purposes for which the
taxpayers do not receive any remuneration; is that accurate?
Mr. Zinser. The weather data is made available to private
companies that then sell the weather forecasting and do the
forecasting for various media outlets.
Mr. Fattah. Has there ever been any analysis of what, if
any, cost sharing there could be between the taxpayers and the
for-profit entities involved here so that we could recoup some
of the dollars? Because the chairman is right, this has been
going on since the early days of the Bush administration, if
not before. What was the original name of the Joint Polar
Satellite Program?
Mr. Zinser. It was called NPOESS.
Mr. Fattah. Right. The costs have gone up. So at some
point, because a lot of members here are very concerned about
the cost of the Federal Government enterprise, if we have
activities that we need to undertake to provide warnings for
communities around major weather events, but we could recoup
some dollars in the ongoing operations of these satellites, it
would seem that we might want to explore that.
Are you aware that anyone has ever made any judgment about
what the economic value is of this weather information?
Mr. Zinser. We have not looked at that, sir. I think it is
actually the other way around. I think NOAA issues contracts to
people so that they can provide this kind of information to
local communities.
Mr. Fattah. Okay.
Mr. Zinser. I think it is actually working the other way
right now, but that would be a good review to do.
Mr. Fattah. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
And, Ms. Schnedar, we will hear your full statement. We
separate it out so we just do the Commerce Department. You will
have the opportunity----
Ms. Schnedar. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. For a full statement. Mr. Culberson.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I sincerely want to thank you for the work that you do.
We in Congress are so inundated with information and have such
a huge realm of responsibilities, the taxpayers we represent
get so frustrated with the waste as we do that the Inspectors
General Offices truly, I think, is one of the most essential
and valuable parts of the Federal Government.
We really appreciate what you do. It is very hard to get
good information and we really, really appreciate the work that
you do, all of you, all of your staff.
This, it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, is kind of a classic
illustration of what is often so wrong with the Federal
Government. The people, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, in your
questions that, some of the people that have made the decisions
that manage this program are still there. They are still
running the program.
There was, as I understand, Inspector General Zinser, the
Satellite Program was initially designed to be run both by the
Defense Department, NASA, and NOAA. The costs got too high.
Defense Department pulled out.
I gather they have their own separate--they have their own
weather satellite system today?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson. And they are not relying on NOAA or NASA?
Mr. Zinser. They actually share data. There are Defense
Department satellites up there and there are civilian
satellites up there.
Mr. Culberson. Right. Defense Department, DoD has their own
weather satellites?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Because they found the Civilian Satellite
Program to be unreliable obviously and costs a lot of money and
the problems. It reminds me of when the Air Force decided to
pull out, they no longer launch their payloads through our
manned Civilian Space Program after the horrible Challenger
disaster.
And the unclear chain of command, sounds like there is
nobody clearly in charge. Nobody has really been held
accountable for these vast cost overruns.
And as the chairman pointed out--I was unaware of this, Mr.
Chairman--that the, make sure I understood, just the Joint
Polar Satellite System alone represents 25 percent of the
Department of Commerce's budget? Did I hear that? Was that
right?
Mr. Zinser. I do not----
Mr. Culberson. Just this one satellite system.
Mr. Zinser. If you take the entire cost of the program over
a number of years, right now the estimate is close to $12
billion. The annual appropriation, the annual request from the
Department of Commerce last year, was $8.9 billion.
Mr. Culberson. It is just extraordinary. I mean, it is
clearly an essential satellite system that we have got to have,
but we are as--I have got to be able to reason together and
find a far more efficient, effective, and particularly in this
new era of austerity, cost-efficient way to manage these
programs and get these absolutely essential weather satellite
systems launched and that we not only get it launched, but we
have a capable system that is going to last for many years.
As the chairman said quite correctly in the private sector,
this would just--this is just not acceptable.
Are the folks in charge of this program at NOAA and the
Department of Commerce career civil servants unionized, career
civil servants protected by civil service laws so they
essentially--nobody has been reassigned or fired at all over
any of this?
Mr. Zinser. Well, they have a large staff that works in the
satellite service. It is a large part of NOAA. They have
different services. The satellite service is a large part of
that.
I am not familiar with the past history in terms of
personnel actions and personnel moves and things like that.
Mr. Culberson. You are not aware of anybody being fired or
reassigned as the chair--the chairman asked anybody reassigned.
To your knowledge, has anybody ever been fired over this kind
of grotesque mess--excuse me--this kind of grotesque waste of
our kids' money?
Mr. Zinser. I do not know the answer to that, sir. Not to
my knowledge since I have been there. I am starting my fourth
year, so----
Mr. Culberson. No one has been fired in the time you have
been there?
Mr. Zinser. I do not think that anyone has been fired
directly for the cost overruns or schedule delays or problems
that----
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Zinser [continuing]. NPOESS has experienced.
Mr. Culberson. I am still infuriated no one has ever been
fired for 9/11. It still galls me. I mean, has anybody ever
been fired, to your knowledge, for--for example, who made the
decision to spend how many billions of dollars on those hand-
held computers the Census was going to use to go door to door
and wasn't that like thrown out the window and how much money
of our--how much of our children's money was wasted on that
foolishness? And nobody was fired for that either?
Mr. Zinser. There were some reassignments or some
retirements, but I do not think anybody was fired, sir.
Mr. Culberson. How much money was wasted on the hand-held
computer fiasco?
Mr. Zinser. Well, the original contract was about $600
million, and I think the reason that they scrapped it is
because of the problems they ran into to finish the development
to where it would meet the original intent. The cost of that
was rising to about a billion dollars, and so they decided to
not go forward with it.

PROGRAM DUPLICATION AND OVERLAP

Mr. Culberson. It is a pattern we see throughout the whole
Federal Government and I am convinced--as someone who
represents a district in Texas, we have no state income tax,
virtually no labor unions. You work at will. People can be
fired if you are incompetent or you screw up the job. And you
reward people for good performance with bonuses, but there are
consequences if you do not do your job.
And there is a clear chain of command. Typically in any
kind of a big organization with making big decisions like this,
you have got a General Patton. You have got somebody clearly in
charge. There is none of this with the DoD and NOAA and NASA
overlapping. Nobody is in charge. Nobody gets fired. Everybody
gets reassigned. Nobody is responsible.
And, of course, I suspect Congress also had something to do
with this and that the original program--was the original
design giving DoD, NOAA, and NASA that sort of overlap, was
that a policy decision made by Congress or by the agencies?
Before I pick on the agencies too much, I suspect a lot of that
may come from this side of the table I have no doubt.
Mr. Zinser. To the best of my understanding, it came out of
the national performance review that was done under the Clinton
administration.
Mr. Culberson. So it was done through the Executive Branch?
Mr. Zinser. As far as I know, but, again, Congress----
Mr. Culberson. Oversight.
Mr. Zinser [continuing]. Congress appropriates and Congress
oversees the program.
Mr. Culberson. True. True. We are all human. I know of only
one human in history that was perfect, Mr. Chairman, and, you
know, we are all human. And we are all overwhelmed and we, all
of us, are devoted to do the best we can for our kids and our
grandkids, but this is just unacceptable. And I am really glad
the chairman has brought this to our attention.
And I hope, Mr. Chairman and members, as we move through
this, we could really rethink the way that the--for example, we
are, and I cannot stress this enough, Mr. Wolf, who I just
revere and admire so much, the chairman points out quite
correctly that our kids, we as a country, I hope, are not--
well, I hope we have not already gone over the cliff.
I share Mr. Wolf's concern that the level of debt, the
level of deficit, the level of unfunded liabilities is already
so huge, I hope we can pull out of what looks like, I hope, is
a very scary time ahead. We are going to have to rethink
outside the box the way we have approached problems in the
past.
And in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the time. I
hope we will rethink the way, for example, that decision making
is allocated on these programs. You know, we are going to have
to, I think, to look at combining some of these functions of
NOAA with NASA with a clear chain of command, with a
responsibility if this is--if we are talking about satellite
systems and outer space, I do not know why all of that is not
done under NOAA.
Why isn't the Coast Guard doing fisheries and oceans--
excuse me--done under NASA and then the Coast Guard doing the
oceans? And, quite frankly, in these huge programs where
somebody screws up, there needs to be accountability. There
needs to be--people need to be fired.
We need to revisit the way the civil service system
operates and the unions and the inability to hold people
accountable because we can withhold money and change the way
the program is managed, but really to the extent that we can do
so, we need to rethink the model. And we are going to have to
come up with dramatic savings. It is not the deficit that is
going to kill us, the debt, it is the unfunded liabilities, in
particular the entitlement programs. And we have got an urgent
task before us.
I just thank you because truly in this age of austerity we
are about to enter into, the work that you do is absolutely
vital to the critical job that we have in oversight. And I
thank you.
Mr. Zinser. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Culberson. And I thank you for the time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
I am going to go to Mr. Austria. But Mr. Culberson just
triggered a thought. Is there any overlap on the climate
research issue between what NOAA is doing versus what NASA is
doing?
Mr. Zinser. There is overlap, sir. I do not know precisely
what it is, but I know that there is research being done at
NOAA and research that is----
Mr. Wolf. But is there any that they are both looking at
the same thing. I want to protect NASA to the best of our
ability. But if there is something that NOAA is doing on a
climate issue, maybe you can look at that and just get back to
the committee.
Mr. Zinser. Yeah. There are three data sets that exist in
the world on climate data. NASA owns one, NOAA owns one, and
the other one is at East Anglia University over in England.
Mr. Wolf. But what Mr. Culberson just kind of triggered,
though, are there any areas that--I know iron sharpens iron and
competition is good, but are there any areas that are so
relatively simple that they are both doing that you could then
come together not to eliminate doing it, because I think
looking at climate issues is very, very important, but if it is
being done at NOAA and NASA, that way, there would be more
money for research and development----
Mr. Zinser. Understood.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. In space or others. So if you could
just look to see----
Mr. Zinser. Sure.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. What programs are similar. Then when
the NASA people come up, we can ask.
Mr. Zinser. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Austria.
Mr. Austria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, excuse me, to the inspector general for being
here today.
Just to kind of follow-up on what Mr. Culberson was
alluding to as far as reducing our deficits by improving
efficiency and rooting out things like waste and fraud and
abuse, let me ask you, because I know in your testimony, you
made reference to improving efficiencies.
And I appreciate the plan that you have laid out before
this committee in managing acquisition more effectively,
increasing accountability with the Stimulus Program, improving
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office processing times, preventing
cost overruns with the Commerce headquarters renovation, et
cetera. And we can go on and on.
And we are all tightening our belts. And right now when we
talk about the delays that are happening right now, how do you
propose that we are going to be able to be accountable for the
taxpayer dollars when we are talking about this transition to
whether it be JPSS and the developing of that program on the
ground goes, not experiencing any further delays?
In your opinion, you know, roughly how much taxpayer money
could be saved or has there been any tracking of the tax
dollars that--the cost of these delays has cost the taxpayers
and then making these improvements that you have laid out, how
much that might save the taxpayers?
Mr. Zinser. Yeah. I do not think there is an overall
calculation on what we are going to save by reducing delays. I
know that the department is engaged in a process very similar
to what the chairman talked about where they have sat down and
they have gone through a process trying to determine which
programs are essential, which programs are less essential, and
they have put them into a number of different buckets. And they
are doing that kind of analysis to be prepared for the budgets
that they are anticipating.
Mr. Austria. Is that information or that data available to
be able to be viewed or when it is available or will we be able
to view that?
Mr. Zinser. I think the department would be prepared to
share that information in connection with the budget request
that is coming up next week.

CENSUS PLANNING

Mr. Austria. I think that would be very helpful.
Let me follow-up on the gentleman from Pennsylvania and his
questions on the census because I think it is an important area
that, you know, I have asked myself a lot of questions about
this.
And being a new member of Congress, you know, the cost of
the census has always been higher than the census preceding it
largely because we know there has been an increase in
population to account for that.
But in your current fiscal and the current fiscal
environment, we need to, again, getting back to saving the
taxpayers wherever possible, and it would seem that with the
technology that is out there today that in today's age where
everybody is using a cell phone, a BlackBerry, an iPad, the
technology that exists, that the census workers are still
walking door to door with paper and pencil.
Are there technologies or other efficiencies that could be
embraced by the bureau to improve their operation and reduce
the cost of this necessary exercise?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. That was the biggest disappointment
about 2010 was the fact that the Census Bureau could not get
that technology ready for use. That would have saved money,
would have saved a lot of money. They did not successfully
implement that acquisition.
In addition to hand-held devices like that, we have been
encouraging the Census Bureau to come up with some way to use
the Internet in the census. They have resisted that. And I
think that they are trying to do some pilot testing in these
early years of the decade to figure out how to use the Internet
for the census.
There are things that they could do to maximize the use of
administrative records that already exist about the population,
if only to update their address list. Right now, to update
their address list very late in the decade, they send three
hundred, four hundred thousand temporary workers out to locate
every address in the country. The post office has that
information; the Social Security Administration has that
information. So there are things that they could do along those
lines, which we are encouraging them to do and which we
included in our testimony.

PROGRAM DUPLICATION AND OVERLAP

Mr. Austria. And, I mean, we all know, and I will conclude
with, we all know that there are cuts that are coming to
programs. Chairman Rogers has said that these will be the most
severe reductions in the history of this Congress. And I have
asked the question to businesses, to the colleges, to some of
the military, sites across my district, and now I would like to
ask you the same question.
You know, where could we cut in your department? If the
cuts are coming, you know, can you help us identify those areas
that maybe we can look at that are less efficient or wasteful
as far as cutting and what reductions would be least disruptive
to your operation and also maybe those areas that we should not
be cutting that you think we are seeing progress as far as
cost-effectiveness and as far as efficiency?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. As I mentioned, the department is
trying to prioritize where they could cut their programs. But I
also think that the chairman was pointing out--and Mr.
Culberson--that there is overlap. There is overlap. The
Commerce Department does things that other departments do, and
I think that is probably a good place to start focusing.
I know that the President, for example, mentioned export
promotion in his state of the union address. Earlier last year,
the President signed an executive order that set up the
National Export Promotion Cabinet. That cabinet has 16
different agencies on it. So you know there is overlap in
responsibilities across the government. I think that is a ripe
berry to look at.
Mr. Austria. Thank you, Inspector General.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, if I was to tell you that I am happy to see
that party in the majority, I would be lying to you. But if I
had to see someone chairing the committee other than our side,
I am glad it is you. You know, the relationship we have and,
well, we get along and we work together. So I did not want to
say that in the mike. There is a reason to my madness, you
know. I did not want that recorded.

CENSUS PLANNING

Mr. Chairman, as you know, I always have a disclaimer that
I do at the beginning of any census questioning and it is that
I have one brother, no sisters, and he has been working for the
Census Bureau since 1980. I came to Congress in 1990, so he got
the job way before I was in Congress.
My understanding is that the 2010 census came in almost $2
billion under budget. Although I understand you have some
concerns about the financial management of the census, I am
more interested in knowing why it was so far under budget. Is
it a result of the recession or are there other reasons?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. We----
Mr. Serrano. Are we going to find out later that they
should have spent that money and on a different job?
Mr. Zinser. I do not think you are going to find out that
they should have spent all of that money. I would offer two
points. One is that I do not think the Census Bureau does a
very good job budgeting in the first place, so the budget that
they finally came up with, after they scrapped the hand-held,
and revised their budget, was kind of fat actually. That is my
view.
But, secondly, the Census Bureau--to their credit--did do a
good job with the money they were provided to get people more
aware of the census through media and to increase the response
rate through the mails. The fact that the response rate was up
in the 70 percent range contributed a great deal to the cost
savings they did realize. It cost 45 cents to mail something
back. It cost $80.00 to send a census worker out to get that
information door to door.
Mr. Serrano. Now, this is probably not a fair question to
ask you since we are talking about the Commerce Department, but
is that true for many departments that they over budget? Is it
the old belief that you ask for more hoping to get what you
really need and in this case, you got what you asked for?
Mr. Zinser. I think that the census is a separate issue
from the other departments. Sure, I think that there is some
padding that goes on in budget requests in general. But for the
Census Bureau, I do not think their budget was done in bad
faith. I just do not think they are very good at projecting
their costs. And as we saw, there is a mix of good management
and there is a mix of poor budgeting in that $1.6 billion
figure that was returned to the Treasury.

IT SECURITY

Mr. Serrano. Right. In part of an IG report about IT
security, there are said to be security weaknesses that
undermine the department's ability to defend its systems and
information. That is on page one.
Can you specify these weaknesses and how they are affecting
the department's functions? And I apologize if any of these
questions have been asked already.
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. The department has been working very
hard on improving its IT security, but there are
vulnerabilities that still exist. For example, last year as
part of our audit work, we went through and did what we call
vulnerability scans on computers. Well, the department did the
same thing earlier in the year. Their scan showed like 1.3
vulnerabilities per computer. Our scan showed almost five
significant vulnerabilities per computer. So they are just not
bringing the skill level and the talent to the table necessary
to really do what is needed to be done on IT security.

RECOVERY ACT GRANT PROGRAMS

Mr. Serrano. Do I have time for one more question?
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Go ahead.
Mr. Serrano. There is a mantra that I deal with on a daily
basis here, for my 20 odd years in Congress, and that is what
about the territories. And I always want the territories,
Puerto Rico, Guam, Samoa, Virgin Islands, the Mariana Islands,
treated equally. Granted they are not states, but as equal as
possible under the Constitution.
What is your sense, if it is within your purview to comment
on this, of how the Commerce Department deals with the
territories?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. The one area that I am most familiar
with would be in the grants that are made by the department,
especially grants under the Recovery Act, for example. And I
know that the department was very conscientious about making
sure that all the states and territories were represented in
the grants that were delivered for the various Recovery Act
programs.
I do not have those numbers exactly, but I have never
received a complaint or any concerns that the territories were
not getting some kind of fair shake from the department.
Mr. Serrano. You say that with sort of a smile on your
face. I am wondering if that is just your style or you know
they were reading my press releases.
Mr. Zinser. No.
Mr. Serrano. Okay. Just checking.
Mr. Zinser. I was not reading your press releases.
Mr. Serrano. Maybe they heard my request. Thank you so much
and thank you for your service.
Mr. Zinser. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

IT SECURITY

Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
I am going to go to Mr. Yoder. But before I do, if I could
follow-up on a thing that Mr. Serrano asked for. Were you there
when Secretary Gutierrez's computers were stripped in China?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir, we did look into that.
Mr. Wolf. Can you tell the Committee so everyone knows,
particularly new members, how the Secretary of Commerce's
computers were literally stripped and how extensive was that
because, quite frankly, there are members of Congress now who
travel to China. The minute you are off that airplane and you
are into the airport, they are stripping your computer and you
are bringing it back on your cell phone and your BlackBerry.
But can you tell us so everyone can be educated what happened
to Secretary Gutierrez----
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And how extensive that was both when
he was in China and how it impacted back on the computers in
the department?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. Well, there were newspaper reports
that Secretary Gutierrez had his computer compromised in China.
We went down and looked into that. What he told me personally,
was he did not take a computer to China. Now, his staff has
taken computers with them. They have taken their BlackBerries
with them. And what happens is it is such a problem that they
have set up policies now where if you want to take a BlackBerry
to China, you get a special BlackBerry with nothing else on it
and you take that with you. It is scanned before you go. You
take it with you. It is scanned after you come back so that
that particular device is isolated and is not incorporated or
introduced into the rest of the networks. And that precaution
is set----
Mr. Wolf. This is the Chinese Government where the
Administration gave a state dinner to President Hu Jintao who
was the one who cracked down in Tibet. I went to Tibet 13 years
ago. I went in with a trekking group. They have plundered
Tibet. They have executed Buddhist monks and nuns. And the man
who literally has the policy in effect is the man that we gave
a state dinner to.
But they are spying against us and every member should
know, every staffer should know, and it is hard for the
Congress, when they go to China, if they get off their airplane
and they walk into the airport, they are stripping your
computer.
Now, did that computer come back into the network with the
other computers in the department?
Mr. Zinser. Not that we know of, sir. We do not think that
it was ever infiltrated into the department. Now, that is not
to say that the department has not found occasions where
foreign governments have taken information out.
Mr. Wolf. Well, that was my next question. How many cyber
attacks have been against the computers in the Department of
Commerce in the last two years and was China ever involved?
Mr. Zinser. I do not have the exact numbers. I do know that
there are a number of countries that----
Mr. Wolf. Was China one?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf. And how often does China hit your computers?
Mr. Zinser. I do not have that information. I can tell you
that, for example, a couple years ago, the number of attempts
to get into PTO computers alone totaled about a million in a
year.
Mr. Wolf. And do we believe that it was in some cases by
the Chinese Government?
Mr. Zinser. I do not have that information. I would----
Mr. Wolf. What would your guess be if you were under oath
and you had to put your hand up and there was a Bible in front
of you and asked the question? Would it be your expectation?
The answer was that the Chinese Government was partially
involved at some times?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. That would be one of the countries I
would suspect. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Just for the record, my computer was stripped by
the Chinese. They came in and got my computer and 17 other
Members, the International Relations Committee, and they took
everything off. And the FBI acknowledged it was the Chinese
Government that did it.
And I think every Member should know and hopefully the
department now, based on the Gutierrez case, has laid the word
out that, and I hope it is government-wide now, that when other
agencies, the trade people, the Justice Department people, that
when they go to China and countries like that, and there are
other countries, Syria and other places that they do the same
thing. So is that the policy now government-wide?
Mr. Zinser. As far as I know, it is, sir. I know the NSA,
for example, has come around and has done a lot of outreach in
the last couple of years, with departments trying to make sure
that that effort is coordinated across the government. I know
they came to the Department of Commerce.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Chairman, if I may on that point.
Mr. Wolf. Yeah.
Mr. Culberson. Real quickly, guys, the problem is so severe
that Google, when I visited Google headquarters, tells me they
forbid--that when a Google executive visits China, they can
only take a stripped down laptop that only has an Internet
browser on it to China and then as soon as the individual
returns, the computer is destroyed. It is that aggressive and
that bad.
Mr. Wolf. I have been told, too, that you really cannot
clean it, that they can embed it whereby you can never actually
technically clean it. So maybe the Chinese, even those who
think that it has been cleaned, now feel very good, but the
Chinese are having a day.
Mr. Yoder.
Mr. Yoder. I will pass, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Mr. Schiff.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I just want to join my colleagues in extending my
congratulations on your becoming chairman. I remember when I
first was elected to Congress, I think you were chairing CJS at
the time. And I came to testify, I was not a member of the
committee obviously at that time, during Member Day. And I know
that member testimony is not often the most scintillating of
testimony and I know mine was not, but I was struck how
diligently you listened to all the members that came to testify
and how seriously you took their concerns. And I appreciated
that commitment to your colleagues and have ever since. And
congratulations.
And, Mr. Serrano, what you said about the microphone
reminded me when I was in the State Senate and the Senate
president was giving an outgoing speech about one of the
members and extolling their marriage. They were leaving the
Senate. He said all these wonderful things about the member who
was literally walking out the door and saying thank you, thank
you, thank you. The minute the departing Senator left the room,
the Senate president turns to the recorder and says, reporter,
destroy that transcript.
Mr. Serrano. By the way, was I the ranking member when he
was so nice to you?
Mr. Schiff. I do not recall because I think that you would
not listen to anything I had to say. You gave me the back of
your hand.
Mr. Fattah. You were that memorable.

U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE

Mr. Schiff. I wanted to ask Mr. Zinser about the Patent
Office. As you mentioned in your testimony, since 2000, patent
pendency has increased ten months. The backlog has doubled. In
the same period, the number of patent examiners has also
doubled, but the number of patents has not kept up.
I have been hearing about this problem for years from
California high tech companies and I have been working on this
issue for some time to try to address the backlog. Many of the
stakeholders are willing to pay higher fees if they have the
confidence in two things. One, that the fees would actually go
to reducing the backlog, that the fees will not be diverted to
pay some other government function unrelated to patents and,
second, that the Patent Office will be efficient enough to use
it effectively to reduce the backlog.
What I would be interested to get a sense of is the
relatively new head of the Patent Office has initiated some
reforms. Do you see any signs of progress that the backlog is
now moving in the right direction or is it still getting
longer?
If we were somehow to, in order to raise fees, commit that
the revenues would go to the Patent Office and insisted that
they develop a five-year plan to eliminate the backlog and that
we have certain milestones to meet, is there a mechanism that
could be used to make sure that we did not just increase patent
quantity, but we also had patent quality at the same time? What
is your sense of where the office is now and what will be
necessary to remove the backlog?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. I think they have made progress on
the backlog. I think the number that I have seen is that they
have reduced it by about twenty or thirty thousand applications
last year. And I think it is headed in the right direction. The
issue of whether additional funding would help reduce the
backlog, I think, is probably just part of the answer.
I know that the reforms that the secretary and Mr. Kappos
have initiated are fairly new and they have to be tracked, but
I also know that the secretary is tracking it. He has set up
this effort called his balanced scorecard, where each of the
agencies are coming in with their performance metrics.
And one thing that PTO has is data. They have a lot of data
about their operations. And I think the key is to figure out
which of those data points are important to track and to really
see whether those data points are valid. And that is the kind
of work we are going to do in following up on those reforms
that they have put in place.
Mr. Schiff. How much of an issue is it that you mentioned
that they have not been very good at anticipating the revenues
and without a good model to anticipate their revenues, they
cannot make planning decisions about how many patent examiners
to hire and whatnot? How much has that impeded their
operations? How much is the uncertainty about whether they can
keep all the fees they generate an obstacle to their long-term
planning?
Mr. Zinser. I do not think the issue of them keeping their
fees is--I know it is a historical issue for the folks in the
patent world, but the recent history of this committee is that
PTO has been appropriating all the fees that it has collected,
basically.
I think where the uncertainty comes in is in projecting
what their revenues are going to be. There is uncertainty
there, and what happens is it impacts their various business
decisions on increasing staffing or what they spend on other
contracts. There is uncertainty about their incoming revenue,
so that creates uncertainty about some of their business
decisions throughout the year.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

NOAA SATELLITE PROGRAMS

Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman, when you get a chance.
Mr. Wolf. Go ahead.
Mr. Fattah. I just wanted to follow-up with something the
chairman asked earlier because I thought it was a very
important point given the extraordinarily large cost relative
to the Satellite Program and the relatively small amount of
your own resources that you have allotted to it.
Now, I am a big fan of inspectors general. I worked with
Chris Shays who co-sponsored the bill that created these
inspectors general and juiced them up years ago with a lot of
resources.
The question is, given your response, you are the
taxpayers' watchdog in the agency, right?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. So here you have got this program in which
there are satellite cost overruns. And when the chairman asked
you-- and I do not mean to put you on the spot. I mean, I am
searching for how we get at some of these issues. He said,
well, you only have two people watching over what is a multi-
billion dollar program out of your entire staff.

IG'S RESOURCE ALLOCATION

So my real question is not about that in particular, but
how you rationalize your allocation of your resources to watch
over the dollars in these agencies inside the Commerce
Department. So you have got the department. You have got its
various agencies.
How do you go about as the public's watchdog deciding where
you are going to apply your resources and are you, you know,
are you majoring in the minors, are you focused on the major
dollars where there could be efficiency improvements?
I am not as concerned about fraud. I assume that most of
the people in the government are trying to do the right thing
and if there is fraud, we have a Justice Department that will
get the bad guys eventually. But in the meantime, efficiency is
a big deal.
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. And the intelligence community has satellite
interests. DoD has satellites. NASA has satellites. NOAA has
satellites. In the private sector, they put up satellites,
right? And I know the chairman was talking about the Chinese. I
mean, they are getting very proficient. I mean, we should know
how to get a satellite up, right?
And so my question is what is your rational basis, as the
IG, for determining how you are going to apply your resources
to look over the public's money? And I would assume you would,
you know, just rationally put more people focused where the
money really is.
Mr. Zinser. It is an excellent question, sir. My philosophy
has always been that I am going to deliver the best oversight I
can deliver with whatever resources the Congress gives me,
number one.
We have a very diverse department. And the first thing I
have to make sure of is that I do the work that is mandated by
statute. For example, I have financial statement audits I have
to do. The IT security audits are required by statute. I am
required by statute to go out and audit a public safety
interoperable communications program. Within the last couple of
years, Congress has required that I audit the decennial census.
Even the top management challenges report that we issued, that
is required by law.
So I have my statutory requirements. Then I get requests
from time to time from members of Congress to do work, and I
make that a priority. The secretary and the administrators ask
me to do work. I make that a priority.
Last year, for example, we looked at an acquisition that
NOAA did on their west coast operations center. That was
requested by Senator Cantwell. And, in fact, that is one of the
jobs that we did that resulted in a very significant review by
the secretary of how they do acquisitions in the department. So
I think we got a lot of mileage out of that review.
Mr. Fattah. And if I could, I mean, so that is a great
answer. You are doing what you are mandated to do. And that
might take you away from looking at a multi-billion dollar
expenditure like the Satellite Program because you have to go
chase these things that the Congress has told you to do and to
perform on a regular basis, right?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. So if we want to find more efficiency where
greater dollars are being expended, we will have to provide
some relief or direct you in that way, right?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. Well, one thing I did do, and I have
been here three years now, one thing I did do when I got this
job and saw the Satellite Program, I did go out and find
expertise, people that----
Mr. Fattah. I know. I am trying to get to an answer here. I
mean, Jesse James said he would rob banks because that is where
the money was, right?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. So if we are looking for efficiencies, we would
have to have the watchdog looking where the money really is and
not looking where, you know, the peanuts are, right?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Serrano. Betty Sutton.

RECOVERY ACT AND BTOP

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Zinser, Commerce received $7.9 billion in February 2009
as part of Public Law 111-5, the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act. This amount was almost as much as the $9.7
billion in base funding provided to the department in 2009.
When you exclude the $1.9 billion increase provided for
census in fiscal year 2009, the $7.9 billion in stimulus
funding was nearly the same amount as the Commerce Department's
base budget.
As of December 31, 2010, the Department has obligated about
$5.9 billion in the Recovery Act funds as the law stipulated
that most of the funds had to be obligated by September 30,
2010.
However, even though about 92 percent of the funds have
been obligated as of December 2010, only about $1.7 billion has
actually been expended or about 22 percent of total funding
provided nearly two years ago.
Can you explain why there has been such a lag in sending
these funds out the door and, secondly, does Commerce keep
track of how its Recovery Act funds may have stimulated the
economy and is any of this money able to be reclaimed,
something that has not been used, because the purpose of the
stimulus bill was actually to stimulate and create jobs? Can
you explain why there has been such a lag in sending the funds
out and can any be claimed?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. The discrepancy between the amount
obligated and the amount spent is largely explained by the
Broadband Program.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Mr. Zinser. The Broadband Program was the largest program
of that pot of money. And they were required to award the
grants and obligate the money by the end of last fiscal year,
by September 30.
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Mr. Zinser. And it became very schedule driven, but they
did it. Now the spending will occur over the next two or three
years as the grantees actually start spending money on those
projects. So that explains most of the discrepancy and why the
money was obligated but has not been spent.
Mr. Wolf. Were there matches involved then because with the
localities having such a difficult time, you are hearing
California, and different states are having a tough time in
localities?
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. We are very concerned about that. The
Broadband Program itself awarded 232 grants, $3.9 billion. The
amount of match for those grants was about $1.4 billion, which
has to be spent by the grantees. Whether it is a private sector
company or a state or a county, those grantees have to come up
with that matching amount.
Mr. Wolf. Is there a time factor involved in that match?
Mr. Zinser. The way the program is run, I do believe that
they have to show their match invested in the project all along
the way. And when we go out and do audits, for example, of
those grants, that is one of the things we look at, to see
whether or not the match is actually being provided by the
grantee.
Mr. Wolf. Are there localities that are now having a
difficult time making the match?
Mr. Zinser. For the Broadband Program, the funds just went
out there, so we have not completed any audits on individual
grantees yet. But I know in past grant programs, even in better
economic times, there were a lot of problems with grantees
providing their match.
Mr. Wolf. Would there be a way, not to be a disincentive to
the grantee obviously if this is something legitimate they are
doing, but is there any thought of doing a kind of a checkup on
everyone saying, okay, guys, you got the grant September 30
last year, we want to see in 60 days that you can comply? And
if you cannot, tell us now because that money could be
recovered.
If it could be recovered, it would certainly impact on the
debt--I mean, we are not trying to hurt anyone. Again, I am not
trying to say, you know, get somebody. But if a locality really
will not be able to make the match--in the transportation bill,
we used to have what we call a use or lose. If you did not use,
and I know you were at Transportation then, and if you did not
use it over a period of time----
Mr. Zinser. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. You lost it. And this economy is
very tough. So there may be a locality that had this great
idea, but now the tax base--I saw Camden, New Jersey has had to
lay off 50 percent of their policemen.
Mr. Zinser. I think it is a very high risk area, sir, and--
--
Mr. Wolf. Well, could you do that then? Could we request
that you--again, this is not to be punishment. I just want to
make that clear. But if someone knows they are not going to be
able to make it, and if they are going to be able to make it, I
think they should continue, but if they are not going to be
able to make it, to let you know in a period of time so that
the money could be reclaimed. And then if it were reclaimed,
there may be a program that, you know, members here would like
to continue that would allow it to continue if they knew this
money were coming in.
So is there a way for you to do that, to check, send a
letter to everybody and say can you tell us within 30 days?
Mr. Zinser. Yeah. Either our office could do that or the
program office itself that is supposed to, in NTIA, that is
supposed to be keeping track of these things.
Mr. Wolf. Well, maybe we should ask them if they can do it
because, you know, based on what you told Mr. Fattah, I know
you have got a lot to do. But maybe we should just ask them.
Mr. Zinser. We could follow up with them as well.

RECOVERY ACT AND CONSTRUCTION GRANTS

Mr. Wolf. Okay. Good.

2. Can you ask NTIA to send a letter to all applicants to
determine whether or not they are able to meet their match
requirements?
On March 9, 2011, my office transmitted a memorandum on
this subject to Lawrence Strickling, Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information and Administrator for NTIA. We
provided a copy of the memo to the subcommittee on March 14.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. NIST received $360 million for its Construction
Grant Program in the Recovery Act. Does NIST have the
experience with construction funds and----
Mr. Zinser. They do have experience actually contracting
with construction companies to build research facilities. What
they do not have a lot of experience with is part of that
Recovery money is actually a grant program where they are
granting money to other parties to do construction. That is a
fairly new function for NIST and we do not think they have a
lot of experience doing that. So that is a risk area that we
have identified.
Mr. Wolf. And so what is going to be done about that?
Mr. Zinser. Well, we have got it on our work plan to go out
and audit the program, specifically looking at NIST's
capability of overseeing those construction grants.
Mr. Wolf. Well, have they begun construction? This comment
says that as of December 2010, it looked at, at that time, it
could have changed, that only $46 million or 13 percent of the
$360 million has been expended.
Mr. Zinser. Yes. It is very similar to the Broadband
Program where the money has gone out and now the grantees are
in the process of spending it, and it has been a slow process.
Mr. Wolf. And are the matches there too? Probably not as
much in----
Mr. Zinser. I do not know the answer to that. I know that
the construction grants primarily went to universities.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Mr. Zinser. There is a whole list of universities that
received these monies. I do not know the grant requirement for
those funds, but I can let you know that.

3. Are the recipients of the NIST construction grants
required to come up with a match?
The NIST construction grant program requires recipients to
provide at least a 20 percent match, with the remaining 80
percent of the grant amount provided by NIST. For the 16
construction awards funded through the program, the matches
ranged from 20 to 88 percent, with the median (and most common)
match being approximately 50 percent.

Mr. Wolf. Okay. Who will be responsible for the ongoing
operations and maintenance of these facilities? Will it be the
federal government or the organization that got the money?
Mr. Zinser. For the Grant Program, it would be the grantee.
Mr. Wolf. The grantee.
Mr. Zinser. For the facilities that NIST is constructing
itself, I think it is probably a mix. The answer is probably a
mix of responsibilities.

U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE

Mr. Wolf. Okay. Before I go back to Mr. Fattah and then to
the other members, too, let me go back on the patent issue.
Last year, the director of the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office voluntarily, and I stress the word voluntarily, there
was no mandate by Congress, gave the Chinese Government our
entire patent database and continues to provide regular updates
to the Chinese with new patent applications.
Now, anybody here who has a company that has left to go to
China, just think about it. Was that a good idea to give,
voluntarily give the Chinese Government our entire patent
database and to give them a regular update to the Chinese with
new patent applications? Do we do this to the Russians, to the
Macedonians? Was that a good idea?
Mr. Zinser. I am not familiar with that. I do know that PTO
does share information with other governments. I was not
familiar with that particular issue.

USPTO AND IT SECURITY

Mr. Wolf. Could you look into that? And have you looked
into the policy impact on Chinese theft of U.S. intellectual
property?
Mr. Zinser. We can look into that. I do know that part of
our emphasis on IT security, for example, is the fact that PTO
would be such an economic target by other countries. That is
why we are emphasizing IT security.
Mr. Wolf. To think PTO just gave them the database so they
did not have to be inconvenienced, the Peoples Liberation Army.
Just give it to them so they could have more time to do other
things? I mean, it does not make any sense to me.
When the Patent and Trademark Office comes up, we are going
to ask. Does that sound like a good idea to voluntarily give it
to them? If you could check on it.
Mr. Zinser. I will, sir.

4. If USPTO fees are raised, would that help reduce the
backlog?
We have not yet conducted audit work analyzing USPTO's
proposed 15 percent surchage on fees, the activities to which
these additional revenues would be directed, or how those
activities would reduce the patent application backlog and
pendency. This fee increase was proposed in USPTO's FY 2011
budget request and was expected to generate an estimated $244
million. According to the President's FY 2011 budget request
(p. 2), the proposed interim fee increase ``. . . would fund
the required hiring along with an attendant investment in
information technology (IT). The USPTO will also create an
operating reserve in FY 2011 to fully fund the cost of patent
hiring in FY 2013 and maintain the reserve to protect the
agency against unforeseen disruptions in revenue. Together,
these will allow the USPTO to deliver on its pendency, quality,
IT, and international objectives.'' The FY 2012 budget (p. 135)
states that it would extend the interim increase for patent
fees to fund the continued implementation of the 2010-2015
Strategic Plan.
In short, the quetion is best directed to the agency. The
question could be expanded along the following lines: Of the
collections expected from the 15 percent surcharge, what
amounts would be directed at which activities, how do those
activities relate to reducing USPTO's patent backlog and
pendency challenges, and what measurable outcomes would be seen
with respect to pendency and backlogs?

Mr. Wolf. And see who else we voluntarily give it to.
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. I know at some point, the information
about patent applications is made public. I do know that.
Mr. Wolf. Of course, there are 30 Catholic bishops in jail
in China today. If you go into an internet cafe in Beijing and
type in the Dalai Lama or type in freedom, nothing happens. So,
I mean, it is not a good idea. So if you can look at it and get
back to us about that, I would appreciate it.
Currently all patent applications are made available on
line for the world to see in 18 months even though the average
backlog has grown to more than 35 months.
Have we ever considered the impact of posting vendors'
trade secrets on line for up to two years before it is granted
the patent?
Mr. Zinser. I do not know the answer to that, sir. I will
have to find out.
Mr. Wolf. I mean, they are stealing. We know what they are
doing. I know what they are doing, if the Patent Office does
not know, but here we have all patent applications are made
available on line for the world, i.e. the Chinese, i.e. the
Russians, i.e. the Syrians, i.e. the Iranians, i.e., you could
put whoever you want to put in.
And what is the impact of posting a vendor's trade secrets
on line for up to two years before he is granted a patent? If
you could look at that and check for us, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Zinser. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. Do you think PTO is doing everything it can to
protect American intellectual property from cyber intrusions
prior to public release of the patent applications at 18
months?
Mr. Zinser. I think they are getting better. I think they
are paying attention to cyber security. I think they are
getting better----
Mr. Wolf. Better meaning they went from zero to 15 or zero
to 87? I mean, because these are jobs. Everyone is concerned
about losing jobs to China factories.
I saw the other day this company in Massachusetts, the
Evergreen Company, you may have seen it, just leaving. They got
a bailout from the State of Massachusetts and they left. And
they are laying off 800 employees in Massachusetts. Just
literally they are walking off to China. I do not think it is
an interest over at the Patent Department frankly. I think they
are really--this is not their interest.
But if you could look to see, and I would like to get a
report maybe even before the Patent Office comes up, as to
whether or not you think they are doing everything they can on
that.
Mr. Zinser. I do think that by this time next year, they
are going to be ahead of the department in terms of their IT
security.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Mr. Fattah, you want to go ahead?
Mr. Fattah. I am willing to pass and submit whatever other
questions I have for the record.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Fine. Okay.
Mr. Serrano, okay.
Let me just cover a couple of the----
Mr. Serrano. If I could just submit some questions for the
record.
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Sure. Without objection.
And I do not want to keep the Justice Department too. So we
will have some questions, too, for the record on the broadband
issue that you cover we assume there.

2010 CENSUS BUDGET

Also, I think you may have covered this, but I want to ask
it because I think Mr. Serrano referenced it, too, and I think
it was a good question.
Could you talk to us about the $1.9 billion budget savings
being described by the census? Are they really cost savings or
was it the census budget for certain activities was not very
accurate? So I think you covered it, but was that a----
Mr. Zinser. I think it was mixed, sir. I think that we have
reported in the past, and GAO has reported, that the census
budget estimation is not very good. And when the hand-held
computer was scrapped and they had to revise their budget
estimates for the decennial, the estimate shot up $3 billion.
One thing that they did do right, I think, is they promoted
the census. They increased awareness. They used appropriations
for a media campaign that I think kept the response rate at a
level such that it did save a lot of money.
So I think you had a mix of bad budgeting and a response
rate that helped reduce costs or keep costs contained.
Mr. Wolf. Do you think that the head of the Census should
be a career person rather than a political appointee? I mean,
you have changed a lot and it seems that--and I know it may
sound opposite of what we were talking about earlier, but if
you keep changing and changing and changing and changing it----
Mr. Zinser. One of the things that have been proposed--I
think it was in a bill last year--was to put the Census Bureau
as a term similar to what they did to the FAA administrator so
that the term would overlap----
Mr. Wolf. That is a good idea.
Mr. Zinser [continuing]. Overlap the administration and----
Mr. Wolf. The FBI is ten years. The director of the FBI is
ten years.
Mr. Zinser. Yes, sir. I think the proposal was for the
census director to be five years.
Mr. Wolf. Now, whose bill is that?
Mr. Zinser. I think Representative Maloney put the bill in
the House, and Senators Carper and Coburn put it in the Senate.
Mr. Wolf. That sounds like a good idea. And if you bring
the right person in and confirm them by the Senate, so
obviously they have to go through that, but I think the change
has made so much of a problem that--so maybe we will take a
look at that.

PSIC GRANT PROGRAM

Would you provide, on the Public Safety Interoperable
Communication grants, would you provide the Committee with an
update on the program? And we again understand the funds were
all obligated by September 30th. But have any of the funds been
actually spent?
Mr. Zinser. On the public safety interoperable
communication grants, that program is a couple years old now
and was funded by the auctioning off of spectrum. We had a
requirement to go out and do annual reports, and we are
obligated to go out and audit about 25 of the grantees.
The only problem we saw in that program is that the way the
program started out, the department allocated the money to the
states before the states really had an idea what they were
going to do with it. And so they had a time deadline to do the
projects. We found that they were not going to be able to
complete their projects, so the Congress extended the deadline.
And so far, the audits that we are conducting show that the
projects are on track and that the problems we found have been
corrected.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. So you do not think that this money that is
not being used ought to be rescinded and returned to the
Treasury, the funds, if it has not been used at this time, or
do you think it is moving along?
Mr. Zinser. I think the PSIC Program is probably moving
along, sir.

U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE

Mr. Wolf. Okay. Telework, this Committee was the one who
pushed the Department for telework. And maybe you can just give
us an update, and we will ask the PTO, but give us--and maybe
you can tell us how you think--I have been a strong supporter
of telework. I think it is important. There is nothing magic
about strapping yourself into a metal box and driving 35 miles
to sit before a computer when you can do it in another place.
But if you can give us that and also if you can give us
some information because I have been a supporter and have
defended it and have been criticized by some of my colleagues
on the Floor at times, which is all fair, but I maintain that
from a continuity of government standpoint, because with 9/11,
this place shut down, heavy snowstorms, the earthquake in
California, if you did not have telework. Can you see how it
has worked and if it improved productivity? Has it reduced sick
leave? And if you could give us the raw truth on what it has
done.
Mr. Zinser. We do plan to do some work this year on PTO's
Telework Program.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Mr. Zinser. I think that they've put in place a very robust
program and are relying on it as a key human capital tool. So
we are going to do an audit of that program to try to measure
how well it is succeeding.
Mr. Wolf. And Mr. Schiff asked a good question too. The
Patent Office increased the number of patent examiners from
4,258 in fiscal year 2005 to 6,225 in fiscal year 2010. Yet,
the backlog persists.
Why does it persist? And in your view, has PTO taken the
necessary aggressive steps or should we bring in an outside
group? Should we bring in a group of former Patent Office
directors just to look to see because the backlog is
increasing? The funding has been there. It really has.
I know sometimes outside groups will come in and say, well,
you know, but this committee has on both sides of the aisle, I
have given everything that they have needed. They have got a
pretty nice building down there too. Could have probably saved
some money if the atrium had been a little lower maybe, but the
backlog continues. And that changes too. I mean, I think we
have changed, we have been changing PTO administrators often
too. Maybe there ought to be a set term there too.
What do you think the reason is?
Mr. Zinser. Well, it is very complicated. I think one of
the things that you look at is the increase in patent
applications themselves. I think those have gone up. I think
you factor in that some of the patent applications have
increased in complexity themselves. As technology gets more
complex, I think the patent applications get more complex.
I think there have been labor issues there with the
employees and the working conditions, and one which I think has
been successfully worked out is the telework. But the idea of
reaching out to outside parties--I think Mr. Kappos is doing
that. I do not have a list of his efforts along those lines,
but I have heard him talk about the outreach efforts he is
making to people outside the little patent PTO circle.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE/COMMERCIAL FOREIGN SERVICE

Mr. Wolf. Okay. We can ask him.
One last question and then I will go to Mr. Yoder to see if
he has anything.
How many Commercial Foreign Service, this is on the export
issue, how many Commercial Foreign Service officers does the
U.S. post abroad compared to Germany and Japan and other
developed countries? Would you know that?
Mr. Zinser. I do not have that data at my fingertips, but I
can get that for you, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Yoder, do you have any?
Mr. Yoder. I do not have anything.
Mr. Wolf. No? Okay. Thanks.
I think that is pretty much--

2020 CENSUS PLANNING

Mr. Serrano. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Yes, Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Can I go back on my----
Mr. Wolf. Sure, yeah.
Mr. Serrano [continuing]. Decision not to ask another
question?
Mr. Wolf. Sure, yeah. No. Go ahead.
Mr. Serrano. I do not know, sir, if you have this
information because it is related to the census but not
directly to the Census Bureau. I have been involved as an
elected official with the census in 1980, 1990, and 2000 and
2010, and I have never seen the outside involvement from the
media and different groups throughout the country in
advertising the need to fill out your form and return it.
For instance, I was asked to do about four PSAs including
one which was a very serious effort by Telemundo nationwide
asking people to return census forms.
Were those collaborations with the Census and, if not, do
we have any idea of how much money was spent by non-public
organizations or non-public funds were spent on promoting the
census? I mean, I know it is not dollars that you keep an eye
on, but it is just----
Mr. Zinser. Well, the use of media to raise awareness of
the census really was not introduced until 2000. And so
whatever awareness campaigns existed before that probably did
exist out in the local communities.
Mr. Serrano. Right.
Mr. Zinser. I am not sure that there is a lot of money--
private money or non-government money--spent on raising
awareness of the census. I think it all came from the
Government. The media campaign, I believe, cost about $180
million. But beyond that, there is assistance provided by
private parties. They provide meeting facilities to have
rallies to get the word out about the census. And people
volunteer their time to help promote the census. But I am not
aware of actual private money being used to promote the census.
Mr. Serrano. So when CBS says as a service of CBS or a
service of NBC, you see these things that say make sure you
turn in your census, or when Channel 4 asks you to return your
census form, that was an ad for the Census Bureau and not
something that Channel 4 did locally?
Mr. Zinser. Yeah. That may have been something Channel 4
did locally. I do not know what occurred in each of the various
localities. But when the Census Bureau procured the ad in the
Super Bowl last year, for example----
Mr. Serrano. That is different. I understand.
Mr. Zinser [continuing]. Part of that deal was for the on-
air talent to actually say some things about the census. That
was part of the deal.

PROGRAM DUPLICATION AND OVERLAP

Mr. Serrano. Right. Okay. That I understand. All right.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
The last question is, and, again, you do not have to answer
it, you can just talk to the staff, are there any, specific
areas in Commerce that you see as duplicative or wasteful,
similar to what Mr. Fattah was saying, if there are different
things in different areas?
Again, the whole purpose is not to hurt anything but to--
based on where we are and the reality of maybe something could
be postponed or pushed off for a while and the money could be
put on to a program like the exports that the Secretary thinks
important or whatever the case may be, but----
Mr. Zinser. Sir, I think there are a lot of opportunities
in Commerce just to reduce overlap inside the administration of
the department. For example, every department has a CIO. NOAA
has four CIOs. There are three or four different operation
centers for IT security in the department. There are
duplications even within the Department of Commerce that could
be consolidated and perhaps save money.
Mr. Wolf. Well, if you will let the Committee know and,
again, depending on what authority we would have, obviously we
have to talk to the authorizers, too, but we can deal with
that, again, not in a way that hurts the Department.
And I think as I told the Secretary, we want to really be
cooperative and help. And, you know, I think he is doing a good
job personally and I have been impressed with him and on the
export issue and other issues and things that he really thinks
are a priority.
And so, anyway, I thank you for your testimony. I
appreciate it very, very much. And you do not have to stay, but
you can go if you want to go. You can stay if you want to stay,
but I----
Mr. Zinser. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. Anybody else have any other last questions?
[No response.]
Mr. Wolf. Great.
Mr. Zinser. Thanks again.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Ms. Schnedar, I appreciate your patience and you can
proceed. Your full statement will be in the record and proceed
as you see appropriately.
Wednesday, February 9, 2011.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

WITNESS

CYNTHIA A. SCHNEDAR, ACTING INSPECTOR GENERAL

MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Ms. Schnedar. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Fattah,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify. While my written testimony focuses on the top ten
challenges facing the Department, today I will focus on three
challenges: counterterrorism, the development of information
technology systems, and grant management.
Counterterrorism continues to be the highest priority of
the Department and our reviews have consistently found that the
Department must improve its information sharing and
coordination efforts in order to be able to respond more
effectively to the threat of terrorism. For example, we found
in a recent review that while the FBI had taken the appropriate
steps to prepare to respond to a potential incident involving a
weapon of mass destruction, or WMD, the Department as a whole
and its other components were not adequately prepared. We found
that the Department had not developed coordinated response
plans, had not designated anyone to have central oversight on
this issue, and had provided little to no training for
responding to a WMD incident.
In another example we conducted a review which found that
the FBI and ATF had developed separate and often conflicting
approaches to explosives investigations, explosives related
activities, such as training, information sharing, and forensic
analysis. These conflicts resulted in unnecessary competition
and duplication of effort, and also could result in problematic
responses to terrorist incidents involving explosives. In a
2009 audit we found that the FBI did not consistently nominate
known or suspected terrorists to the terrorist watch list in a
timely manner and did not update or remove watch list records
as required. We recently initiated a new review of the FBI's
management of the watch list to assess its progress in this
area.
The Department has taken steps to address the deficiencies
we have identified in these and other reviews relating to
counterterrorism and we believe it is important that the
Department continue to focus its efforts on improving its
ability to combat terrorism.
Another significant challenge the Department faces is the
planning and implementation of information technology, or IT,
systems. Our audits have found that the Department has
experienced significant problems in developing and implementing
these IT systems in a timely and cost effective fashion. For
example, when the FBI awarded a contract to Lockheed Martin in
March 2006 to develop the Sentinel Case Information System, the
FBI estimated that it would cost a total of $425 million and be
completed by December 2009. The FBI later revised its budget
estimate to $451 million and its estimated completion date to
June 2010. In our most recent report on the development of
Sentinel we found that Sentinel is at least two years behind
schedule and at least $100 million over its original budget.
Since issuing its stop work order to the prime contractor
Lockheed Martin in July the FBI has adopted a new agile
methodology in which it has assumed direct management of
Sentinel development and significantly reduced the role of
Lockheed Martin as the prime contractor. We remain concerned
that the FBI's new projected estimate that it will finish
within its original budget appears optimistic. We will continue
to report on the status of this project.
We have found similar problems in other Department IT
development projects, including an ineffective requirements
planning process, requirements being modified after much work
has been done, and defects identified in the user acceptance
stage that were costly to correct.
Other federal agencies are also experiencing IT development
problems and there are no quick and easy solutions. But the
Department's track record in this area is uneven and we believe
the Department must focus on this increasingly important
challenge.
Another significant challenge that the Department faces is
that of grants management, and this has been heightened
recently because the Department was required to award $4
billion in grants under the Recovery Act at the same time that
it awarded $3 billion in grant funding from the Department's
annual appropriations. Our reviews have found that the
Department generally issued the Recovery Act grant funds in a
timely, fair, and objective manner. We also found that the
Department has been trying to improve its regular grant
management practices by working to implement a series of
recommendations that we provided them in 2009.
However, our audit work has continued to identify areas
where the Department could further improve its management of
grants. For example, we found that the Department needs to
implement better controls to ensure that it correctly scores
and ranks grant applications. We also found that the Department
was not consistently documenting its reasons for making
discretionary awards, including its reasons for deviating from
the ranking provided by peer reviewers, and was not
consistently implementing a process to eliminate conflicts of
interest among its peer reviewers. In addition, we found
significant deficiencies in the use of grant funds by some
grantees, and we recommended that the Department issue
additional guidance to grantees to help correct this problem.
In sum, the Department has made progress in addressing many
of its top management challenges, but important improvements
are needed in these areas. These challenges are not easily
resolved and will require constant attention and strong
leadership by the Department. To aid in this effort the OIG
will continue to conduct vigorous oversight of Department
programs and provide recommendations for improvement.
This concludes my prepared statement, and I would be happy
to answer any questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FOREIGN LANGUAGE TRANSLATION

Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Thank you very much. Your office
reported in late 2009 that the FBI was failing to meet hiring
targets for linguists in critical languages. In fact we were
told they only made the hiring targets in two of fourteen
critical languages, and the average time it took to hire a
contract linguist increased to nineteen months. What are the
major obstacles to correcting this problem? And what can the
FBI do to get more qualified linguists on board more quickly?
Ms. Schnedar. One of the obstacles we found in the delay in
hiring was the background check process. And we thought there
were things that they could do to simplify that process. There
also was additional outreach efforts they could do in order to
identify linguists and bring them on board. We did make a
series of recommendations.
What's interesting, we did an audit in 2005 and we found
that the hiring was actually worse in 2009 than it was in 2005.
So this is----
Mr. Wolf. So it actually got worse?
Ms. Schnedar. It actually got worse between 2005 and 2009.
So, and many of the recommendations that we made in '05 and '09
were actually similar. So we are going to go, this is something
we're going to be tracking very carefully and we will have to
go back in at some point and see how they are doing in this
area.
Mr. Wolf. Well we would like to see what your
recommendations were to the Bureau. And what is the impact, how
much material is not being reviewed? And does the FBI have
sound practices in place for prioritizing what material gets
translated and what goes into the backlog? Because if they are
actually doing, there is more almost to review now than there
was in '05, in some respects. So are they missing much?
Ms. Schnedar. We did find, I should point out between '05
and '09 the number, the length of the backlog did go down. But
we found in '09 there was still significant amounts of
materials that were not being reviewed in a timely fashion. And
we found that part of the problem was tracking all of the
materials they were collecting and then prioritizing it. And we
made recommendations about how to implement a system that would
improve, would help improve that. We, they are trying,
implementing some of those reforms now. We have not gone back
in to do another audit to assess that. But we do know they are
trying to implement some systemic changes at this point.
Mr. Wolf. Well maybe you can let us know before the
Director comes up that way we can----
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, we would be happy to talk with you about
that.

HIGH VALUE DETAINEE INTERROGATION GROUP

Mr. Wolf. Has your office reviewed the implementation of
the HIG, the High Value Interrogation team, the new interagency
terrorist interrogation unit that is found under the auspices
of the FBI? If you could tell us your findings? And if not, I
would like you to look into it. Have you looked into the HIG?
Ms. Schnedar. No, we have not conducted an evaluation of
that.
Mr. Wolf. If you could I would appreciate it. At the time
of the creation of the High Value Interrogation team, as you
know it was the subject of a lot of controversy. And the
Christmas Day Bomber, the High Value----
Ms. Schnedar. Yes.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Interrogation Team was not
implemented, was not used. And at the time of the creation I
wrote to the Attorney General and the Director of the National
Intelligence to urge that the HIG be colocated at the National
Counterterrorism Center. Have you been out to the National----
Ms. Schnedar. I have not myself personally been out there.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Ms. Schnedar. So.
Mr. Wolf. Well then, you know what the Center is?
Ms. Schnedar. Oh yes, absolutely. We have done many reviews
and I am very aware of what it is.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Ms. Schnedar. I just have not physically visited it.
Mr. Wolf. I was told at that time that it was not possible.
It is in my district and it is very large, if you have not been
there.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. That they could not do it because of space
limitation. I believe that by having the HIG at that location,
because that is where the information is coming in, and if you
are going to send a team out, whether it be to Yemen or
wherever, the fact that they are almost colocated with the team
as the information is coming in, would you look at whether or
not the HIG could be strengthened by being at the National
Counterterrorism Center?
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, we could look at that, too.
Mr. Wolf. And also, although they have expanded that quite
extensively, is there someone, is there some function at the,
and again it is a large, it is large. It is not a little place.
Is there a function at the Counterterrorism Center that should
be some other place in comparison to the HIG? Because if the
HIG is there, had the HIG been on the site on Christmas Day,
that team could have been sent out. There could have been a
person who spoke the language, who understood the culture who,
and that was not the case. And so it was just the FBI person
working on Christmas Day in the Detroit office who may not
have, who may be a wonderful person but may not have been the
very best person that our country has. And you could have
missed operations and things like that, or maybe they would not
have read the Miranda rights right away. Who knows what the
circumstances were? But I think if you are going to have the
High Value Interrogation Team it ought to be used and I think
it ought to be there. So if you can look at it there, should it
be there? And then is there any other function out there that
you could move to some other place? And have the HIG there on
site?
Ms. Schnedar. That is something we can certainly put in our
queue. I would say we do, we will have to finish, there are
some ongoing reviews that are coming near completion. So we
would not have a team immediately available. But we would
certainly prioritize that.
Mr. Wolf. But this is really a priority, though.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. Because on 9/11 when the Pentagon was hit,
thirty-some people from my congressional district were killed
in the attack on the Pentagon.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, we would----
Mr. Wolf. And if we missed, if we miss something, and so I
think this is really a priority. And with the funding that the
committee has given with regard, this committee funds that. The
FBI is the lead agency with regard to that. I think it is
really a priority because if we are missing this, so----
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, we would treat it as a priority. We
would just, we do need to take a little bit of time to assemble
the team and get started on that.

GUANTANAMO DETAINEES

Mr. Wolf. I would hate to think of something happening,
though, in the meantime, that we missed it. And then we would
obviously say, ``Why did we not do this thing?'' In spring of
2009 the Attorney General made arrangements to secretly release
a number of detainees held at Guantanamo Bay into the United
States. It is my understanding that an apartment was secured
for these detainees in Falls Church, Virginia, very near my
congressional district. This was released when my, this release
was stopped when my office became aware of the effort and made
inquiries to the Department and the White House. Has your
office ever looked into whether or not they were going to
release detainees and allow them to have an apartment in
Northern Virginia?
Ms. Schnedar. No, we have not looked at that issue.
Mr. Wolf. Could you look into that?
Ms. Schnedar. That is something that we could also look at
here as well. I do, I am not as familiar with how much of that
would be, we would have to talk to your staff and get a little
bit more information. I mean, we are aware of what we read in
the news but we have not done----
Mr. Wolf. Well the Attorney General made the decision. And
if you cannot look at it no one----
Ms. Schnedar. No, we certainly can look at it. I would just
want to talk to your staff and get additional information and--
--
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Sure, we can----
Ms. Schnedar [continuing]. Try to assemble, you know, put
that, again, try to put our resources to that as soon as we
can.
Mr. Wolf. Sure. We can, we can do that, give you the
information. Mr. Fattah.

COUNTER-TERRORISM

Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much. And obviously the first
place is to start at this counterterrorism responsibility
because obviously we agree that that is the principal
responsibility of the FBI now. After 9/11 there was a lot of
debate about whether that was going to be the primary focus,
whether or not we need to think anew about the overall mission
of the agency. How do you see it being fulfilled within the
context of the other priorities that the FBI has? We are almost
ten years out now, and obviously the agency has done an
extraordinary job in terms of protecting the country.
Counterterrorism fits in, and still the FBI can carry on its
other duties. Do you think that the right fit of
responsibilities are there?
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, that is I think one of the major
challenges for the Department, is it has shifted a lot of its
resource and attention to counterterrorism and at the same it
has, you know, many needs, such as violent crime, organized
crime, detention, incarceration. You know, it has many demands
on its attention. We have found that overall the Department has
I think made some major transformational changes and that is
going well. However, there are many improvements that can be
made to increase information sharing among the programs that
relate to counterterrorism, and then those programs need to
talk to the programs that are doing non-counterterrorism work
as well. And so we continue to do these reviews that find areas
where improvements can be made.
Mr. Fattah. Now the Congress has suggested that it is going
to make some substantial cuts, and part of that is going to be
an attempt to limit those cuts on national security issues. Now
in the FBI it appears that a significant part of this budget,
around, I don't know, $4.5 billion or so, really seems to be
related to national security. So I would suspect that a
significant reduction at the FBI would have some impact on the
agency's ability to conduct its counterterrorism mandate?
Ms. Schnedar. That is correct. I think one of the things
the Department of Justice is doing, just as the Inspector
General for Commerce said, I know that they are currently doing
the internal process of listing what all their programs are
and, you know, prioritizing and that type of thing, too. And
what will be impacted with budget cuts. But I think that,
again, we have consistently emphasized that counterterrorism is
a top challenge and one that, you know, attention must continue
to be focused on.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Fattah. Now I know that you are the watchdog over the
taxpayers' money so I am going to go to some of these more
unpleasant areas. Looking at the long list of IT projects that
are challenged, three of them were found in the Department. One
you have mentioned already, I want to go to that, the Sentinel
program. So not only is it over budget, it is a couple of years
behind schedule. And you said that a lot of the
responsibilities the agency is taking in house. And these are
challenging systems to set up, I understand. The question is,
going forward, here is a project which is already over budget.
And you say in your review you are wondering whether or not the
expertise exists inside the Department, because what you have
got to do is you have got to figure out who is going to use
this, what they are going to use it for, and design a system
that can capture all of this information and make it work on a
day to day basis. So given that a half a billion dollars is a
lot of money, the real question is if the agency does not have
the internal capabilities, should we not be looking to provide
the resources so it can have those capabilities? Or, if one
contractor did not work out, normally, at least in the
businesses that I am familiar with, you go find their
competitor and you give them a shot at it.
Ms. Schnedar. Well I think part of what we are concerned,
or our major concern, is how much can they deliver with what
they have left to spend? They have brought it basically more in
house. They have this new agile methodology where they have
assumed control, they have reduced the number of contractors,
they say they are talking directly to the subs. But there are
still many things that have not been delivered. For example,
initially Sentinel was supposed to deliver eighteen forms,
electronic forms, that could be completely, you know, used
easily by the agents and the analysts. To date they have only
delivered four of those, and of those four forms they are not
even completely functional. They still have to print them out
and, you know, keep a signed copy in their records.
So with the money that they have left and the time that
they have left one of the things that we are evaluating is what
is it that the ultimate end product, are they going to be able
to deliver what the agents and the analysts need to truly be
effective in the field? And I think that is something that with
some of the estimates we believe have been a little optimistic
about that. And we have stressed to them that they need to do
more consistent reporting. There are several reporting
mechanisms that they have had, such as earned value management
and some others, that they did not use consistently. And we
think that is one of the things that they should be doing in
order to keep on track with this project.

DNA BACKLOG

Mr. Fattah. Let me skip ahead now to the DNA backlog, which
is mentioned in your full blown statement.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes.
Mr. Fattah. What is it that you believe can be done to
actually move this backlog? Is it more resources, and how much
more resources? And, I know we spend a lot of time talking
about cutting. But if we have to invest more money to deal with
this problem, which is in effect to keep people safer and to
make sure our criminal justice system works, what do we need to
do to solve the problem?
Ms. Schnedar. Part of it is, additional analysts would
help. DNA analysts who could review that. But in addition they
can improve their process. We found, again, there is another IT
system that has failed in the laboratory. They had an evidence
tracking system that has not gone anywhere. And I think that
would have helped them expedite and improve their process. And
there were better methods of tracking, even doing it in the old
way, I think we found they could improve the way that the
evidence was being tracked as it went through. So even with the
resources they have they could make some improvements, but
again they also will need additional resources to significantly
cut that backlog.
Mr. Fattah. Crime, serious crime is on the down swing in
the country, which is good news. But there are still a lot of
challenges. Only yesterday I visited the Center for Missing and
Exploited Children, which is an agency funded in large measure
by the Justice Department that helps track down about 2,000
children who are reported missing each day in our country. So
there are a lot of issues that we cannot deal with on the
cheap. I mean, they have a fairly extensive program there to
reach out, and they have a lot of cooperation from various
entities inside the Justice Department. And I know the chairman
has been out to visit, and I went out to visit yesterday. I was
quite impressed with the work they are doing. But it obviously
costs money. But to my way of thinking, locating children who
have been kidnapped is worth the dollars that we spend to do
it.
So I want to thank you for your answers, and maybe we will
go back around again. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

HUMAN TRAFFICKING

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. And I agree with what Mr.
Fattah said, and it just triggered another thought, too. We
were going to ask the Attorney General about it. I saw they
just put out something on sexual trafficking. There are reports
that anywhere from 100,000 to 300,000 women and young girls are
sexually trafficked in the United States. Some people think it
is in Albania, but it is also in Annandale, Virginia. It is all
over. And can you look at this whole issue of sexual
trafficking? I hope that we can carry language in there
directing that every U.S. Attorney's office have a task force
to deal with this issue, and bring in the faith community.
But could you look at the whole issue of sexual trafficking
and how effective you think the Department has been? And I know
that the argument sometime, and Mr. Fattah's comment is true,
it is that well, we are working on counterterrorism, we are
working on this, that is really a local issue. But these women
and young girls are being trafficked across state lines.
In Northern Virginia and in the Northern Virginia suburbs I
saw a list of some of the places, and we have given them to the
U.S. Attorney Neil McBride. But it is kind of frightening the
number of places whereby there are young girls sexually
trafficked. And if you could kind of look into that? And also
to see are there things, more things the Justice Department
could be doing, in the sense that much of this is on the
internet, and things like this. But----
Ms. Schnedar. Yes. And I would also want you to be aware
that we did do a review, it was maybe three years ago, on some
of the grant money that was given to organizations to be
extended to victims of human rights trafficking. And we did
find some deficiencies in that, in that they were not good at
doing outreach and actually finding the victims, and that they
needed to do a better, we made some recommendations there as
well. And we would be happy to give you some information----
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Ms. Schnedar [continuing]. On that report.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. If you would? Mr. Yoder.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
testimony today, and I appreciate hearing all this. I am a new
member of Congress and a new member of the committee, so I am
trying to----
Ms. Schnedar. Well I am a new IG, so there you go.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CONTRACTING/FBI SENTINEL

Mr. Yoder. Well good, we will learn this together. And
having gone through the process of visiting with constituents
and listening to the frustrations, we hear over and over and
over again that Americans are just frustrated that Congress
cannot find a way to balance the budget, and cut spending. It
just, to most Americans it just seems inconceivable that this
continues to run on and on and on and on. And it is boiling
over to anger in the country.
And so I appreciate the work you do because it helps me
understand where some of these holes are. And I took particular
note of your discussion, and gentleman discussed earlier,
regarding the overruns on the technology projects. And you
noted the twenty-six projects across the federal government
that experience problems such as significant cost increases,
schedule delays. And then you listed a few here. And I am
trying to understand how we got to this point, and where the
error was, and who is to blame, and how we fix the problem
going to forward, and how we stop the run on spending. It seems
like there are cases like this all across government.
You have cited the Sentinel project. And at first read,
when I first read this paragraph, it appeared to be that
Lockheed Martin was not doing their job. And that there had
been an agreement, the agreement was to come in under a certain
cost, and that actually did not occur. But as I read further
into your report I took particular note of the reasons for the
cost, the reasons for the delays, the cost overruns. And you
cited, and in the LCMS proposal or project, but you said it was
similar to what you find in all of the projects. And you said
specifically we have found ineffective requirements; planning
process; requirements being modified after much work had been
done; defects identified in system integration and user
acceptance that were costly to correct; and the failure to
adequately address in a timely fashion the difficulties the
contractor was having in meeting schedule and cost
requirements. So that makes it sound like it is completely
internal and that it is our fault in our management of these
projects, which I take particular note of the idea that we
would bring more of these projects in house and more control as
opposed to outside control of these projects. And it appears to
be the client, the Federal Government in this case, that is
making decisions that are costly because they are making them
after the fact. So poor planning is what you are citing.
And so I guess I would first ask, is this a correct
assessment of what is happening here? That these costs are
being overrun because of decisions that are being made in the
Department that are driving up the cost of the project?
Ms. Schnedar. Well we cannot say that the contractors are
without blame. But we do feel that in many of the systems that
we have looked at the Department could be doing a much better
job of exercising its oversight of the contractor; of making
sure it has a tight set of requirements and that it sticks to
that; that it looks to find the defects early rather than at a
later stage where it is costly to correct. So we really do find
a lot of areas for improvement for the Department.
Mr. Yoder. Well in particular in the Sentinel project you
note that the original budget was $451 million. That we have
spent $405 million of the $451 million. Two phases have been
completed. And you believe that the most challenging work for
that project still remains. So even the current estimates
appear to be way under what this is going to cost, if we are
only halfway through and we are estimating to be hundred
million over budget. It sounds like it is going to be much,
much greater than the budget. Do we have, does the Department
or do you have an estimate of where we think this thing is
actually going to end up?
Ms. Schnedar. We do not have a current cost estimate. I
think one of the things we are tracking is what will be
developed in the next nine months? For example, I mentioned
that not all the forms have been developed. There is also,
initially the plan was to migrate the existing system, the ACS
database system, into a new system. And now the FBI has said it
is not going to migrate, it is going to build an interface
between the two. So they are basically in essence changing some
of the requirements. So we have to see--or modifying some of
those. We have to see what it is that, and this is one of the
things that we have auditors on the scene now assessing this,
what is it that ultimately, how will it be different from what
was originally envisioned? And how much will that cost?
Mr. Yoder. When do you think that occurs?
Ms. Schnedar. Well we are continuing in the Sentinel
project. We are working on our eighth report now, and so our
next report should be coming sometime spring or summer. But the
FBI is estimating, it is hoping to make a lot of major strides
within the next year. And, you know, so that is one of the
things we will be tracking. How much will they be able to do in
that time period?
Mr. Yoder. And then, noting that a lot of this appears to
be decisions that were made within the Department that we have
just discussed here, are there things that go into these
contracts that can help the private contractor remain
accountable? Not having seen this specific contract, are there
things in here that say you receive a bonus if you can do it
under budget and under time? You know, in the private sector
there are all sorts of projects that, there are incentives for
the producer of the outcome to do it quicker, in a quicker
time, under budget. Are there things like that? Or is it
essentially just a contract to produce a product, and it may
come under budget or it may not? How do we keep the private
contractor regulated and making sure they come under budget or
within budget?
Ms. Schnedar. I do not know off the top of my head,
although I am sure our auditors know, are there incentives or
penalties built into the contract that they had with Lockheed
Martin. I do know that one of the things we have reported on is
that they were not doing enough of these, you know, reporting
mechanisms that were made to do assessments as they go along.
How is the project going, and what do we need to change? But I
can get back to you with that answer about this, incentives and
penalties.
Mr. Yoder. And then what would be your recommendations to
this subcommittee and to this Congress? How do we try to root
this kind of stuff out? We cannot just order that it get done
in a timely fashion. I mean, that is what the whole point of
the executive branch is. So what can Congress do to put in
better controls and better accountability with the financing of
these projects?
Ms. Schnedar. I do think oversight is a key provision, what
this committee is doing here today. It focuses attention on the
issue. I think it holds the FBI's feet to the fire. This is the
critical system that the FBI needs, so understandably it is
something that the committee wants to fund but to make sure it
is done as cost efficiently as possible. And again, we have
done work in this area, the GAO has done work in this area. And
I think that also helps in that regard.
Mr. Yoder. Okay, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Yoder. Following up on what Mr.
Yoder said, though, is there one thing that can be done? This
really is not new. I was on this committee before, and then I
left years ago, and came back. I mean, it is the same thing. I
think one of the last meetings I had we had some of the, we had
Glenn Fine was up here, I think, a whole groups in this room.
And I believe the Director was there, and now we are at this
point. Do you really believe--I do not, to be honest with you--
do you really believe that the expertise is in the FBI to do
this? I mean, the FBI does a great job. I think Director
Mueller, I am one of his biggest fans. I think he has done an
incredible job. No one is perfect, and he came in at a very,
very difficult time. So I have always been very supportive of
the Bureau.
But that is not what the Bureau does. The Bureau does not
put together comprehensive technical systems like this. And
now, just to give you a case history, the administration, the
President has frozen federal pay. Do you think you are going to
bring a great person in from whatever high tech company is out
there to come in now to, I mean, is this really, so is it
really real that this will be done by the expertise? Or are
they going to have the ability to go out and find the very best
person out there to kind of do this?
Ms. Schnedar. In our last report, and I think this is still
our opinion, we do think that their current estimates appear
optimistic. And it is a difficult task if they have to finish
what they are going to do in the time that they have to do it.
They have made more efforts to bring expertise in but it is
not something they can do themselves. They will have to work
with contractors in order to do this.
Mr. Wolf. Well I think Director Mueller will want to
resolve this before he leaves, and his term will be up at the
end of this year. I think September, if my memory serves me, or
October of this year. Is that correct? I think he----
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, it is September, I believe----
Mr. Wolf. And so I think the Director, who again I am a fan
of, will want to resolve this. Is there three of the very best
minds, somebody at MIT, and somebody at Caltech, or somebody
elsewhere, can come in for thirty days to kind of look at this
system? Because it is important, what they wanted to do. But I
do not have the confidence that there is the expertise in the
Department or in the Bureau to really resolve this thing. And I
know Director Mueller is going to want to resolve it before he
leaves, because he was the initiator of it. Is there something,
what would your recommendation be? Rather than just throwing
rocks at the place and telling him it is all screwed up, what
would be the way to bring it in? Would we bring in three of the
very, and I am reluctant to mention a company because I do not
know the answer. But somebody? This is not, I mean, other
companies, other places are doing these things. And so to bring
in to kind of be an advisor to the Bureau, particularly since
they have had the problem with Lockheed Martin?
Ms. Schnedar. The recommendations that we have made are
that they should, you know, redefine the requirements now that
they are at the crossroads, if they have switched to this new
agile methodology. And I think refocus on what it is they
really need, and what they can get done. We do know that they
have consulted each other, they have had assessments done by
companies such as MITRE. They have had, you know, some outside
expertise that is brought in. They have a fairly new person in
charge of this project who comes from the private sector.
Mr. Wolf. Where did he come from?
Ms. Schnedar. From Lehman. And then he was with Microsoft
before that. He's, I forget his background off the top of my
head.
Mr. Wolf. Did he take a pay cut from Lehman to come in?
Ms. Schnedar. I would assume he would have had to take a
pay cut. So, and part of that problem, too, bringing in the
people from the outside, then they must become familiar with
the government contracting process. I know he commented in an
article about, you know, some of the difficulties he was
encountering in learning the government contracting system.
Where some of the obstacles that he became aware of after he
entered the FBI.
So I think again, part of it is again this continual
assessment of what it is they are doing. Continual tracking,
you know, to keep it on track which with this agile methodology
they are doing two-week sprints, where they report to each
other, you know, report out what they do every two weeks. So
that, you know, could be a positive step. Again, it's still
fairly new and we're in there assessing.
Mr. Wolf. I think I know the answer. But how many people
have been, how long have you been at the Department?
Ms. Schnedar. Oh, I have been twenty years now at the
Department.
Mr. Wolf. How many people have been involved in this
program, responsible for it since it was initiated by the
Director?
Ms. Schnedar. Since the virtual case file?
Mr. Wolf. Yeah.
Ms. Schnedar. Three to four is what my auditor is telling
us.
Mr. Wolf. So that would be about----
Ms. Schnedar. Well it was approximately ten years. It has
been quite a while, so.
Mr. Wolf. Yeah.
Ms. Schnedar. And we have done, this is our eighth report
on Sentinel, and we did a report on the virtual case file
before that. So we certainly----
Mr. Wolf. I think they have a dart board with Glenn Fine's
picture on it in the FBI. I think.
Ms. Schnedar. And this is something we will continue to
follow closely, so.
Mr. Wolf. Well, but I think it has got to be more than
follow it closely. Because it is, because people lose
confidence, and also it deals with the national security of the
nation. And my sense is, maybe you can be in touch with the
subcommittee staff to see if you know or the people that you
know who could tell who would be the very best person or the
team that you could bring in. Not to do it, but to assess, and
make an evaluation. Otherwise, I think in fairness to Director
Mueller, who has done a good job, this is something it would be
ideal to get finished and resolved before he leaves. So.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, we would be happy to do that.

GANG ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Wolf. The DEA's El Paso Intelligence Center, EPIC, has
become a valuable resource for federal, state, and local law
enforcement providing intelligence related to a broad range of
criminal activity. You did a review. What did it show?
Ms. Schnedar. We found that overall they do produce a
useful product and I think that users in the field found to be
useful. However, we thought that not all users were aware of
it. They could do a better job in their outreach to state and
locals so that they are aware of that product. And we did find
some areas where they could increase the type of information
that they uniquely track, such as drug seizures, and try to
gather that information together and conduct more analysis of
it so that we could share that information and it could be used
in the field.
Mr. Wolf. Gangs, about eight years ago gangs were running
rampant in Northern Virginia. I offered an amendment to set up
a gang task force. We brought in the FBI, DEA, ATF, and
Marshals Service. To a family that lives in an area that is
gang infested, they are impacted like a, almost like a
terrorist is in them. They are afraid. There were neighborhoods
in Northern Virginia that I would talk to the families that
lived in them and they were afraid to send their kids to
school.
The Congress in its wisdom has voted to abolish earmarks so
there will be no opportunities to deal with this. And I might
say, just for members, as you look in terms of the earmark
issue, I was the author of the Iraq Study Group, which was an
earmark, which the administration, we wanted to look at how the
War was run so we put together the Baker-Hamilton Commission to
look at this.
On this gang issue I really worry, and I personally believe
we almost need a new concept, a new idea. Gang membership has
increased by more than 20 percent from 2005 and gangs now total
more than one million members out of the population of over 300
million in the country. Gangs are now developing a working
relationship with U.S. and foreign based drug trafficking
organizations and other criminal organizations. Your office did
a review of anti-gang intelligence coordination in the
Department. What is a weakness? What should be done? How do we
really deal with it? Because, again, a person that lives in a
neighborhood where they are afraid, they are impacted the same
way that somebody would be afraid with regard to Al-Qaeda. I
mean, their kids sending to school. What can we do and are we
doing to really deal with the gang issue? And what did your
analysis come up with?
Ms. Schnedar. We did look at two gang intelligence centers
in the Department, the National Gang Intelligence Center and
GangTECC, which is a more tactical basis.
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Ms. Schnedar. We found with NGIC that its products were not
as useful as they could be. They were, one person described it
as they were writing history instead of writing leads. And we
thought they needed more discussion with the field and back and
forth so they could understand how their product was actually
used and make it useful.
We also found that the two centers, even though they were
colocated, were not talking to each other and were not sharing
information. And that they could, if they could work together
they could be more effective.
Since we issued our report they have made efforts to make
them more cohesive. They have not fully merged them but they
have placed them within the special operations division and
there has been some change in that area. But, you know, it is
not a complete merger as we initially recommended.
Mr. Wolf. Do you think that we are doing everything in the
country to deal with gangs that we could be doing or should be
doing?
Ms. Schnedar. I think that with the Department they
certainly have made a lot of strides. But again, it is some of
the problems that we have found in other areas. There needs to
be more information sharing, more coordination. And this also
goes to budgetary questions as well. The more that they can
combine some of these different centers and work together and
coordinate, they will actually have a better product in the
end.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Mr. Schiff.

DNA BACKLOG

Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask you
about a couple of areas, about DNA as well as the gun
trafficking along the Mexican border. In terms of DNA, I
understand now from Justice, and I want to see if you can
confirm this, that they have now eliminated the offender
backlog. I know your report is pending, but will your report
conclude that in fact the offender backlog is a thing of the
past?
Ms. Schnedar. They have said they have eliminated the
backlog. We have just begun that review, so I cannot tell you
yet if that is actually true and if it will stay eliminated.
Our review will take a few months to do, but we just initiated
that review. And it was really following our previous report on
the forensic DNA backlog.
Mr. Schiff. And on the casework backlog, what is the status
of that now? Is that moving in the right direction?
Ms. Schnedar. They have implemented many reforms. Again,
there is also still a resource question. And one of the things
that we intend to do is after we finish the offender backlog we
are going to go back in and look at the case backlog because we
think this is an important area that we need to continue to
monitor.
Mr. Schiff. When you look at the casework backlog can you
in particular look at a subset of that and determine if there
is any backlog in rape kits? I have been informed over the last
few years that there is not a rape kit backlog problem in the
federal government but I want to confirm that that is true.
Ms. Schnedar. I would have to double check and get back to
you with the answer to that. I do know we found backlogs in
general in different types of forensic DNA cases, but I will
have to look at that and get back to you.

ATF'S PROJECT GUNRUNNER

Mr. Schiff. In terms of the situation, the mutually
destructive trade with Mexico in drugs and guns, I am
interested to get your thoughts on an issue that you wrote
about, and that is the current requirement that handgun sales
of two or more within a certain period of time have to be
reported but long gun sales do not.
As I am sure you know, the administration--well ATF--sought
an emergency rule that would allow them to require notification
of long gun, multiple long gun sales, that would apply in some
of the border states and track the current requirement for
handgun sales. The administration, I was disappointed to see,
at least temporarily has turned that down. Can you shed some
light on the impact of not having that information? And
whether, if you had to choose one or the other, to be informed
of multiple handgun sales or multiple long gun sales, which is
of greater significance in terms of information we need to
combat the terrific violence in Mexico?
Ms. Schnedar. Well we did find on the southwest border that
the long guns were the more prevalent gun that was used in
trafficking, and that is what is being reported out of the
information that is being gathered through the cases and the
arrests that are being made. And I do not know if I had to
choose if it is better to choose one or not, because what is
the cause and what is the effect of reporting, I do not know.
But we did find that there was a need for that information and
recommended that the ATF consider ways in which to capture that
information.
Mr. Schiff. Well if the long guns are the more prevalent
weapons, would it make sense that that is where the more
valuable information would be?
Ms. Schnedar. My only question is if, does reporting cause
a shift from one to the other? I do not know. But yes, I do
think it is information that the ATF says would help it in
fighting crime on the southwest border.
Mr. Schiff. I mean, right now if someone makes, you know,
multiple, multiple purchases of an AK-47 there is no notice
requirement. And it is discretionary, I guess, on the gun
seller's part? Is that right?
Ms. Schnedar. There is not a requirement to report that by
the gun seller, that is correct.
Mr. Schiff. Your report has indicated a lot of problems
with Operation Gunrunner. What do you think can significantly
be done to enhance both Mexico's ability and our ability to
prosecute not just the straw purchases, as difficult as that
has proved to be, but frankly to follow them up the chain to
those that are trafficking large numbers of weapons. What is
missing that we can do? Is it manpower, or is it sharing
information? What are the biggest obstacles? Whenever I meet
with Mexican law enforcement officials this is obviously what
concerns them most significantly. They just, they are getting
massacred. And you know, significantly with American made
weapons. And they do not feel like we are doing much to deal
with that problem.
Ms. Schnedar. We did find that the ATF should shift its
focus less from the straw purchase to the organized trafficker.
In fact, prosecutors that we spoke with told us they would
prefer to see these kind of cases and that they are more likely
to prosecute them. Sometimes the straw purchasing cases may not
even rise up to the level of meriting a prosecution for various
reasons. We found that they could be using OCDETF more, they
could be coordinating more with ICE, they could be talking more
between headquarters and their fields. Again, information
sharing, to share this type of information, to build those
cases instead of focusing on the straw purchases, which give
you a lot of numbers but do not necessarily have the same
impact as the organization traffickers.
Mr. Schiff. Well sometimes, having been a prosecutor,
unless you can go after the low guy on the totem pole, you
cannot roll them up to get the higher person, to get the higher
person. I mean, what is preventing them now from going after
higher level people?
Ms. Schnedar. I do think that we have seen a bit of a shift
since we have done our report. I think they are trying to
encourage those type of cases. I think sometimes the low level
cases are the low hanging fruit, they are easier to do. It does
take organization, it takes intelligence sharing between
agencies and between components of ATF in order to build these
more complex cases. And again, we did heavily recommend that
they work more with OCDETF in order to build those type of
cases.
Mr. Schiff. And would it be within your jurisdiction, or
one of the other agencies, to look at, you know, the very
significant amount of money that we have been providing to
Mexico for work on their side of the border to see how
effectively that is being utilized to deal with the same
problem?
Ms. Schnedar. The Merida Initiative, I believe, is
administered through the Department of Justice. So that would,
I would believe that would be in our jurisdiction. We have not
done a look at money going directly to Mexico. We are looking
at the OPDAT, the overseas training for prosecutors, and
ICITAP, the overseas training for law enforcement. But that is
a more global look at what they are doing globally, not
specifically at Mexico. And that is an audit that is underway
now.
Mr. Schiff. Well if there were one or two priorities that
you think we should focus on in terms of trying to more
successfully combat this traffic, what would your
recommendations to the committee be?
Ms. Schnedar. Well our recommendations to ATF were, again,
to increase information sharing and to focus more on going
after the gun trafficker rather than the straw purchaser. And
also with Mexico there is a real, I think they could improve
its gun tracing program. They are not sharing information in a
timely fashion and I think building that program in Mexico, and
that also would be helpful.
Mr. Schiff. And what information sharing problem are you
referring to on our side? Is it on our side of the border? Is
it between U.S. and Mexican officials? I mean, what is, where
is the breakdown that we can address?
Ms. Schnedar. We found some weaknesses in the liaison
program, and that they were not building the relationships and
explaining some of the need to get the Mexican gun information
in a timely fashion. They had distributed some equipment to the
Mexicans but hadn't given them training on how to use it. So we
found that there were improvements that could be made. And part
of that is just relationship building between the two
countries.
Mr. Schiff. So it is not so much an information sharing
problem within U.S. agencies, but rather between U.S. and
Mexican agencies?
Ms. Schnedar. Well we also found it within U.S. agencies as
well. For instance, ATF is not talking to ICE a lot. And there
is a lot of overlap there, and there are cases that they could
be prosecuting together, sharing information, having a stronger
case together. And that they needed to implement a system for
doing that. And then we found the ATF field was not
coordinating with headquarters, and that that information
needed to be shared that way as well so that it could be shared
throughout the ATF when it needed to be.
Mr. Schiff. Are there, I mean in addition to the people
located at Justice, are there, is there one or two of the U.S.
Attorneys in the region who are sort of the point people on
this?
Ms. Schnedar. The southwest border U.S. Attorneys' offices
are all very involved with the cases flowing out of Gunrunner
and we did speak to a number of Assistant U.S. Attorneys in the
southwest border states. So they are very aware of what ATF is
doing and they did give us suggestions which we incorporated
into our recommendations for ATF.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Schiff. We will try to go through
these fairly fast, and if anybody has anything just say
something. Any particular areas you think that the committee
ought to look at with regard to targeting for cutting, please
let us know. Again, not to be harmful. Just if there is
something we are trying to balance off to protect things that
are really important, to make sure that we can take from one to
give to another in order to do what I think everyone in the
country would like.
On the Gunrunner question too, and I am going to have a
series of questions on that we will just submit for the record,
but since 2009 we have appropriated more than $65 million for
Project Gunrunner. You note in your November 2010 report ATF's
expansion of the e-trace system to trace guns in Mexico has
yielded very limited information of intelligence value. Could
you tell us what you mean? I mean, nothing? What is----
Ms. Schnedar. We found that a lot of the trace information
that is coming back from guns that are seized in Mexico is
stale and not useful. And I think of that is they need to
increase, improve their relations with Mexico to get a better
system for getting the information in a more timely manner so
that it can actually be usable.
Mr. Wolf. Is that because it is dangerous to go down to
Mexico? Or is that because there are not enough ATF people down
in Mexico?
Ms. Schnedar. I think again, part of it was building those
relations between the people running the tracing project for
ATF, and with Mexico, and a lack of training----
Mr. Wolf. Have we brought them up here? Have they come up
here and have we gone down there?
Ms. Schnedar. I know we have had ATF down there. Yes. ATF
has certainly been to Mexico. I do not know if Mexico has come
to the U.S. for training on e-trace. But there has, we feel
that there are many, just additional outreach effort, training
systems that could be put in place to get these done more
quickly and so that it could be more useful.
Mr. Wolf. Maybe they should be invited up here. How many
people does Mexico have working on this issue? Do you know?
Ms. Schnedar. I do not know that. I could find that out and
let you know.

FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS

Mr. Wolf. Well there will be a number of other questions on
that. Bureau of Prisons, in your audit of the Bureau of Prisons
furlough program published last September one unresolved issue
was a need for BOP to have a more effective means of
coordinating with the union on policy changes. According to
your audit the collective bargaining agreement expired nine
years ago, and BOP contends that it will not have another
agreement in place until 2017. Is that accurate?
Ms. Schnedar. That is what they said to us at the time of
the audit. I do know they are focusing increased attention to
it since we issued our audit, so----
Mr. Wolf. Probably. Still awaiting implementation is a
policy that would assure that victims of crime are notified
when an offender is approved for a medical furlough. This
notification has waited seven years for implementation and may
not be implemented for another seven years. Why? That is a big
issue.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, it is. It is a big issue. Since we
issued our report they did jump this issue to the top of the
queue and negotiate it. So they did implement a policy where
that notification now takes place. However, there are other
recommendations we have made in other reports that have not
been implemented that they have told us it is due to delays in
negotiating with the union. And we think they need a better
mechanism to bring these issues to the table and get them
negotiated in a timely manner.
Mr. Wolf. Has that, because of the delay, has that
jeopardized the safety or security of anyone? Are there any
cases where certain things happened that would not have
happened if that had been implemented?
Ms. Schnedar. I do not have a particular case to point out
to you. But we, I would say that some of the policies that we
think have not been negotiated yet can affect prisoner safety,
inmate safety and guard safety. So we think it is an important
issue.
Mr. Wolf. Wow. I mean, it seems like it would, that would
be something you would deal with pretty quickly.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes. And we certainly have pointed this out
to the Department. I will say that this is something that has
received renewed attention since our report came out.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Over the past twenty-five years the U.S.
prison and jail population has skyrocketed to an all time high,
with 2.3 million people incarcerated, we are now number one in
the world in incarceration, confining 23 percent of the world's
prisoners. Meaning we have in our jails and prisons 23 of the
world's prison population. Therefore, it has become imperative
that the U.S. modernize its expensive, unsuccessful, and
unsustainable correction policy. The goal of the Serious and
Violent Offender Reentry Initiative and the Prisoner Reentry
Initiative, programs which have now concluded, was to reduce
recidivism among offenders released back into the communities.
Your report on these programs provided lessons that can be
applied to the existing Second Chance Reentry Initiative. While
I am concerned about your findings that DOJ sometimes had
difficulties awarding the grants consistently and assuring that
grantees did not spend funds on unallowable expenses. Did these
programs have the intended effect of reducing recidivism? That
is the purpose of it.
Ms. Schnedar. We found that they could not say. And part of
that was they did not have good measures. First of all, they
were not even using a uniform definition of what constitutes
recidivism. And so in order to measure that they need to
implement better performance measures. They had not collected
the data to allow us to make that assessment.
Mr. Wolf. But this is a big issue. This is, the whole issue
of recidivism. And there was a report we are going to have a
hearing on Friday, I mean that is a big issue.
Ms. Schnedar. Yes, it is.
Mr. Wolf. I have a couple of others on a different subject,
but let me try to stay on that for a second. Has your office
investigated the dramatic decline in prison industries
participation over the last decade?
Ms. Schnedar. We have not done a review on that. We have
done a review on the e-waste recycling program that they had,
which had some health and safety problems. And that is a
program itself that has declined over the last few years.
Mr. Wolf. Has your office looked at the impact of the loss
of prison work on inmates' violence against guards?
Ms. Schnedar. No, we have not done a review of that.
Mr. Wolf. I hope you will look at, you know the Congress is
really to blame here and not the administration, on the whole
working in the prisons. But if you put a man in prison for
years and give him or her no work and no dignity, no skill, you
are just going to have recidivism. And so if you could look to
see what the impact has been on the ending, basically, of the
Federal Prisons Industries, and what that impact has had, or
potentially would have, on recidivism.
Having a robust work program in our nation's prisons is an
important priority. We learned from your investigation that
prior to 2009 UNICOR's management of the electronic waste
recycling program resulted in numerous violations of health,
safety, and environmental laws, as well as BOP policies. What
were they, and what changes are being done based on your
report?
Ms. Schnedar. The electronic waste recycling was basically
the breaking up of computers, and the cadmium and lead were
being exposed. Some of these, many of these corrections were
made actually prior to the start of our report. But we did make
additional suggestions. They were not wearing proper protective
gear. They did not have proper work stations with proper
ventilation. Inadequate training, inadequate inspections, they
were not, they ignored some of the early warnings that came in.
So they have put in a series of reforms to correct many of
these issues.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I would hope that we could convince the
Congress to support a program of developing more work in the
prisons, and having perhaps industries who are no longer making
or manufacturing products in the United States. For instance,
oversimplification, there are no televisions made in the United
States. I am sure you have a television set, you may even have
two.
Ms. Schnedar. Two, that is all.
Mr. Wolf. So if we could have, and I am using this just as
an example, manufacture televisions in prison so you are not in
competition with American industry, you are in competition with
something in Mexico or China, something like that. I would like
to see in the federal prison system everyone works. And with
that they get a skill and a training, and they have money that
they can keep so when they get out of prison they have money to
take with them, send money to their families, also use it for
restitution. But I really think it is a tragedy that there is
so little now because of the narrowing and hollowing out of the
prison industries. So if you could look into that and give us a
report of what you think or what you are seeing with regard to
that, I would appreciate it.

CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION

Next is the Black Panthers. Because of mounting evidence of
improper activities in the Justice Department Civil Rights
Division and the extremely troubling dismissal of the Black
Panthers voter intimidation case, I felt it was essential that
your office investigate the division. Inspector General Fine
assured me that there would be an examination of the types of
cases brought by the voting section and that any changes in
these cases over time; any changes in voting section
enforcement policy or procedures over time; whether the voting
section has enforced civil rights law in a nondiscriminatory
manner; and whether any voting section employees have been
harassed for participating in the investigation of a particular
matter. Will this investigation include all these issues? And
when can we expect your review?
And I want to kind of put out, so you know how strongly I
feel about this. When the Voting Rights Act came up in the
Congress I was the only member of Congress from the State of
Virginia that voted for the Voting Rights Act. When I voted for
it I was criticized by the Richmond Times Dispatch, and ripped
apart in many newspapers in my area. I voted for the Voting
Rights Act and I continue to be a strong supporter of the
Voting Rights Act.
But I want to see the enforcement of the Voting Rights Act.
And no one should be intimidated, whether they stand in front
of polls in Philadelphia, Mississippi, and there is a
Philadelphia, Mississippi, or Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. And
so we have been pursuing this and pursuing this and pursuing
this. So when can we see your review of what you have found?
Ms. Schnedar. Our scope is the same as you just, as was
described to you previously by Inspector General Fine. And we
are working on it, we are in the middle of it. We are looking
at documents, interviewing witnesses. It is very hard to
predict when we will have it. It is still, you know months
away. But I cannot give you a precise date because sometimes
one thing leads to another in an investigation, so I cannot
predict with certainty when it will be done. But we certainly
have prioritized this and are trying to get it done as quickly
as possible.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Well again, as the only member of that
delegation that voted for the Voting Rights Act, I feel
passionate about this. And I just, I just want to see that this
thing is done in an appropriate way. There will be some other
questions on that issue, too.

SEXUAL ABUSE OF PRISONERS

I have just one or two more, and then I will go back to Mr.
Fattah. Let us see, prison industries, we have covered that. We
have the Marshals Service, in your September 2009 report
entitled, ``Department of Justice Efforts to Prevent Staff
Sexual Abuse of Federal Inmates,'' you recommended that the
U.S. Marshals Service develop and implement a policy that
ensures a zero-tolerance policy standard aimed at preventing
staff sexual abuse of federal prisoners. Has this policy been
implemented?
Ms. Schnedar. They did take steps to implement this policy.
And I know they, I do not know if it has been distributed
throughout the Marshals Service. Yeah, they have not, it is not
a closed recommendation so they have not finished with their
steps to implement it. But they have, they are taking steps to
distribute that, to develop the policy and distribute it
throughout the Marshals Service.
Mr. Wolf. As you may or may not know Congressman Bobby
Scott and myself were involved in what we called the Prison
Rape Bill. And some of the stories of prisoners being raped are
just unbelievable. I have been really disappointed in the delay
of the administration to finalize these regs. And but I think
we will wait to go into that when the Attorney General comes
up.

EXPLOSIVES COORDINATION BETWEEN FBI & ATF

And I guess the last question I may have, or last two and I
will go back to Mr. Fattah, is the ATF and the FBI, and you
covered this briefly in the opening, share jurisdictions for
investigation of federal explosive crimes. Disputes between the
two have arisen where there is an absence of clear jurisdiction
with respect to a particular investigation. In what situations
has there been an absence of clear jurisdiction? And I keep
reading about it in the paper. They do not want to work
together? What is the problem? And cannot they resolve this, or
either give all to one or all to the other? Or, I mean, how do
you work that out?
Ms. Schnedar. With explosives they have given FBI
jurisdiction if it involves a terrorist incident and the rest
falls to ATF unless there is some other FBI preexisting
interest. And what we found was the guideline just was not very
clear, the memorandum was not clear, and they were racing to
the scene and, you know, trying to beat each to the scene in
order to gain jurisdiction.
The Deputy Attorney General has issued a new policy but we
think a part of this will depend on implementation. And I think
the policy probably needs to be a little clearer about how the
delineation will fall and we are continuing to track that to
see how that works.
Mr. Wolf. Does the expertise reside equally in both of
them?
Ms. Schnedar. Well the ATF I think has built, you know,
they both have experts. You know, probably the ATF has more
explosive experts but the FBI has them as well. And again, we
found overlap in their labs, in their training, in their canine
programs. So there is a fair amount of overlap.
Mr. Wolf. Is not everything almost terrorism now in a way,
whether it----
Ms. Schnedar. That is the problem. How do they know when
they are responding to the scene if it is a terrorist case or
not? And that is where a lot of the conflicts arise.
Mr. Wolf. Well maybe you can help us resolve it? Or maybe
we should write something in. I am, I am supportive of both of
them. But somehow there ought to be a delineation. That time
that you are arguing could better be used from some other way.
And you are always seeing news stories about the conflict and
you constantly hear about it. And there ought to be some
mechanism to kind of resolve it.
And let me go to Mr. Fattah, and I think that would pretty
much take it to the end.

RESTORING CONFIDENCE IN THE DEPARTMENT

Mr. Fattah. Well I do want to not necessarily delve into it
but want to take note of your written testimony describing the
efforts that the Department has taken to restore confidence in
the Department in terms of some of the issues that arose in
Senator Stevens' case and other issues relating to professional
conduct of attorneys, and other issues that have raised some
public concern about activities inside of the Department over
many years. I think that the Department has done a great deal
in this regard, so I want to take note of it.
But I want to go back to a question that we asked of your
colleague from the Department of Commerce about your general
resources. How many staff people do you have?
Ms. Schnedar. We have 430.
Mr. Fattah. Okay. And how do you rationalize, and I know
you are in an acting capacity, but how has it been
rationalized, how and under what circumstances you would pursue
the work as the watchdog for the public, and is it the case
that you have a number of mandated responsibilities that
prescribe most of these resources? Or do you have more of a
free hand, a discretionary hand, about where to apply your
resources?
Ms. Schnedar. Our current work plan was developed by
Inspector General Fine, who left a week and a half ago. But I
was his Deputy so I was part of that planning process. And we
intend to continue with the same planning process. Some of our
reviews are mandated, but that is not the majority of what we
do. We do a very careful work planning process. We look at the
Department's top ten challenges and we try to find reviews that
fall within those top ten challenges. We also consider very
seriously any requests from committees with jurisdictions,
congressional requests that are appropriate for us to take on.
And we, you know, then we have to divide our resources between
our investigations to look at, you know, any corrupt law
enforcement agents. And we look at the numbers coming in to
make sure we have enough there. And then with our program
reviews we try to identify those that would have the most
impact.
We also firmly believe in doing follow up reviews. So as in
foreign language translation we will go back in after two or
three years to see if they have actually implemented the
recommendations that we made, if there has been improvement.
And so we certainly try----
Mr. Fattah. I assume that the dollars that we spend are
well spent?
Ms. Schnedar. We believe they are very well spent. We do
think that inspectors general in general are cost savings
because we do identify----
Mr. Fattah. Okay. So this should not be an area that when
we are looking at cuts that we should be enthusiastic about?
Ms. Schnedar. Yeah, I think any inspector general would
tell you yes, we are cost savings. So.
Mr. Fattah. Okay. All right. Thank you very much.
Ms. Schnedar. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. Where did Mr. Fine go?
Ms. Schnedar. He is taking some well deserved time off. He
probably will find an opportunity in the private sector, but he
has not identified yet what he will be doing.
Mr. Wolf. I thought he was going to open up a bed and
breakfast up in Vermont, or something like that.
Ms. Schnedar. Well he thought about taking on coaching a
basketball team, but he has decided instead----
Mr. Wolf. Give him my best. I appreciate, you know, his
service.
Ms. Schnedar. I certainly will.
Mr. Wolf. And thank you and thank all your people. And
there will be questions that we will just submit for the
record.
Ms. Schnedar. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much. Okay, the hearing is
adjourned. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thursday, February 10, 2011.

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

WITNESS

ALLISON C. LERNER, INSPECTOR GENERAL

Opening Remarks of Chairman Wolf and Ranking Member Fattah

Mr. Wolf. Good morning. The hearing will come to order. I
want to welcome everyone today to our hearing on the state of
management challenges at our science agencies.
The witnesses are Allison Lerner, Inspector General,
National Science Foundation, and Paul Martin, Inspector
General, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
I want to thank you both for being here to go over the
current budget and activities of the inspectors general. We
will be looking to the IGs for guidance on where money can be
put to very good use for program improvements and positive
outcomes.
We are going to need your help redirecting that. We are
going to discuss management challenges and identify their
implications, which are important to effective and efficient
programs.
Ms. Lerner will provide some brief overview and answer
questions from the Subcommittee, and then we will turn to Mr.
Martin and proceed the same way.
Before we begin with Ms. Lerner, I would like to first turn
to the ranking member, Mr. Fattah, for any opening comments.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thought yesterday was quite productive in terms of
hearing from the IGs and look forward to this morning's
testimony, starting with the National Science Foundation.
So I will reserve and we can get right to it. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
Ms. Lerner.

Opening Remarks of Inspector General Lerner

Ms. Lerner. Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I
appreciate this opportunity to discuss the Office of Inspector
General's work to promote the efficiency and effectiveness of
the National Science Foundation's programs and operations and
to safeguard their integrity.
My testimony will focus on two of the six top management
challenges facing NSF in fiscal year 2011, improving grants
management and strengthening contract administration, as well
as some recent reviews our office has conducted of NSF's
operational expenses.
With regard to the first challenge, in 2010, NSF did more
than 55,000 awards at over 2,100 institutions. Since most of
these awards are made as grants, it is essential that the
foundation's grants management process be robust enough to
ensure the highest level of accountability and stewardship.
Previous audits have found that the agency needs to improve
its oversight of awardees and NSF has taken action to address
these concerns including establishing an Award Monitoring and
Business Assistance Program to provide necessary oversight.
That program's impact is limited as it can reach fewer than
ten percent of the institutions receiving awards. In this time
of increased concern about accountability and federal programs,
it will be a continuing challenge for the agency to find new
and cost-effective ways to ensure that awardees are
accomplishing their goals and expending their federal funds
appropriately.
In addition to grant administration, we have focused
considerable attention on contract administration at NSF,
particularly on the agency's efforts to manage and recompete
its largest contract and its ability to manage high-risk
contract reimbursement contracts.
NSF obligated $283 million for such contracts in fiscal
year 2010 and the monitoring of cost reimbursement contracts
was a significant deficiency in both the foundation's fiscal
year 2009 and 2010 financial statements.
These contracts are high risk because of their potential
for cost escalation and because NSF often pays contractors
before they incur costs. This risk is compounded by the fact
that the agency has made advanced payments to contractors that
do not have adequate accounting systems or approved accounting
system disclosure statements.
The risk of fraud, waste, and abuse on these contracts will
continue to be high until NSF implements fully adequate cost
surveillance procedures.
NSF's use of contingencies and budgets for its large major
research equipment and facilities construction projects is an
emerging management challenge.
Two recent audits of cooperative agreement proposals for
large construction projects found that the awardees' budgets
contained more than $169 million of unallowable contingency
costs and that $55 million or 33 percent of this $169 million
was funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
In addition, although the NSF allows awardees' project
officers to hold contingency funds for allocation during
construction, we found that there were no barriers to prevent
the funds from being drawn down in advance and/or used for
purposes other than contingencies. As a result, there is an
increased risk of fraud and misuse of these funds.
We are working with the agency to resolve the recent audits
and have started additional work in this area.
My office also examines how NSF spends money internally for
its own operations and activities. In light of the current
economic climate, it is essential that we carefully study these
expenses to identify opportunities for cost savings, so our
funds can be put to better use within the foundation.
In this vein, we recently examined expenditures in two
areas, both of which might yield cost savings with additional
oversight and control.
Our recent review of charges on NSF purchase cards for
refreshments for panelists and others attending meetings at NSF
identified nearly half a million dollars in food-related
payments in both 2008 and 2009.
NSF pays for these refreshments out of program funds in
addition to the compensation it is already providing to
attendees to cover their expenses including meals.
One-fourth of the purchases we reviewed exhibited at least
one typical fraud indicator. In addition, we found there is no
foundation level oversight or coordination of refreshment
purchases and that purchasing practices vary widely across the
agency.
We recommended that NSF assess the prudence of these
expenses and that if it decided to continue providing
refreshments it centralize their purchase to improve control
over the process.
Our review of NSF's Independent Research Development
Program, which provides travel funds to temporary employees at
NSF such as IPAs to travel to their home institutions and
attend conferences, found that NSF could not tell without
substantial effort how much it expends annually on IR&D travel
or how such travel is used across the foundation's various
divisions.
In addition, some participants used IR&D funds for more
trips or longer trips or spent more on travel than proposed in
their plan. Because of the weak oversight of the IR&D funds and
the potential for abuse, we are currently auditing this
program.
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Wow. Thank you very much.

RESPONSIVENESS OF NSF

You raise a lot of issues. Are they paying any attention to
you?
Ms. Lerner. I think they are doing what they can to improve
these areas. They do have, as I noted in grants management, a
program in place to do some monitoring of awards, but we think
that it is time to think of ways that they can do more.
And one of the things that our office is starting to do is
to develop a data analytic type capability that will enable us
to do continuous monitoring of costs. NSF does this to a
limited extent and we are hoping that if our efforts are
successful, we can bring them along so that they can do more of
that and hopefully have another cost-effective way of staying
on top of how grantees are spending their funds.
In the contract area, we have been working with NSF for
quite some time. And they have made some progress. They have a
new procurement executive coming on board, I believe this
month. They have come up with some new policies and procedures
for overseeing cost reimbursement contracts, but those were
implemented relatively late in the fiscal year, and the auditor
who conducts the financial statement audit has not had a chance
to evaluate their effectiveness. We will be doing that this
year.
So they are attempting to tighten up their procedures over
cost reimbursement contracts. They have also entered into an
agreement with DCAA to do some of the much needed audits at the
pre-award stage and across the life cycle of awards so that
there will be better assurance that money is being spent
appropriately.
So they are paying attention. There is just a lot of ground
to cover and some real room for improvement.
Mr. Wolf. How many people do you have on your staff?
Ms. Lerner. Approximately 72 employees.
Mr. Wolf. I guess I should get it out of the way early. I
have been a little disappointed. I am going to tell the NSF
people that when they come up. I have been a strong supporter
of NSF. I think America needs to be invested in----
Ms. Lerner. Absolutely.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Math and science and physics and
chemistry and biology, et cetera, et cetera, and I have always
supported increased funding.
About two years ago, we put language in asking the NSF to
look at best practices with regard to having students get
interested in science. The indications are that if they lose
interest before fifth or sixth grade, you will lose them.
Ms. Lerner. You are out of the pipeline.
Mr. Wolf. It has been two years and they have never
completed the report. Mr. Bement, who I always had a great
amount of respect for, just left town without finishing it.
We cannot get the NSF to respond to this. This is a very
minor thing. We have done the same thing for prisons. We have
asked the prison systems to look at best practices, and the Pew
Foundation and the state governments helped us to come up with
a report. We have asked NSF to do the same thing on what is
working in education to get young people through first through
fifth grade, and it has been two years.
And we cannot get an answer. Mr. Bement left town without
the courtesy to call to say where the report is. The new
director has never been up.
And so I am beginning to think that it is a very sloppy
operation out there. As another example, I remember initially
the National Science Foundation fought strenuously against
moving their headquarters. They did not want to move to their
current location.
Senator Robb had moved them out to the Arlington area, and
they fought it and fought it and fought it. And now it is
there, and someone said there may be some effort to move them
again.
Is there any thought of that?
Ms. Lerner. The two buildings that the foundation is in, I
think the Stafford One lease expires in 2013, I think Stafford
Two in 2014. So the process is in place to find a new building
for the agency.
Mr. Wolf. To move again?
Ms. Lerner. It is uncertain at this point whether they will
move again or whether the current lender will be able to get
the current space up to standards where they could remain is my
understanding. But, yes.
Mr. Wolf. Well, they wanted to stay on Constitution Avenue
in an old building that was falling down----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. So they could be close to the White
House.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. If they come in and ask for money for that, I
personally would not be very supportive. I mean, I think they
ought to spend their time on science.
Well, you just let the word go back. I do not know who is
here from the NSF, if anybody is, but I am really so
disappointed in Dr. Bement and the current leadership now for
not even having the courtesy to come up and discuss the status
of the education report.
It was requested in the fiscal year 2009 language, and we
cannot even get them to act. So if the Congress cannot get them
to act, I wonder if you are able to do it.
Ms. Lerner. I meet with the director tomorrow at one
o'clock and I will make sure he understands your concerns. So I
will do what I can.
Mr. Wolf. Well, if they really care about education----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And getting young people to be
involved in the sciences----
Ms. Lerner. Right. And I know they do. So I do not know why
they would not be getting back to you and communicating with
you on that or completing the work that you asked them to do.
But I will certainly have that conversation with the director.
Mr. Wolf. Somebody ought to tell Mr. Bement, too, who I
really admired. I am really disappointed in him. He left town
literally without cleaning up and dealing with this issue. And
we have discussed it. We have had conversations. We have raised
it in hearings. It is in the hearing record. It was in the
bill. And he leaves town and does not do a thing. How hard you
work on the last day is as important as all the work you have
done before.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. You ought to stay until five o'clock or five-
thirty and clean up everything. This was an act of Congress
with regard to the sciences. This is not a----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Pork barrel project. We want young
people to be involved in science. Last year, China graduated
700,000 engineers. We only graduated 70,000. Half of them were
foreign students. We want America to be number one. And here is
something that could get young people involved, and NSF cannot
even give us an answer.

POSSIBLE NSF BUDGET SAVINGS

Making cuts in programs that are inefficient, ineffective,
or simply low priority is one of the ways to meet our critical
deficit reduction needs while still allowing necessary
flexibility for important NSF programs that advance our
national competitiveness.
Using the knowledge you have gained by reviewing programs
for waste, fraud, and abuse, and I think you have covered this,
can you give the Subcommittee some specific areas that we could
look at that would not hurt the sciences----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. But would allow us to make some
necessary spending changes that would help save some money for
the American taxpayer?
Ms. Lerner. Right. Well, I think at a minimum, the half
million dollars that is spent on refreshments for panelists is
something that should be looked at carefully.
Mr. Wolf. Well, if you could give us a list in addition.

The OIG does not have a basis for saying that one NSF
program should be funded over another program. We will continue
to examine NSF's external funding, particularly in regard to
contingencies and contracting, as well as the Foundation's
expenditures for its operations such as travel in order to
identify opportunities for cost savings and funds put to better
use.

Ms. Lerner. In addition to that? We will do what we can.
And we are looking for more and more areas. So if you would
like our thoughts beyond what we have identified in the light
refreshment area, we will respond.
Mr. Wolf. I think that is important, but I am thinking of
more extensive even----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Than that. Has your office studied
how the NSF measures the downstream outcomes from federal
grants and tech transfers? What is the economic impact of
National Science Foundation investments?
Ms. Lerner. Not in the period that I have been there. But
we have been having conversations just in the past month or so
figuring about how my office can get a handle on measuring how
NSF measures performance and outcomes because we think it is
critical that someone be looking critically at what processes
and what infrastructure is in place. So we will be expending
more time and effort in that area in the coming months.

NSF'S MANAGEMENT OF STIMULUS FUNDING

Mr. Wolf. Two years after the enactment of the stimulus
bill, less than a third of NSF stimulus funding has been spent.
This is the lowest stimulus expenditure rate across the entire
government.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. What does the extremely low outlay rate tell you
about the stimulating impact of these funds?
Ms. Lerner. From NSF's view of the money it received from
the Recovery Act is that, yes, what they do will have a certain
stimulative effect to the extent that you have additional
people. You are able to bring on additional investigators or
folks to do the scientific research that is being funded. But
their focus has been as much on the reinvestment, the second
area that will come from the work that they are performing.
They have also structured their awards, I think they ranged
from two to five years, so that is part of the reason you see
the obligations, the rate being as low as it is.
Mr. Wolf. But the outlays of the stimulus funds have been
even lower than NSF's own projections.
Ms. Lerner. And I do not know the precise reasons for why
it is lower than their own projections. I know they do monitor
the issue very carefully. But there are a variety of different
lengths of projects and the scientific projects.
In some instances, you have some that are cost heavy at the
beginning, others where costs are more spread out evenly over
time, and some where the majority of expenses come later in the
project. So I can only presume that that is playing out in the
slow pace of the obligation rate.
Mr. Wolf. Most of the NSF funds were used for research
grants. So some of the outlay problems may be due to inactivity
on the part of the grantee.
What is NSF doing to identify inactive grantees and recover
these awards?
Ms. Lerner. They are monitoring those pretty carefully.
They have a 99 percent plus reporting rate from the entities
who are required to report on a quarterly basis. So they are
getting the quarterly reports, and I presume they are looking
at the quarterly reports.
We have asked that where there were areas, we were very
concerned with situations where you had awards that had been
made, and it had been a year and no costs had been incurred.
And so we have tried to stay on top of the agency and ensure
that they were monitoring those awards.
And due to their own interest and the pressure that we were
putting on them, they have reached out to the recipients where
they have not had any expenditures at all to determine if there
is a rational reason for it.
Mr. Wolf. Has any of it been reclaimed?
Ms. Lerner. Any reclaimed, I do not believe that any has at
this point.
Mr. Wolf. Because there are so many others who are waiting
for an NSF grant.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. The number of people who apply is much higher
than the number of people that receive.
Ms. Lerner. Yes. Right.
Mr. Wolf. So if someone has applied and got a grant but has
not acted on it----
Ms. Lerner. Right. NSF is obviously more on top of the
precise details of this than I am, but my understanding is when
they did look at the situations where there had been that 12-
month window without--the burn rate was not what it should be,
that there were appropriate explanations for it in the
instances where they followed up.
So I do not believe that any amounts were reclaimed. That
certainly would have made sense and----
Mr. Wolf. Wouldn't it make sense to reclaim something to
demonstrate to people that if they are going to get a grant and
they have this great idea to save America----
Ms. Lerner. Absolutely.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And do something for math and
science, they ought to move on it rather than getting a grant
and then laying back? I would urge you to ask them to reclaim a
couple to stimulate the others to move ahead. If you had a
stimulating bill, you want to stimulate.
Ms. Lerner. And we did push them to do that when they were
looking at this issue. And the feedback that we got was that
there were appropriate reasons for----
Mr. Wolf. For every one, every single one?
Ms. Lerner. There were only a small number of these is my
understanding and that there were----
Mr. Wolf. How many were there?
Ms. Lerner. There were, I think, fewer than 20.
Mr. Wolf. Could you give us a list of the 20?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Lerner. Sure. I will give you a list of however many it
was. My recollection is it was fewer than 20, but, yes, we will
give you a list of that.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

NSF POLICY ON REFRESHMENTS FOR MERIT REVIEW PANELISTS

I guess on the front end of this, some could suggest that
there is no federal law here or no constitutional mandate for
us to be involved in basic research?
I agree with you in your testimony, your written testimony,
that this is a critically important area for the Federal
Government, and it is one of the things that I am most proud of
in terms of investments that we make as a country.
The National Science Foundation is the premier entity in
the world, and obviously the work that your office is doing to
improve its efficiency is important.
In defense of the coffee and doughnuts, I want to say that
there are probably some areas where you could cut, but I am not
sure that we should be inviting the most knowledgeable
scientists in the world to sit around and talk about finding a
cure for cancer and not offer coffee or some need.
I think we need to not be foolish about our efforts here.
This is a very important entity, and part of what you do is the
collaboration of scientists. There are no earmarks here. This
is all----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Rigorously reviewed, peer reviewed
research that in so many ways has helped move our country
forward. So I just think that the totality of the budget at the
National Science Foundation is less than we would spend in half
a month or that we are spending in half a month in Afghanistan.
Ms. Lerner. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. So we ought to be careful as we go forward. And
I want to get into some of the real work that I think that you
have been involved that has saved money, the recompete and the
major construction efforts in Antarctica, and if you could also
comment on the decision not to go forward in South Dakota in
terms of the investment there.
But I would just say that I hope that in the future, we can
always afford to take the best minds in the world, put them
over at the National Science Foundation for a day-long or two-
day meeting, and I think it is quite appropriate that there be
coffee and orange juice and whatever else they need so that we
can get the best of their thinking.
Ms. Lerner. Great.
Mr. Fattah. But please respond.
Ms. Lerner. Sure. And, as you know, on the issue of
refreshments, I think that is a management decision. The
situation that we found was just a wide variety in amount spent
per person across the agency. So there are some areas where you
could still provide refreshments, but save a decent amount of
money there.
Beyond that, the----
Mr. Fattah. The recompete and----
Ms. Lerner. The recompete----
Mr. Fattah. Right.

RECOMPETITION OF THE ANTARCTIC SUPPORT CONTRACT

Ms. Lerner. The recompete is an issue that we have been
monitoring very carefully. It is a delicate thing for an IG to
do when there is an open procurement. But we have been very
concerned.
NSF is not an agency that ordinarily has a lot of very
large contracts. We are a big grant making agency. But every
ten years or so, we have this enormous contract that has to be
competed and has to be competed well. And we have been dealing
with the flaws in the process of the last competition for the
past 12 years. And so what we were hoping is that they would
get it right this time.
And I am sure you are aware that there has been one
extension that they have had to grant to the current contract
because they simply did not get their act together sufficiently
in order to make the award at the time when they needed to so
that the new contract could take place and where a second
extension has now been necessary.
NSF has really finally recognized that senior management
has to pay attention to this process and make sure that it
works or it is going to slip again. And they have a group of
senior managers that meets I believe on a biweekly basis to
stay on top of the process.
They have a plan with dates. They had a plan the first time
around, but there were no dates associated with it after they
missed the first year, after they missed the first effort to
get the contract in place.
So they have a plan with dates. It is a plan that can work
so that there will not need to be a third extension, but there
is very little room for error in that plan because of the
challenge that you have, the window of opportunity you have to
do the transition. There is six months when nobody can get down
to the pole. So there is a limited window when you can do a
transition for a contractor.
If there is any slippage in the current schedule there is a
chance that it would have to be extended once again. So we are
monitoring their progress. I know NSF management is monitoring
their progress. There are some issues that are not within their
concern.
I am very happy to see that pursuant to our advice they are
getting pre-award audits done of the proposals that are in the
competitive range which should hopefully help eliminate some of
the problems that plagued the past contract. But getting those
pre-award audits is going to take some time.
They have budgeted a certain amount of time there based on
conversations with DCAA about how much time they think they
will need to do the work. But, I can tell you, you can think
you know how much time it is going to take to get in to do an
audit. But, until you get in there and start looking at the
books, you really do not know what you are going to find.
So if it turns out that DCAA needs more time to do those
very important audits, then the schedule may not be able to
hold. So we are monitoring on that and we are hopeful that if
everything works and the planets align that they can have a new
contractor in place and avoid a third extension. But, I do not
know if that will pan out.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Culberson.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you so much for the work that you do. The
inspectors general are really vital to help us do our job
better and to help us be good stewards of the taxpayers'
dollars.
I am devoted as the chairman is and other members of this
committee to the National Science Foundation and to ensure that
they are given as much support as we can possibly give them in
this environment that is difficult, but we are all going to
work hard to make sure that NSF is protected and want to be
sure the money we are sending them is well spent.

NSF'S GRANT FUNDING ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

I wanted to ask about two areas, if I could. Could you talk
about the level of funding we have been giving NSF and in your
opinion from what you have seen and analyzed and the number of
grant requests they receive what percentage of the requests
that they receive are they actually able to fund? Do you know?
Ms. Lerner. Yes. It is about a 25 percent success rate.
Mr. Culberson. Twenty-five percent of the----
Ms. Lerner. This year.
Mr. Culberson. Twenty-five percent of the eligible grant
requests that they receive, they are able to fund. And I assume
that there are criteria. You cannot even apply for a grant
unless you meet certain criteria. You are----
Ms. Lerner. It would depend on the program. There are many
different programs, but there are two main criteria that NSF
looks for, broad impact and intellectual merit. But beyond
that, I am sure that individual programs may have specific
criteria as well.
Mr. Culberson. Oh, excuse me. What I was talking about is
the eligibility of the applicant to even receive the grant
because one of the things I know that you are concerned about
and mentioned in your report is the ability of NSF to ensure
that the money is being well-spent.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson. That the recipient is actually doing what
they said they were going to do----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson. With the money----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Which is vital. And I think
your report said that NSF is only looking at a very small
fraction, seven percent, I think you said, of the----
Ms. Lerner. Through one particular program. Kind of the
jewel in their crown of monitoring only is able to touch about
seven percent.
Mr. Culberson. And the institute of this program in 2004, I
think you said in your testimony----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. That to try to track how the
money is being used by the recipient.
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson. Is there an eligibility requirement, though,
before you can even apply? I mean, are there certain----
Ms. Lerner. I do not know that there are----
Voice. There are a couple. There is the new awardee guide
and some reviews of the institutions, but the institution
eligibility is different than the PI eligibility.
Ms. Lerner. Right. A lot of our awards are made to
institutions and not individuals with the exception of certain
programs, career programs or things like that, so----
Mr. Culberson. What I was driving at is just to ensure that
they are not making awards to people that are not able to
fulfill the request, certain minimum requirements to--like any
other job----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. You have got to be a licensed
law enforcement officer before you can apply to be a, you know,
Texas state trooper, for example.
Ms. Lerner. Right. And NSF is required to check the
excluded parties list which is the list of people that are
excluded from receiving federal funds before they make any
awards, so they have a process.
Mr. Culberson. Why are they excluded? What is excluded? For
what reason will they be excluded?
Ms. Lerner. The excluded parties list is a listing of
individuals who have been suspended or debarred from doing
business with the government for any number of a wide variety
of reasons. Sometimes just lack of present responsibility,
sometimes because they have committed crimes or civil crimes.
Mr. Culberson. Those folks for sure?
Ms. Lerner. So they are supposed to accept that.
Mr. Culberson. But, I mean, there is a standard. You know,
you come in----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. To apply for a job at a, like I
say, use Texas, you know, if you are going to be a state
trooper, you got to meet certain criteria. What are the minimum
criteria of eligibility to even apply and receive a grant from
the NSF? Are they in your opinion satisfactory?
I know, for example, you award a grant to any of the major
universities of any of our districts----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. It is going to be handled
competently----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Professionally----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. In a way that we would all be
proud of.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson. What is NSF doing to make sure that there is
nobody even coming to the door asking for money that is not
capable of doing the work?
Ms. Lerner. I think that is certainly something that is
examined in the merit process when the panels look at the
proposals. They will look at the people who are the proposed
collaborators. I do not know if there is the----
Mr. Culberson. I do not know if they have a minimum set of
criteria of eligibility.
Voice. It depends on the program. Some programs, if you are
talking the PI, the person, there are some programs that do
have criteria for those people.
Mr. Culberson. Uh-huh.
Voice. You are talking institutions. There are criteria
around their financial systems, but most of the requirements
are placed back on the institution----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Voice [continuing]. To manage the awards.
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Ms. Lerner. Yes. The burden is on the institution to----
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. To oversee this.

ICE BREAKING

Mr. Culberson. Let me also ask, and the chair has been very
generous with the time, about the Ice Breaker Program.
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson. And that has been a concern of mine since I
first got on this committee several years ago when Mr. Wolf was
the chairman before. The Bush administration just issued an
executive order that transferred responsibility for the Ice
Breakers from the Coast Guard to the NSF which really alarmed
me because, of course, they need to be replaced. It was a
massive amount of money. They were in bad shape and needed to
be replaced. And that just shifted that huge liability back on
to the Coast Guard.
And I think Frank LoBiondo, Mr. Chairman----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Helped fix that. There was a
Coast Guard reauthorization done, is that correct, about three
or four years ago, right be----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson. Does that sound right, like about four or
five maybe years ago?
Ms. Lerner. Yes. That sounds about right.
Mr. Culberson. And the reauthorization, because I remember
pestering, Mr. LoBiondo was wonderful about that, the Coast
Guard is responsible again for those Ice Breakers?
Ms. Lerner. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Culberson. Is there adequate money to get the Ice
Breakers upgraded, repaired? Are they in good shape?
Ms. Lerner. I think there have been----
Mr. Culberson. Do our scientists have the ability to get to
Antarctica? Are we leasing Ice Breakers? What is the status of
that?
Ms. Lerner. My understanding at this point is that the two
ships that the Federal Government has, the two Ice Breakers
that they have, neither are capable of functioning. So we are
relying on leases.
Mr. Culberson. Out of commission?
Ms. Lerner. They are both out of commission and in the
process of getting refitted so that they can function again.
There is talk of procuring a new Ice Breaker. I gather that
that is in motion right now. But currently we are relying on
leased Ice Breakers.
Mr. Culberson. And that may be a good solution.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson. I mean, have you all looked at that? It is a
huge expense. And have you looked at it?
Ms. Lerner. The Department of Homeland Security IG has done
an audit of that process. I think they just completed that.
Mr. Culberson. That would be something worth looking at,
Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Lerner. Yes. We can provide you with a copy of their
report.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. And it may indeed----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Be more cost effective to----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Lease them. I think other
nations are using leased Ice Breakers.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson. But ours are completely out of commission. I
did not know that.
Ms. Lerner. That is my understanding.
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Ms. Lerner. Yes.

ATTEMPTS TO IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF THE MERIT REVIEW PROCESS

Mr. Culberson. Any areas I know the committee asked you
about that you could identify--if they have already asked you,
forgive me.
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson. I was hung up and could not get here. Areas
that you find we could help make the money we are able to give
to the NSF to reach those grant recipients and how can we save
money at the NSF and ensure the money reaches the folks that
need it----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. And not diminish our already
diminishing abilities in science?
Ms. Lerner. Well, I think one thing that NSF is doing right
now that is really exciting and that could lead to some savings
and some efficiencies in their merit review process, they have
an ongoing pilot of using Second Life as a way to conduct
panels so that every panel does not have to be done at NSF.
You have I think about 19,000 scientists that come to NSF
every year to do merit review panels at NSF. You know, that is
a lot of people coming through. A lot of time and effort to get
them here, a lot of time for them away from their work.
So NSF has a pilot right now where they are using Second
Life to evaluate proposals. And they have done it, I gather, in
about six instances and it seems to be working well. And I do
not think that is a----
Mr. Culberson. Yeah. If I could----
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. Solution----
Mr. Culberson. Forgive me. I am sorry----
Ms. Lerner. Yeah.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. For interrupting. And the
chairman has been very generous and----
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. I am going to pass because he
has been so kind with the time. We want to make sure everybody
knows what Second Life is. That is basically a virtual reality
world where you sit----
Ms. Lerner. A virtual reality world.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Playing Avatar and we are all
sitting----
Ms. Lerner. You have an Avatar and they----
Mr. Culberson. Looking at each other.
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. Are doing merit review by Avatar,
exactly.
Mr. Culberson. Time talking to each other.
Ms. Lerner. You can talk to each other----
Mr. Culberson. We can all look like----
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. So you get the camaraderie. You
have the ability to talk and the feedback that is----
Mr. Culberson. Real time.
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. In place from some of the people
participating is that you have that ability to interact. You
lose that if you try and do panels by mail. You just lose that
human connection which is an important part of the merit review
process. But with this Avatar situation, you have that, but you
do not have the time to go out to dinner in the evening or
lunch.
So something is lost, but you gain people not having to
travel. You may be able to attract some people who would not be
able to take the time and effort to come to NSF and
participate. So I think that that is a pilot program that they
should really look at expanding and utilizing where appropriate
across the foundation. I think it would be an efficient way.
Mr. Culberson. Get a real-time meeting like this, we can
all be----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. 21 years old and in perfect
physical condition.
Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman, maybe we could have our hearings
like that, you know.
Ms. Lerner. Well, and the beauty is it costs about $3,600 a
year to have the agreement with the entity that runs Second
Life and the average panel costs about $10,000. So you save.
You know, you do one panel this way and you have paid for a
whole year's worth of the ability to use this. So I think it is
exciting and wonderful.
Mr. Fattah. Let me ask a serious question about that. What
about the security of the----
Ms. Lerner. That is something that I want to have a
conversation with NSF about and make sure that all the
procedures are in place.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Have you found out that Second Life has been as
successful as the panels coming in? Has anyone looked at that
to see that the Second Life--is it teleconferencing? Is that
pretty much what it is?
Ms. Lerner. It is teleconferencing and then some because
you have these Avatars sitting talking.
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Mr. Culberson. Virtual world.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. Do you then check to see that it has been as
successful as it is when the panelists come in? Has anyone
looked at the comparison?
Ms. Lerner. My understanding is that the groups that have
done this, some have found it to be useful and the panels have
worked well. Some of the feedback that I have seen from the
participants is very positive. Some missed the human touch.
Mr. Wolf. Sure.
Ms. Lerner. So I think that is why it is in pilot right
now. And it is the sort of thing that has been tried in a
focused area. It seems to me to make sense to expand it out,
continue monitoring it. But the potential in that program is
great for efficiencies and good ways to get the people who
might not be able to commit to----
Mr. Wolf. Sure.
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. Flying to D.C., especially in
crazy weather like we have had lately, and participating.
Mr. Wolf. It makes sense.
Mr. Aderholt.
Mr. Aderholt. I do not have anything.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Austria.

TRENDS IN GRANT APPLICATIONS, EXTENSIONS AND AWARD RATES

Mr. Austria. Mr. Chairman, just I appreciate, as a new
member, the Second Life is very interesting. I appreciate the
things that you are doing in helping provide opportunities to
research and science and engineering for our universities and
colleges. Just a quick follow-up on the number of grants. You
mentioned 25 percent.
Ms. Lerner. Yes.
Mr. Austria. How many of those are extensions and how many
of those are new grants? And when you say 25 percent, is the
number of requests increasing, decreasing? What is it made of
because it seems like this is the way of the future?
Ms. Lerner. Right. Right. And can I get back to you with
what the answer is for that? I do not have all of those facts
committed to memory.

The OIG does not maintain its own information regarding the
number of proposals, nor does it track trends. The most
comprehensive source for the number of proposals submitted to
NSF is the ``Report to the National Science Board on the
National Science Foundation's Merit Review Process, Fiscal Year
2009.'' The report is available at: http://www.nsf.gov/
publications/2010/nsb1027.pdf. That report's executive summary
(attached) provides an overview of awards made and some trends
indicated in FY 09.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Austria. In general, I assume that the requests of
grants are increasing; is it?
Ms. Lerner. Yes, I believe so. I mean, do we----
Voice. The requests for grants are pretty stable.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Voice. The issue is how much can we fund them because of
the money.
Ms. Lerner. Right. The number, if you heard my colleague,
is pretty stable, but the issue is how many can be funded. And
with more money, the success rate goes up or not.

NSF PORNOGRAPHY SCANDAL FOLLOWUP

Mr. Austria. Let me just touch on another area. You know,
soon after you came into the position as inspector general,
there was some significant things that happened as far as
within NSF with employees, with taxpayer dollars, with the
computers, with going to inappropriate sites, things like that.
Can you maybe just brief this committee or assure this
committee that proper safeguard has been put in place to
prevent that from happening in the future? And are you able to
detail those safeguards that you put in place to assure that
that does not happen again?
Ms. Lerner. Well, most of those incidents predated my
arrival at NSF, but we were in the process of dealing with the
agency and ensuring that it made the changes that were
necessary to plug some of the holes that allowed situations
like that to occur.
So it is the agency's problem to fix. And as the IG, I
cannot fix the problems for them, but I can make sure that they
do. I am there to oversee and make sure that they do the right
things. So as a result of that, they have put in place e-mail
filters, and let me pull my little note here, e-mails and
internet filters so that we will not have situations where
someone can sit for eight hours a day for multiple days a week
and watch porn at their desk.
They have also beefed up their IT security training so that
people are more aware of what they can and cannot do. They have
circulated information out to NSF staff that they should report
issues like that to my office so that if there are any further
problems, we will become aware.
We have followed up fairly regularly with the IT security
staff to make sure that they are doing what they said they were
going to do to ensure that these problems will not happen
again.
They have Blue Coat technology in place on most of their
networks. They have a separate high speed network that is used
by limited people for limited purposes that does not yet have
Blue Coat technology, but we are working with them to make sure
that they do what they can to ensure that that network will not
be able to be used inappropriately.
But it is a situation where you fix one hole and another
one appears. So I think that it requires constant vigilance on
the part of NSF management and on my office to ensure that we
do not fix one problem and then have another one.
Mr. Austria. And I appreciate your efforts to address that
and put those safeguards in place. And I did not mean to imply
at all that it was under your watch that all this occurred.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Well, this is a little bit toward the
substantive area, which is not your involvement, but I do want
to commend the agency. I have been paying some attention to the
work related to neuroscience, both on the cognitive side and on
the brain injury side. And given that our colleague,
Congresswoman Giffords, was speaking in her own voice
yesterday, I think that we should acknowledge the great science
that really is going on as part of the efforts of the agency. I
know you have a tough job because in all this good news, you
are looking for the bad news. And that is what auditors do.
That is what your job is.
But given the $10 billion, both the annual and the stimulus
dollars, and the thousands of awards, I think that it is pretty
clear that this is a first-class operation. And obviously in
any operation including our own here in the Congress, there are
times when we have unpleasant circumstances that we have to
deal with. So we appreciate the work you do in helping to make
the National Science Foundation the premier entity in the
world.

CYBER SECURITY

I am all for Second Life, Mr. Chairman, but I think that we
should be concerned about security issues. This is taxpayer-
paid research and, as you know, you were talking yesterday
about cyber security issues. And, particularly, we have a great
deal of espionage by economic competitors and others. I know
that we are for intellectual curiosity, and we are for sharing
information, and we want to be friends to the world, but we
want to get the first benefit of our research here in the
United States of America and not have it shared. So just in the
chase for efficiency, we ought to be careful and make sure that
we do things that actually protect the long-term public
interest.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I think Mr. Fattah makes a very good point.
I would share that too. And it leads me to ask the question,
have there been any cyber attacks against your computers?
Ms. Lerner. Yes, there have.
Mr. Wolf. By what countries?
Ms. Lerner. I do not know. We were not able to tell because
the computers were wiped before our folks were able to look at
them and----
Mr. Wolf. Who wiped the computers clean?
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. NSF IT staff and----
Mr. Wolf. Did they not tell you who did it?
Ms. Lerner. I do not know that they know. What we
understand is that some NSF material--and there was an article
about this in Nextgov--turned up on a server in the former
Soviet Union. And so my office is very concerned about how that
happened and how the computers came to be wiped before we were
able to see if we could work with prosecutors and get to the
bottom of what happened there. And we are going to be working
with the agency to ensure that situations like that do not
happen again and that the IT security processes are tightened
up.
Mr. Wolf. When did this happen?
Ms. Lerner. Over Christmastime.
Mr. Wolf. We are going to ask the FBI to look at it, too,
if we can. My computer was stripped by the Chinese, and there
were 16 other Members of the House whose computers were
stripped in addition to the International Relations Committee.
A number of government agencies went out of their way to
urge me not to say who had done it, but they knew it was the
Chinese.
I am sure NSF and NSA know who did it. And I think we
should find out.
Have there been other attacks over the last several years?
Ms. Lerner. Not of that nature that I am aware of.
Mr. Wolf. You have checked to see how many cyber attacks--
--
Ms. Lerner. NSF is supposed to activate a CERT that
includes participation by my office when a situation like that
occurs. And they have not activated that cert.
My office has been increasingly concerned about the quality
and the caliber of IT security within the foundation. And we
are going to be expanding our efforts to evaluate the controls
that are in place so that we can all be assured that adequate
security, you know, that----
Mr. Wolf. Is there information given to NSF employees when
they travel to China or Russia or Syria or whatever, not to
take their BlackBerries or their telephones?
Ms. Lerner. I am not aware of that. I am not aware of that.
I am not aware. I can----
Mr. Wolf. Shouldn't there be a policy? Has there been
anyone from the NSF that has gone to China, Syria or Russia in
the last year?
Ms. Lerner. I know there have been folks who have been to
China. I do not know in the last year, but certainly in the
past couple of years.
Mr. Wolf. But 30 seconds after you go through----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. The terminal, you are compromised.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. Could you ask the Bureau to see how many other
attacks have occurred, and could you tell us what the travel
policy is? Maybe when the director comes up here, they could
tell us what the policy is for----

Since 2007, NSF's Computer Incident Response Team (of which
OIG is a member) was activated two times--once in 2007 and,
most recently, in 2011.
NSF informed my office that it does not have specific
information security policies for NSF employees traveling
abroad, though it did note the following:
--All NSF staff are required to take annual IT security
training.
--All mobile ICT equipment (laptops, Blackberries, etc.)
issued by NSF to staff are encrypted and password protected.
--The Department of State must approve the travel of NSF
staff travelling on official business to any country. OISE
coordinates the ``country clearance'' process. When clearance
is requested for travel to China, State provides warnings/
guidelines related to use of mobile devices in China, and this
is shared with each traveler.
--The NSF overseas offices (Beijing, Tokyo, Paris) operate
under Embassy umbrella and are therefore subject to all
Department of State requirements for USG officials in each
country.

Ms. Lerner. Absolutely.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. NSF employees who travel abroad----
Ms. Lerner. We will absolutely do that.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Because I think Mr. Fattah is very
accurate.
Ms. Lerner. That is why our office was very concerned when
we got word of this attack and then went to look into things
and found that the machines had been wiped. So I think it is an
area where we are going to be spending a lot of time.
Mr. Wolf. And NSA did that?
Ms. Lerner. Not NSA. NSF.
Mr. Wolf. But who wiped them? Your own people?
Ms. Lerner. Not my people. NSF IT staff is my
understanding.
Mr. Wolf. Why did they do that?
Ms. Lerner. Because they believed it was standard operating
procedure in a situation like that. So we have a lot of work to
do in that area to ensure that they know how to handle an
attack like this.
Mr. Wolf. Well, maybe what we will do is just ask the FBI
and their cyber people to come over to the National Science
Foundation, and I think you should be there. They can give
everybody a briefing as to what is going on and then look to
see that your computers are sound and safe. We will do that. We
will make a call this afternoon and connect the Bureau with
your office.
Ms. Lerner. Great.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.

CONTRACTING PRACTICES

You have done a lot of work documenting NSF's problems
monitoring cost reimbursement contracts. But before we talk
about those implementation problems, I want to talk about why
NSF is using this type of contract vehicle to begin with. With
cost reimbursement contracts, the risk is on the government,
and they are the most difficult and expensive to administer.
Yet, NSF relies on them almost exclusively.
Do you think NSF has adequate justification for its use of
cost reimbursement contracts, and could they effectively meet
program goals using a different contract vehicle?
Ms. Lerner. I think there may be some instances where--
obviously the preferred method of contracting to use is fixed
price contracting. I believe there are probably some instances
where cost reimbursement contracts makes sense for NSF, but it
has to be done right. It has to be done rigorously.
I really question the use of advanced payments in here, but
it cannot be done without the groundwork to ensure that we know
how the costs are going to be charged and how we are going to
be billed and there is agreement on that from the outset.
And when NSF fails to get cost accounting disclosure
statements, fails to have accounting systems audited, pays in
advance on the high-risk contracts, you have just got a recipe
for real problems. They could utilize the contracts when
appropriate if they did things the right way. And I would have
much less concern. I would still prefer that they rely more on
fixed price contracts, but I understand there are certain
instances when that just does not make sense.
Mr. Wolf. Through audits of existing contracts, you have
found that the accounting controls needed to determine whether
NSF is overpaying its contractors often do not exist.
Until those accounting controls are fixed, what can we say
about the chances that NSF has been making improper payments
under those contracts? And if you can answer that, then do you
know what the magnitude of these improper payments could
possibly be?
Ms. Lerner. I certainly think there is a risk of improper
payments in the situation that we have found when there is no
approved accounting system in place. The magnitude of it could
be--I could not speculate as to that.
Mr. Wolf. Could be what? Try to finish that sentence.
Ms. Lerner. It would be pure speculation on my part.
Mr. Wolf. Well, let's speculate for a moment.
Ms. Lerner. You know, it could be anything. I mean, it
could be minor and it could be tremendously major. The problem
is we just do not know.
Mr. Wolf. What should we do to know?
Ms. Lerner. Well, what I would like to do is under
contracts, if I can, when we start our data analytics
capability, we can monitor payments under the contracts on a
real-time basis in a meaningful way and even potentially get
down to the transaction level. So I think improved use of data
analytics both by my staff and by NSF staff would give everyone
a lot better sense that the money is being used appropriately.
Mr. Wolf. This may be a controversial question, but I say
this as a supporter of the NSF, and I think Mr. Fattah and Mr.
Culberson are, too. In the CR that the House is marking up, we
are doing everything we can to protect NSF. I believe America
is falling behind in science, so I am with you.
But should we ask GAO to look at how these contracts are
being done? I mean, would it be helpful, not in an adversarial
way, to have the GAO come in to look at some of these things?
You know, iron sharpens iron. The intention is not to catch
somebody, not to embarrass anyone. But should we ask the GAO
just to look at these things?
Ms. Lerner. Well, GAO has already come into NSF. In fact,
one of the reasons that there is a significant deficiency in
contract management of cost reimbursement contracts is because
GAO looked at that issue across the government and focused a
lot on several agencies including NSF in the 2009 time frame
and found some real problems with what NSF was doing. They were
looking at NSF in addition to I think it was about ten other
different federal agencies.
So they have come in and looked and pointed out problems,
but certainly I think there could be value in having them come
in in a nonadversarial fashion and look a little more deeply
and carefully at----
Mr. Wolf. Well, why don't we just ask the GAO to do that,
just to make sure that, as Mr. Culberson said, every dollar
that is available is used in such a way that America can have a
renaissance, be number one in the sciences, innovate and do all
the things we want to do. So, we will ask that GAO do that. You
can go back and tell NSF that we are not trying to catch
anybody. I am sure that every congressional office could be
looked at up here, and they could----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Probably all be run better if
somebody came in to tell them better ideas. On another topic,
your office has identified problems with the way that NSF
allows grantees to access contingency funds that are built into
the construction budget. Specifically, regular project funds
and contingencies are intermixed, and the grantee does not need
NSF approval to spend contingency money.
How does this policy encourage poor fiscal management?
Ms. Lerner. We are very concerned about that. This is a
brand new issue. It first surfaced in an audit that was
conducted by DCAA for us. It was issued at the end of
September. It surfaced again in another audit that DCAA did in
January. And we are trying to get a handle around the issue
right now, how NSF has done this, how it has happened.
Contingencies, I can certainly see in conducting a project
why there might be a need for some contingent funds, funds for
contingencies. But why NSF instead of holding the funds
internally and providing them when they are needed to the
awardee, why NSF just takes what looks to us to be a very
generous estimate of what those contingencies would be and
allows the awardee to handle it with very few constraints on it
is concerning to us.
So we are trying to understand better why NSF is doing what
it is doing, how contingencies are handled by other federal
agencies, and we are going to look specifically at some closed
projects to see how the contingency funds that they had were
actually spent. Were they used for contingencies or do they
just cover cost overruns that relate more to problems with
project management than to actual contingencies. So we are
trying to dig very deeply into this issue that has just
surfaced.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. I just have a couple more questions, and we
will submit others for the record.

GRANTS MANAGEMENT

Some of NSF's basic grant management activities decreased
over the course of the last fiscal year. Site visits, for
example, were down by 20 percent.
What do you believe is the cause for this decrease in
oversight activity? Is it tied to the workload burden of
simultaneously managing stimulus grants with normal NSF
activity and what do you believe has been the impact on the
management of NSF grants generally?
Ms. Lerner. NSF has indicated that they, instead of doing
the 30 site visits that they planned, they were only able to do
24 because of staffing, because of lack of resources. I do not
know precisely how much money they have, but it seems to me
that getting people out to do those visits should be a priority
to NSF management.
But I am concerned and have been concerned about the extent
to which NSF staff has been stretched. You have got people who
really care about what they do and who try to do the best they
can, but they have a lot of work to do to start with.
And then with the stimulus activity being added on to it
and no additional hiring being done in the administrative
group, I think that people are being pushed to a level that is
beyond their capability to do their job as well as they should.
And we are starting a job right now to look at the extent
to which the span of control of individual program officers has
increased over time so that we can get a sense of how much
these people used to have to do in the past and how much they
are having to do now and what NSF is doing to make it so that,
if as we suspect, they are having to do a lot more right now
with less, what can NSF do to work smarter.
I do not have the immediate answers, but I think it is a
real concern that these people are stretched and we need to
position them to be able to do their jobs well.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. I just have one last issue and then I will
go to Mr. Fattah or any other members that have anything. And
we will have other questions which we will submit for the
record.

DISSEMINATION OF STEM EDUCATION FINDINGS

NSF spends a lot of money and effort on research about how
best to implement STEM education, creating model programs and
developing curricula. But there are already many schools out
there that are highly successful in STEM education and have
figured out effective curricula and methods.
That is why I had suggested that NSF get together some
experts, identify those success stories, and focus on getting
their methods replicated.
Does this make more sense than investing so much effort in
reinventing what these schools have already done?
Ms. Lerner. It would certainly seem, you know. I know that
there is a lot of question about overlap and effectiveness of
those programs. And I think you raise a good question there.
Mr. Wolf. Well, hopefully we can do that. We will ask them
and you can raise it with them.
I worry about, the country and whether we are falling
behind.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. I mean, China graduated 700,000 engineers. We
graduated only 70,000. Norm Augustine's Gathering Storm report
talks that about how last year, China graduated more English
speaking engineers than we graduated.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. And America is falling behind.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. And, yet, we know there are things out there that
are working. When I go into schools and talk to the young
people, there are some very positive things being done around
the country that we could put out so that people could know
where to go and so.
Okay. Well, thank you for your testimony. Based on that, we
will ask the FBI to look at the cybersecurity incidents. Tell
them to keep us informed of any cyber attacks that are made. I
think it should be publicized and not hidden, what attacks have
been made and by what countries. Our FBI knows and NSA knows.
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Wolf. They know. They may not want you to say, but we
should let people know.
So we will ask the bureau to come over and do that. And
then we will ask GAO to come over and look at some of these
questions that we have raised.
Mr. Fattah, do you have any thing else?
Mr. Fattah. I know we are going to move on. I want to ask
some questions for the record.
Mr. Wolf. Sure.

DEEP UNDERGROUND SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING LABORATORY

Mr. Fattah. One of the more successful efforts your office
was involved in was looking at the ocean observatory
initiative. And if you could supply some additional information
about----
Ms. Lerner. Certainly.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. The issues there. And in South
Dakota, I mentioned this earlier, I am on Energy and Water
also, so----
Ms. Lerner. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. There was a project which in the
National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy were
going to collaborate----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. And which you have now decided,
maybe for very good reasons, not to, and I do not know to what
degree your office was involved, this is a program decision,
so----
Ms. Lerner. Exactly.

As the Ranking Member Mr. Fattah noted, NSF's participation
in DUSEL would be a program decision. The OIG does not have
information pertaining to that matter.

Mr. Fattah. But if you have any information, we would be
interested in it. And on the chairman's point, one of the great
programs that you have in terms of the development of
scientists, this is women scientists, is a program where
different institutions around the country have really become
the focal point for getting young girls into----
Ms. Lerner. Right.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. STEM education. And I do not know
whether you have looked at this for any particular reason, but
I did want to mention it because I think it is one of the
things that may be right up the chairman's alley around some of
the things that can be done to get populations that previously
have not necessarily been at the very forefront of people's
minds in these areas engaged around them.
So thank you for your testimony.
And I thank the chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Lerner. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Wolf. Do you have any follow up?
Mr. Culberson. If I can very quickly.
Mr. Wolf. Sure.

CYBER SECURITY, CONTINUED

Mr. Culberson. I just wanted to confirm, make sure I
understand that I heard you say you are increasingly concerned
about cyber security at NSF. I heard you say that they do not
have, it sounds like, any standardized policy for dealing with
a threat once it is discovered. They thought it was standard--
--
Ms. Lerner. They have a policy, but I do not know if it is
the best policy and I do not know if it is always followed.
Mr. Culberson. Okay. And also I did not hear you mention
that they have any standardized policy to protect against
attack. Apparently everything you mentioned were things they
discovered after the fact.
Ms. Lerner. They have patches, I mean, and they have
monitoring. They were aware of the incident that occurred in
December before the news occurred, hit the paper, but because
they could see----
Mr. Culberson. After the fact.
Ms. Lerner. They could----
Mr. Culberson. But my question is----
Ms. Lerner. Well, they could see the information being
pulled out of the computers. So they are monitoring, but I
think----
Mr. Culberson. Right. But my----
Ms. Lerner [continuing]. They were not necessarily
sensitive to why it might have been going.
Mr. Culberson. Yes, ma'am. Is NSF in the room? Sure. Okay.
Great. We love you. We are devoted to you. But these are things
when you come up, because truly you guys--our investment in the
sciences and our space program and in encouraging kids to
become scientists and engineers is what is going to save this
Nation. So we are devoted to you. But this is really alarming.
And the chairman is exactly right and Mr. Fattah. All of us
are devoted to you, but this has got to stop. I mean, you have
got to have obviously a policy in place to protect against
attacks, which it sounds like you do not have, to handle them
afterwards. Obviously there has been serious breaches of
security attacks on NSF computers.
And we are also, I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, very
concerned about when NSF comes in to talk to us that you are
paying for work in advance before the work is done, that you
are giving large sums of money to grantees before the research
is done and do not have good accounting procedures in place to
make sure that the money is actually being spent for the
purpose for which either the contractor or the grantee applied
for because dollars are so scarce.
We are in a whole new environment. This is an age of
austerity unlike anything this country has ever faced before.
We want to help you and we are going to do everything we can to
help you, but we just want to be absolutely certain, the
committee wants to be certain every dollar we give you is
actually reaching scientists and researchers that are going to
do the work intended and that you are good stewards of our
precious dollars and you are protecting the valuable
intellectual property that you are stewards of.
Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
Ms. Lerner. Thank you all.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. We are now going to hear from Paul Martin from
NASA.
Why don't you proceed as you see fit. Your full statement
will be on the record, and then there will be questions.
Thursday, February 10, 2011.

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

PAUL K. MARTIN, INSPECTOR GENERAL
Mr. Martin. Thank you.

Opening Remarks of Inspector General Martin

Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, and members of the
Subcommittee: Today NASA finds itself in a state of significant
uncertainty, particularly with respect to its Human Space
Program. The immediate challenge facing NASA is managing the
Agency's broad portfolio of space, science, and aeronautics
projects amid the continuing lack of clarity about its budget
in 2011 and in the out years.
Last month, we sent a letter to Congress describing
conflicting directives in NASA's 2010 Authorization Act and the
continuing resolution that prevents the Agency from terminating
Constellation contracts or initiating new space exploration
programs.
NASA officials told us that by March 1st they anticipate
spending up to $215 million on Constellation projects that had
they been given a free hand, they would have considered
canceling or significantly scaling back.
Moreover, by the end of this fiscal year that figure could
grow to more than $575 million if NASA is unable to move beyond
the planning stages for its new Space Exploration Program.
In our letter, we recommended that Congress take immediate
action to address this situation, and we encourage this
subcommittee to support a legislative solution as soon as
possible.
Moving on to the broader focus of this hearing, the OIG has
identified the following as key issues facing NASA in 2011: The
future of U.S. spaceflight; acquisition and project management;
infrastructure and facilities management; human capital;
information technology security; and financial management.
My written statement contains a detailed discussion of
these six challenges. Rather than restate that testimony, I
offer three observations to provide context for our submission.
First, with respect to spaceflight, NASA's top priority is
to safely complete the Space Shuttle's two or three remaining
flights.
In addition, NASA is directed in the Authorization Act to
develop a new space launch system and multipurpose crew vehicle
that use Constellation and Shuttle technologies, ``to the
extent practicable.''
At the same time, the agency continues its efforts to
foster development of commercial cargo and crew capabilities.
One key unanswered question is whether NASA will receive the
level of funding necessary to address both of these priorities
on an aggressive yet realistic time table.
Second, NASA has historically struggled with establishing
realistic cost and schedule estimates for its science and space
exploration projects. The James Webb Space Telescope is the
most recent example of this problem.
In 2003, NASA said it planned to launch the Webb Telescope
in 2011 at an estimated cost of $1.6 billion. However, last
November an independent review concluded that the earliest
possible launch date was September 2015. But even this date
depended on the project making critical management changes and
receiving an additional $500 million over the next two years.
The new total estimated life cycle cost for the Webb Telescope:
$6.5 billion.
And third, it is important to keep in mind when evaluating
NASA's performance that for some projects it really is rocket
science. And I say that both a bit humorously and a bit
seriously. The engineering required for many of NASA's science
and space exploration projects is complex and visionary, but
the agency must do a better job to manage costs and scheduling.
To its credit, NASA has made a concerted effort over the
past several years to improve its management practices and
address these systemic weaknesses. Nevertheless, significant
challenges remain.
The Office of Inspector General is committed to providing
independent, aggressive, and objective oversight as NASA seeks
to meet these challenges.
I would be pleased to answer the Subcommittee's questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.

FINDING SAVINGS IN THE NASA BUDGET

From your perspective as Inspector General, what areas of
the NASA budget would you recommend we look into as possible
sources of budget savings?
I think you have a subcommittee made up of people who are
very, very supportive of NASA. I do not have a NASA facility in
my congressional district, but, I think it is very, very
important and I think that contribution to the country has been
very, very important.
And so knowing these tight times, what would you recommend
that we look at if you have to eliminate? Also, in the process,
are there programs where there is an overlap? Are NOAA and NASA
doing the same thing, whereby NASA could do more of it and we
could reduce the NOAA budget? Or NOAA would do it, and we would
free up the NASA budget to put a man on Mars and keep faith
with aeronautics? What are you thinking when you look at it
from your perspective?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Mr. Wolf.
Let me tee up three areas. The first would be what I cited
in my oral remarks and what we mentioned in our statement. And
that is the conundrum created by the conflict between the
holdover language in the CR that does not allow NASA to
terminate the current Constellation contracts and begin a new
program with the directives contained in NASA's 2010
Authorization Act.
There are big dollars at stake. I think NASA, to its
credit, is doing what it can at this point to redirect those
Constellation contracts to areas that it hopes will be part of
the next Space Exploration Program, but they need to be freed
from these constraints. So I think that is the first issue.
And, again, there are significant dollars there.
Secondly, and I also touched on this, NASA must do a better
job with its project management both in its cost estimations at
the front end and its project management as the project moves
forward.
I think the taxpayers, and certainly this Committee and the
public, have the right to know that if we are going to do
really ground-breaking technological science like James Webb,
and it really is ground-breaking, NASA needs to inform the
public we can do James Webb, but we can do it for $3 billion or
$5 billion.
And so NASA and Congress can make a decision with the
limited resources whether that is where we want to expend our
dollars. But to go into a program, even something as visionary
as James Webb, and estimate that it is going to cost $1.6
billion and then find yourself ten years later multiple years
behind schedule and several billion dollars above estimate is
just not the way to run a railroad.
So some of these projects are incredibly expensive and
incredibly visionary and incredibly important. And NASA should
be on the cutting edge, but they need to do a better job at the
front end saying this is our business case, this is our best
cost estimating, and as the project moves forward managing
those resources.
And, third, I would cite as an area for possible cost
savings, NASA has at least ten facilities, NASA Centers spread
out across the country. I would cite the aging infrastructure.
NASA has over 5,400 buildings, laboratories, warehouses, and
facilities. Eighty percent of NASA facilities are over 40 years
old. There is a tremendous amount of what they call deferred
maintenance. NASA spends about $300 million every year just
fixing the roof and plugging the holes, sort of mandatory
maintenance. There is $2.5 billion worth of deferred
maintenance, major renovations, repairs, or demolitions and
construction that need to happen.
In the 2010 NASA authorization bill, Congress directed NASA
to deliver a report by October of this year taking a hard look
at NASA's facilities, trying to identify redundancies, areas
that we could downsize (I do not like to use the word right
size) but looking at ways to handle this infrastructure problem
because, again, with $2.5 billion in deferred maintenance,
given the tight economic times, that number is only going to
increase.
So those would be the three areas I would cite.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Well, it would be helpful if you had the
report before October. Maybe you could ask NASA to update the
Committee or the Subcommittee on a continuing basis.

OIG FINDINGS ON CONSTELLATION SPENDING UNDER THE CR

On the Constellation spending, I have a question. NASA
Headquarters told us they disagree with your findings, and they
believe that they have appropriately targeted their contracts
to activities that would be directly applicable to the new
exploration program or are required to maintain a minimal level
of program readiness.
How do you respond to this contention? How do the data and
methodology you used differ from what NASA is using to reach
the opposite conclusion? I think this really has to be
resolved. You cannot have he said, he said. We have got to
resolve this thing. So what is your response to the NASA
comments?
Mr. Martin. I read the two-page NASA clarification, and I
find it a bit ironic. Here is our methodology in coming up with
the numbers that are in our letter.
We went to the NASA people, the people running the
Constellation Program, the people at Headquarters who the
Constellation Program reports to, and we said given the
conundrum created by the CR, the provision in the CR, along
with the new directive in the NASA 2010 Authorization bill, if
you were freed, if you had the ability to close down
Constellation contracts and move in this new direction, what
spending that you are doing now wouldn't you do.
These are their numbers. These are their answers. They are
not our answers. They are not the Inspector General's policy
call about which money is not being used efficiently. That is
our methodology, asking the program people.

CHALLENGES WITH COST ESTIMATION AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT

Mr. Wolf. NASA continues to experience major challenges in
accurately estimating costs and then managing programs to stay
within the estimates. In the fiscal 2010 review of NASA's
costliest projects, the GAO found that 10 of the 19 projects
have experienced overruns, with an average budget overrun of
over 19 percent and an average schedule delay of 15 months.
NASA implemented a new cost estimation policy in 2009 that is
intended to produce more rigorous and realistic budget
projections for major missions.
When do you believe we can begin assessing whether this
policy has actually improved the accuracy of NASA's cost
estimates?
Mr. Martin. I think given the dollars involved and the
importance, we need to start doing that right now. I think with
two or three years under their belt, we will have some sense of
whether their new procedures are effective.
Again, as I mentioned at the outset, some of these more
innovative, visionary projects, whether the technology is not
mature and whether there is just not sound management
practices, it is a very big issue.
We have recently opened a new audit that is going to
examine the role of project managers at NASA: do they have the
appropriate experience, the appropriate training, are they
given the appropriate authority to make the difficult calls as
they manage these projects.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NASA AUTHORIZATION ACT

We have been concerned about the Administration's hostility
toward manned spaceflight and exploration over the past two
years. The President's fiscal year 2011 budget would have
effectively ended NASA's exploration program. However, the NASA
authorization that the Congress passed explicitly mandates a
strong exploration program.
Do you believe that NASA is, to the best of its ability,
complying with the exploration provisions of NASA's
authorization of last year?
Mr. Martin. I do. Again, we have the conundrum that we
articulated in our January 13th letter. I think they are doing
about as well as they can under the constraint and the
prohibitive language in the existing CR to try to effectuate
what the new directive is in the 2010 authorization. But,
frankly, they are between a rock and a hard place.
Mr. Wolf. Have they come up to speak to the authorizers? If
they do not agree with you, obviously they have not come up to
say that.
Mr. Martin. Excuse me. They do agree. They agree with the
bottom line that NASA, this provision, the holdover provision
in the CR needs to be removed. There is complete agreement.
What they are dickering with a bit are the numbers. We
cited it as politely as possible, ``potential inefficient use
of taxpayers' funds,'' the $215 million number and the $575
million number. That is what they are attempting to clarify.
But they are not attempting to clarify, they agree a hundred
percent, that this limitation in the current CR needs to be
removed.
Mr. Wolf. Do you have any recommendations on how NASA can
achieve its exploration objectives beyond low earth orbit?
Mr. Martin. Mr. Wolf, I really do not. As a lawyer and as
an Inspector General, we do not do policy. We do not, you know,
say ``commercial crew development'' versus keeping it in house
at NASA. That is not really our role there.
Mr. Wolf. Then do we bring in four or five of the best
minds in the country who are not connected to the issue that
can look at this thing? Because we need a strong space program
for military reasons and for other reasons.
How do you bring clarity? Quite frankly, I am not so sure,
with due respect to the Congress, that the Congress knows
precisely what to do. If you had a very serious disease that no
one could figure out, we would send you up to Johns Hopkins or
maybe bring some of the very best people in the country to look
at your case to make a recommendation.
We know we want to have a manned space exploration program.
I think everyone in the country agrees, except for maybe a
handful. The science advisor at the White House may not be in
that group, but everybody else agrees.
How do we do it without this back and forth?
Maybe you cannot answer that now, but it has got to be
answered. You cannot just kick the can down the road.
Mr. Martin. It needs to be answered. After spending about a
dozen years at the Department of Justice, I have been Inspector
General, at the NASA OIG for about a year now and it has just
been fascinating.
But there are starkly different policy-based visions, and I
think everyone is of good faith, about what is the most
appropriate and effective use of the taxpayers' money moving
forward. Should NASA really be a test bed of research and
innovation and should it fund the commercial sector for some of
the low earth orbit both cargo and crew?
And NASA should think about this. Some of the legislative
language they use funds the R&D for some of these sort of game
changing technologies that could get us to Mars and beyond, is
that NASA's primary role while encouraging commercial, or
should NASA continue as it has historically by building or
contracting out and keeping under its purview the actual, you
know, rockets and flight instruments themselves. And these
visions really are conflicting. I think the Authorization Act
attempts to bring them both together.
Mr. Wolf. Do you think it did?
Mr. Martin. I do not know about the science yet. But I do
not know in these funding times whether this compromise, this
sort of shotgun marriage, is going to be funded adequately to
achieve this, on the kind of timetable that Congress is looking
for, the capability to move beyond low earth orbit. I just do
not know.
I am not sure you can split the pie that NASA is going to
get and say, well, we are going to give this amount to
commercial crew and we are going to give this amount to NASA to
fund its own heavy lift system.
Mr. Wolf. Well, just think about it. If there are things
that NASA is doing that are not part of the organic act, you
could then take those resources to put them into what the
authorization said.
But let me just turn it over to Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You said that what
NASA is doing is, in large measure, actually rocket science,
which I thought was a great line.
Mr. Martin. We used to use that, excuse me, over at the
Department of Justice where we are saying it is not rocket
science. Well----
Mr. Fattah. I got you. And I want to use that analogy, I
want to use that analogy in my own way. Which is that, you
know, I really love the programs side of this. You have got a
much tougher job. And people are generally not fans of
auditors. So I want to focus on the purpose of NASA, all right?
Because I went to the greatest high school in the world,
Overbrook High School in Philadelphia. And we got a lot of
attention because a great basketball player went there, Wilt
Chamberlain. But we had another guy by the name of Guion
Bluford, who ended up being an astronaut. He led one of the
shuttle missions and he did not even get the same attention as
a great basketball player, but he is a fantastic scientist. He
went to Penn State, too. And I note that you went to Penn
State. And I spent a few years on the Board of Trustees at Penn
State. And it is a great university. The Creamery on the campus
is the best deal.
Mr. Wolf. And who is the coach there now? I am not sure
who.
Mr. Martin. I think they have a new coach.
Mr. Wolf. I went to Penn State, and the same coach who was
there when I was there----
Mr. Fattah. He is still there. He is still there.
Mr. Martin. When our children go to Penn State he will
still be coaching.
Mr. Fattah. But let me just try to work with this rocket
science deal, right? Because I think that sometimes those of us
here in the Congress kind of forget that we are all kind of
human and there are realities to some of this. We went to build
the Capitol Visitor Center. I was in the Visitor Center this
morning. When the first budget was released, it was going to be
$200 million and it was going to be finished in 2005. Well, you
know, it came in at $600 million, $600.5 million, and it cost a
lot more money, and this was not rocket science. This was just
brick and mortar, right here, on earth, right?
So you know, when you are talking about taking a human
being and sending them out into space, it is a challenging
thing. The technology for how to get that done, originally when
President Kennedy set the original mission, nobody knew how to
do it then. I mean, it kind of was the investment in our belief
in ourselves that moved the country into this effort
successfully. And I think that it is a challenge.
When we went to Iraq, I do not know if you recall, but
there were estimates given to the Congress about what the war
was going to cost us. And it did not pan out that way. So I do
not want anyone here to think that because NASA misjudges the
finances on a particular project that somehow, that is
different than the rest of the government. Because we often
miss the mark. But it is not so much in the numbers. It is
really in the overall purpose that we have to kind of keep
focused on here. Right?
So the Chairman says, you know, look, we need to have a
space program. I mean, we are not in this world all by
ourselves. We have allies, and we have potential adversaries,
actual adversaries. We have circumstances that we have to
manage on behalf of a great nation. So we have a responsibility
here, and we just ought to be careful about how we proceed.
Now you say that, and I think your letter to the Congress
was a courageous act because the truth is that we can want to
tilt the blame in any particular direction. It is really that
Congress has been the one that has provided the lack of
clarity.
Now it is good that we have an authorizing bill, and our
committee waited for us to have one. And I think that that is
the direction we are going to head in. And we are going to make
the wedding, shotgun or not, work out. That is our job, to make
it work. But we have to take our foot off first base. So in the
case of Constellation, at some point having the agency waste
money that we know is a waste on a project that we have
determined is not going to happen does not make any sense,
especially in a climate where we say we do not want to waste
money, that we want to cut spending.
So we just need to assert the truth in the simplest fashion
here. One is that there is not going to be in the realm of
science a kind of perfection around cost that we may desire. We
cannot even find it in the normal activities of the government,
so we are not going to find it in this particular activity in
which costs are in many ways immeasurable. I mean, when you
start talking about taking a human being now, and not in lower
orbit but into deep space, and the technology leaps that we
will have to make to do that, which is what I think is really
grand about what the President has put forward. It really is to
set a mark and a destination that would cause the agency to
kind of renew its commitment and renew the country's covenant
with it to really be the premier science agency in the world in
terms of space flight.
So I think that we should invest in the technology. And
just like it was true many years ago, we did not know what the
end result was going to be, and we did not know exactly how it
was going to work out, but there was a belief in our ability to
do it. So I just think that as you go and you look through your
work--and I think it is appreciated--the main point, I think,
is your letter to the Congress, that we need to provide some
clarity. And we cannot steal second base without taking your
foot off first. And we need to, if we want to save money, we
have now passed an authorization, the White House has signed
it, the United States Government has a firm commitment about
how we want to proceed. So what we need to do therefore is stop
spending money on something we have already decided we are not
going to do. And that would seem to be the most commonsense way
to proceed. And that is not rocket science.
So I want to thank you for the work you are doing. I know
that you are relatively new to this work in NASA. I am
interested in this facilities issue because I do not have a,
like the chairman, I do not have a NASA facility in my
district. So this is not a jobs issue for me. There are no
people working in my district relative to the space industry. I
think this is purely a matter of national imperative. And we
should be thinking about, you know, how we can, within the
question of moving forward, if you have got forty-year-old
facilities, I mean, there is no question. There was an article
last week about one of our economic competitors and major
investments in space. We should not be proud of the fact that
the majority of these facilities are forty years-plus in age,
and we should be looking to how we can make some sense about
how we go forward.
And I know that some of my colleagues here from Alabama and
Texas and Florida have a particular interest, but I think we
have to think about how we modernize the agency with a modern
mission. I do not see how it can possibly be a partisan matter.
This is a matter that really should unify the country and unify
the Congress.
So I want to thank you for your testimony. I do not have
particular questions, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Culberson.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We really
appreciate your work. We are all devoted to the space program
but because, as if you were in earlier have heard us talk about
the scale of the financial problem the country faces is an age
of austerity really unlike anything we have ever faced before.
Is NASA in the room? I hope NASA is in here somewhere. Is NASA
here? Oh, okay. Because it is important that NASA hear what we
are discussing and the questions that they can anticipate. And
I know we will be, we will have, the chairman is going to sit
down and the ranking member before we actually bring the
administrator in.

CONFLICTING VISIONS FOR NASA

I wanted to, if I could, ask about a couple of areas,
Inspector General Martin. The, I heard you say a moment ago
there are starkly different policies, ideas, about the
direction NASA should go, whether or not it focuses on
commercial and R&D, or is space exploration. Did you mean
within the agency you are aware of starkly, are you talking
about in general with Congress and the administration, or
within NASA?
Mr. Martin. I was just responding to the Chairman's
suggestion, should we bring a panel in. You know----
Mr. Culberson. Oh, okay----
Mr. Martin [continuing]. The facility of that. I think
Congress, through its Authorization Act, has brought some
clarity to what is the objective, what is the mission.
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Mr. Martin. I am just saying if you brought a panel in----
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Martin [continuing]. You would have the problem of some
might be for----
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Mr. Martin [continuing]. A more commercial route versus
keeping it in house. And that is the tension.
Mr. Culberson. One thing I know that has concerned me and
other members of the subcommittee and the Congress was that the
administration abruptly about a year ago just announced that
they were essentially shifting completely over into this
commercial arena without coming to Congress, without any prior
warning. We were, of course the Congress strongly resisted
that. And we as a Congress have endorsed very strongly the idea
of a manned space flight program as the principal mission of
NASA, space exploration and a manned space flight program. And
with Mr. Wolf's leadership we were able to get that language in
the authorization bill that NASA was going to build a heavy
lift vehicle to go beyond low earth orbit and to develop a
manned capsule.
However, I continue to get reports back from NASA field
offices, from the flight centers, that there is a continuing
problem, it was particularly bad last year with the NASA
administrators, people at headquarters, despite what Congress
had put in the law, continue to attempt to shut down major
sectors of the work being done on the heavy lift rocket. Could
you talk about that? Is that still going on? Is NASA and the
administration following the statute?
Mr. Martin. Well again, I think you tee up the problem
which is detailed in our letter. We have two conflicting
statutes. We have the CR, which directs NASA----
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Martin [continuing]. And----
Mr. Culberson. Specifically the Constellation.
Mr. Martin. Correct. And so they need to keep funding those
Constellation contracts, be it Ares I, Ares V, or the Orion
crew vehicle. So under law, under the existing law, they are
required to continue funding. Now there is discussion about
what amount you have to keep funding them. I mean, they had
projections of hundreds of millions of dollars for each of
these parts of the Constellation contracts. I think they have
appropriately scaled those back trying to anticipate what is
going to be the architecture for the heavy lift that is called
for in the Authorization Act. But these are in direct conflict.
Mr. Culberson. The statute signed by the President though,
let me make sure I understand, would that not be a later
enacted statute, the authorization act signed into law, that,
the CR is of course ongoing and still in effect. But then we
passed a statute that is very specific. You are an attorney----
Mr. Martin. I am.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. And I just recall in looking in
other cases where you have conflicting statutes the one that
was signed later and is more specific wins.
Mr. Martin. I think as a general rule of statutory or
congressional construction, that would be correct. But I think
you, the problem here is you have an authorizing act that sets
the policy direction. And then you have an appropriations act
which talks about how you are able to spend the funds. And so
the conflict is on the policy level.
Mr. Culberson. But both, the CR language was statutory, I
think.
Mr. Martin. Yes.
Mr. Culberson. Excuse me, the language in the last
appropriations bill that you are referring to was statutory,
and this is a later enacted statute. It is more specific.
Mr. Fattah. But Mr. Chairman, maybe I can help you out
here?
Mr. Culberson. No, please. Help me. I would love to get
this straight.
Mr. Fattah. Let me help you out here. It does not matter
what you say in that authorizing bill. What counts is what the
appropriators have said. And what we have said in this instance
is to the contrary. We have said in the CR that they cannot
initiate any new program----
Mr. Culberson. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Or cancel any existing program. So
you have an authorizing bill that says that we have worked this
out and we know which way we want to go. That is where the
conflict comes in.
Mr. Culberson. Yeah, and we are going to try to fix that, I
think.
Mr. Fattah. In a couple of weeks, we are going to pass a
new CR. We can fix it or we can pass a new bill.
Mr. Culberson. I think we are, in fact. I know Chairman
Wolf----
Mr. Fattah. Whatever we are going to do. But they cannot
solve this problem. This is our problem. And we have to decide
how we want to proceed.
Mr. Culberson. Yeah, I just wanted to explore it with Mr.
Martin.
Mr. Fattah. Right.
Mr. Culberson. You are right, Mr. Fattah. And I think that,
I am confident the bill that we are going to pass is going to
give clarification of that, to ensure that the authorization
act is the one that prevails and that we follow. The question
of clarity then absolutely is essential. And the cost
estimates, are you satisfied that NASA's ability to, that the
programs and the policies that they have put in place are going
to give us more realistic cost estimates at the outset of these
major flagship missions?
Mr. Martin. I am hopeful. I am hopeful. Of course, as an
IG's office we are going to keep auditing and reviewing and
pushing them that way.
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Martin. And to just comment on something Congressman
Fattah indicated, I think NASA needs, the American people need,
to have a visionary agency. So I was not being overly critical
that they are starting a project like James Webb.
Mr. Culberson. Oh we understand, sure.
Mr. Martin. I just think we need to be more disciplined
about how, and sort of put up front. Because one of the
problems you run into with these significant cost overruns in
the James Webb Space Telescope Program is it is frankly going
to eat the lunch potentially of other important science
programs. There are only so many dollars to go around.

FINDING SAVINGS IN THE NASA BUDGET, CONTINUED

Mr. Culberson. Mm-hmm. Do you have specific recommendations
that you could give us? There is a, the committee is going to
produce a continuing resolution very rapidly. It is being
written right now. Specific ideas or recommendations that you
could give us for cost savings for the agency that would enable
us to meet the charge that Chairman Wolf has to produce savings
for all the agencies under our jurisdiction while preserving an
agency that is vital to the national security of the country
and that we are all devoted to. Have you got specific
suggestions, Mr. Martin, that you could give Chairman Wolf and
our very capable, professional staff, like, right now that
could help us find some savings without damaging or injuring
NASA's core mission?
Mr. Martin. I would be pleased to work with Diana and Bob
and the staff to try to come up with some discrete answers, I
have mentioned three overarching issues here.
Mr. Culberson. We need real specific----
Mr. Martin. Right.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. Real quickly.
Mr. Martin. We will do what we can.

Recommendations for Budget Savings Within NASA Programs

Removal of the language in the Continuing Resolution
currently funding NASA that prevents the Agency from terminating
Constellation Program contracts or initiating new space exploration
programs. This will allow NASA to more efficiently allocate its funds
to address the directives in NASA's 2010 Authorization Bill that
require the Agency to develop a Space Launch System and Multi-Purpose
Crew Vehicle.

NASA must exhibit greater discipline in managing its
science and space exploration programs by, among other things,
developing firm requirements, establishing more realistic cost and
schedule estimates, and ensuring technologies are sufficiently mature
before proceeding through development.

NASA should take a realistic look at its sprawling
infrastructure and aging facilities, assess those aspects it needs to
retain and potentially upgrade, and develop an aggressive plan to
``right size'' the Agency's footprint to meet future challenges. Absent
such an effort, NASA's facilities will not be used effectively or
efficiently, and the Agency's deferred maintenance expense will
continue to grow from its current estimate of $2.5 billion.

Mr. Culberson. Yeah. And again, as we always stress, while
protecting their core mission. I frankly, Mr. Chairman, really
want to discuss this further. I have mentioned this to you
before, and I want to talk to other committee members about it.
I think ultimately in this environment, this age of austerity
that we are entering which is unlike anything the nation has
ever faced before, that we are going to need to look very
carefully, as Mr. Wolf said, at combining some of the functions
of, for example, NOAA. Why is not NASA responsible for the
polar satellites, and the weather satellites? And the Coast
Guard, for example, responsible for the oceanography mission of
NOAA? That we are going to have to think about consolidating
all sorts of things. The facilities that are 80 percent of them
over forty years old. We are going to have to look very, very
hard at how do we protect the core function of NASA to have a
vigorous, not just vigorous, the very best manned space flight
capability in the world. And the very best robotics missions in
the world.
And in my mind the statute, the statute is there. We I
think are going to need to protect the decadal survey missions.
One way in my mind, and I wonder if you could just offer any
comment, Mr. Martin, and I will pass on and yield my time, Mr.
Chairman. If can you comment on the, if we are short of money
and we were going to focus on manned space flight, and then we
wanted to try to preserve the very, the best robotic missions,
the most important robotic missions like Webb and others. To my
mind we should focus on the decadal survey recommendations
because that is an independent recommendation of all the best
scientists in the world prioritizing the missions in separate
categories, and would allow us to preserve NASA's ability to
fly those top missions in an era where we just really do not
have the money. Could you comment on that?
Mr. Martin. I cannot comment on, you know, the priorities
in the science program or really, you know, some of these major
policy decisions. I can offer that NASA takes quite seriously
the results of the decadal survey. And tees up to the extent
they can, they have different tiers of priorities. The National
Science Foundation, or whoever puts the decadal survey
together, does. I know NASA takes those recommendations quite
seriously.
Mr. Culberson. Well I look forward to working with you, and
thank you for what you do. And coming up with some short term
recommendations, and then for the longer term as we produce a
bill for the 2012 fiscal year. Thank you very much.
Mr. Martin. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Bonner.
Mr. Bonner. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Serrano and I just came from
meeting with the Inspector General of the Securities and
Exchange Commission. And since we both got to this a little bit
after Mr. Martin had started his testimony I am going to tee
this up with first of all by saying I think everyone on this
committee, Democrat, Republican, all sections of the country,
certainly value what NASA means to our country, both our past
and certainly for the future. But in talking with the Inspector
General of the SEC he was going through some examples of some
of the things that he had uncovered in terms of troubling
expenditures, waste. A $15 million lease in Manhattan, which
the gentleman from the Bronx pointed out in Manhattan terms is
not that much money, but in Mobile, Alabama terms or in the
Bronx terms it is a lot of money. $15 million for a lease of an
office that they have not had a single employee in for the last
five years.
Can you give us, because again we all support NASA. But
have you uncovered during your time as the Inspector General
some examples that as taxpayers we all should be concerned
about that the agency needs to be more focused on in this time,
as Mr. Culberson said, of austerity? How can the, how can NASA
look inside and find some of its own misappropriations of
funds?
Mr. Martin. Right. I do not want to repeat the areas about
project management and about the conundrum created by the
conflicting legislation. So those would be things I would put
out number one. NASA also has a program called the SBIR
Program. And these are grants for small business innovative
research. And we have done a recent audit looking at the
internal controls there. Our recommendation is that NASA can do
a much better job improving the internal controls to ensure,
number one, that the right people are getting the grants that
they are qualified for. Number two, that they are producing
meaningful research. And number three, that the expenses that
they are charging the government are appropriate. We found over
$2 million in unallowable or unsupportable costs.
We also made recommendations about the lack of internal
controls. NASA is just one of eleven federal agencies that are
involved in the SBIR program. And some of the criminal
investigations we have done over time have found individuals
who would apply for an SBIR grant through NASA would also apply
through another agency, turn the same term paper, the same
research into both, and collect from both. So the agencies
involved in this program need to talk and need to cooperate
more to ensure that that kind of fraud does not occur.
Mr. Bonner. And then just one more question at this time.
You said in your written statement, the third paragraph, ``the
most immediate challenge facing NASA's leadership is to manage
the agency's portfolio of space and science missions amid the
continuing lack of clarity caused by conflicting legislative
directives in the authorization act and a holdover provision in
NASA's fiscal year 2010 appropriation law.'' You have, in
talking with Mr. Fattah and also with Mr. Wolf, you have
addressed that as a concern. And I know your role as the
inspector general is different than the administrator's role or
the President's role or our role in Congress. But as the father
of a fifteen-year-old daughter, and a soon to be this weekend
thirteen-year-old son, I sometimes am having conversations, I
am in no way drawing an analogy that NASA is our child. But we
are proud of what NASA has accomplished. And I draw analogies
to when my kids come to me telling me they want to do this,
that, and the other. And my wife and I always say, ``Well, when
you make up your mind come back to us and we will talk.'' Is
the most immediate challenge the conflict between the
authorization law and the appropriations, the CR? Or is it that
we have yet to have someone like President Kennedy did in the
1960's help give us a vision of where NASA will go in the next
forty years?
Because we all touch on it. We are concerned about what our
friends and some of the people who are not our friends in other
countries are doing in terms of investing in their space
programs. Do we have a, from your perspective, I know you are
not policy. But from your perspective, having been on the job,
do you see a clarity of vision and purpose for NASA today?
Because I know I am older than you are. But when I was a child
and could sit around the TV set, and people would come from all
over the community to watch those space launches, and those
first steps on the moon, and the exciting days of the shuttle
program. Even if we did not know all of the science that was
being conducted, and all of the research that was being done
that would change our life, there was an excitement about that
vision. I do not see the vision, personally. But I would love
for you to tell me I am wrong.
Mr. Martin. Well again, as an inspector general, and as an
inspector general who has been on the job for a little over a
year I do not think I am qualified----
Mr. Bonner. That is a long time.
Mr. Martin. On some levels it seems like yesterday, on some
levels it seems like a lifetime ago. I cannot really address
that. I think it would be inappropriate for me to address and
kind of check the vision of NASA and NASA's employees. I will
say that NASA, excuse me, that the Congress has provided a
roadmap and a blueprint in its 2010 Authorization bill and
frankly has given marching orders for NASA. Now to what extent
NASA at large has embraced those marching orders? I think they
are absolutely following them. But again, when I talk about the
most critical issue facing NASA it is a short term issue. NASA
has to know what its funding stream is going to be. It needs to
be freed from the constraints of funding the prior
Constellation program so that it can begin to put resources
into the new blueprint outlined in the 2010 Authorization Act.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Martin. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. I think Mr. Bonner really made a good
point, though. And I feel the same way, too. I remember when I
came to Washington and my parents came to visit me. We actually
drove by John Glenn's house, and it was so exciting to say,
that he lived in Arlington, by Little Falls. And I think you
are exactly right. There is not that feeling anymore. Mr.
Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too apologize for
my brief appearance here, being late and then leaving early.
But you know how that works with all these subcommittees. And
thank you for your service and for your testimony.

IMPACT ON NASA OF MAJOR BUDGET REDUCTIONS

Inspecter General Martin, I do not envy, and this is in no
way an attack, they know me better than that. I do not envy the
majority party in the role they have taken to cut across the
board incredible amounts of dollars. And some of those cuts
will affect people and we will deal with that as time goes on,
and they are very painful. But NASA, and any cuts to NASA,
dramatic cuts to NASA is a very interesting situation. Because
when the President talks about competing with other countries
in the future and staying on top of our game, NASA to me is
right there at the center of that competition and that
preparation.
And it is interesting that we are discussing this here
because the chairman has made a career, and I say that in a
respectful way, of singling out what happens with the People's
Republic of China, and how they treat their people, and how
they interact with us, and how they in many cases attack us.
And so we can bet that right now in China, and I am beginning
to sound like him, there is the equivalent of NASA, not
worrying about budget cuts, but worrying about how strong they
are going to become in what they do and what they produce and
what they invent. Because NASA has given us a lot, and it is
not just Tang or Velcro, it is much more than that. Although
those are very important.
So without putting you in the middle of the budget cutting
debate, you looked for waste, you looked for fraud, but you
also must have an idea of how much an agency could sustain in a
cut. Can NASA sustain the cuts that we hear may be proposed and
remain viable? When the President says we have to compete he is
basically saying there are some areas you could leave alone.
Could we accomplish that? Or are we all dreaming that the cuts
will come across the board and affect everybody the same? How
much of a cut can NASA take? Not in dollars, but in getting
away from their mission?
Mr. Martin. I am going to apologize up front, Mr. Serrano.
I cannot really address that because I do not know what level
of cuts that the Congress is anticipating. But in addition it
is a question really of prioritizing what the Congress does not
want NASA to do. NASA can only do so much with the sizable
budget that the Congress appropriates. So what science, what
sort of visionary science programs or projects, or satellites,
or missions to Mars does the Congress not want to make a
priority for NASA? It is----
Mr. Serrano. And do you feel we have given NASA too much to
do? Or do you think they can handle their mission right now?
Mr. Martin. Well again that is----
Mr. Serrano. Before the cuts.
Mr. Martin. Yes. I do not think you have given NASA too
much to do. NASA, again, and I keep using the word, really is a
visionary place with people who are excited. There is no place
like it in the United States, on earth, for both its history
and its importance. So there are people clamoring to work at
NASA and they can come up with, as Carl Sagan would say,
billions and billions of projects to do. So no, I do not think
you have given NASA too much to do.
Mr. Serrano. Right. And I, this may shock Mr. Culberson
because he does not remember the last time I agreed with him on
something, although we agree on a lot, especially on
immigration, but that is another issue. He is cutting
immigration funding enforcement, too.
Mr. Martin. I hung up my DOJ hat.
Mr. Serrano. Yes, right. But I agree that maybe part of
what we do is take a closer look at where there is overlapping
responsibilities. Why are satellites handled by two folks when
only one folks?
It reminds me of this whole technology that you are so good
at dealing with. I mean, there used to be an iPod, and there
used to be a cell phone. And now each one of them can take
pictures, can get you music. And you wonder, ``Okay, do I need
them all? Or do I just need one?'' You know? I have a Walkman.
I still have seventy-eight records, you know? Do you know why
they were called albums? Do you know why? Because the seventy-
eights used to go into an album, and you put six of them, which
were twelve songs, and it was an actual album. I am the king of
worthless information. Okay. I am. I have information you do
not need.

ETHICAL CONFLICTS AT NASA

Let me ask you a question on this whole issue of ethical
responsibilities. There was a report that showed there were
contractors working alongside NASA employees, and then in many
cases NASA employees then went on to get jobs in the private
sector that may or may not have been influenced by their
working along with these folks. Now this is an issue across the
government. The whole idea of contractors, and what rules they
follow as compared to the federal employees, and how much they
get paid, and their benefits, and what does that. So is there
anything being done about looking at what ethical issues may
come up in having that kind of a situation, where you have
these folks working side by side and then some folks leaving
later?
Mr. Martin. It is an incredibly important issue and one
that the Office of Inspector General stresses. We, our
investigations division in particular, attacks any allegations
of improper ethical conduct. I think the Agency does a pretty
good job in ensuring that the employees, especially those that
are dealing first hand with the contractors, are aware of their
ethical responsibilities and obligations. But it is, as you see
in the cases that we do, where senior members of NASA are
convicted for improper use and improper influence. And so it is
something that we just need to be continually vigilant on.
Mr. Serrano. So we know the number of contractors that work
alongside NASA employees? I mean, is it a large number? Is----
Mr. Martin. It is a very large number. Eighty-five percent
of NASA's funds are pushed out to contractors.
Mr. Serrano. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

NEED FOR ENTITLEMENT REFORM

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Serrano. I am going to call on Mr.
Aderholt, but I wanted to say that I am glad Mr. Serrano said
what he said. I think he makes a very, very valid point. I
think we are coming to a time when both parties are going to
have to address this, as well as the audience, which is made up
of probably a lot of contractors and people in the business.
Everyone is going to have to face this. Simon and Garfunkel
sang a song in Central Park called ``The Boxer.'' And it says
``a man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest.''
The reality is we can never solve these problems until you deal
with the entitlements, if you do not look at Medicare,
Medicaid, and Social Security.
I gave a speech on the floor the other day saying that if I
had the opportunity to serve on the Bowles-Simpson Commission,
I would have supported the recommendations. Because I am afraid
of what is taking place. You are going to squeeze programs that
are so important to keep up. And as Mr. Serrano says, the
Chinese now have 200,000 engineers working on their space
program, and we only have about 90,000 or 95,000. We are
falling behind. And as a father of five and grandfather of
fifteen, I worry about where this country is.
And so we need to deal with that. In the Senate, you had
Tom Coburn, who I think is a good senator, and Dick Durbin both
support what was in the Commission recommendations. Until you
deal with the entitlement issue, you are making all of the cuts
out of a very small, one-fifth or maybe one-sixth piece of the
budget.
There is a piece by Niall Ferguson, a great historian, who
says great nations decline rapidly once the decline begins. I
do not want to stand by and see my country basically decline. I
will send a copy of the piece to every member of the Committee.
I was disappointed with the President. The President set up
this commission and then he walked away from it. He should
force the Congress to address it, and the Congress should force
him to address it. I think we can do it in a bipartisan way
that literally saves the country.
But if we, and as Mr. Serrano said, are not putting the
money into math and science and physics and chemistry, into the
space program, and investing, the decline comes. And I do not
want to see our nation decline. Willie Sutton the bank robber
said he robbed banks because that is where the money was. To
make the necessary savings, to have a renaissance in this
nation and to have a space program that has the excitement that
Mr. Bonner is talking about really requires that we deal with
the entitlements. The member who tells you he is going to solve
the problems here by going after earmarks and waste, fraud, and
abuse has missed the whole point. And I think the constituents
have to say, well, that is not going to solve the problem.
Otherwise we will see this nation begin to slip. And I do not
want to be here, or ten or fifteen years from now sitting on a
rocking chair in the Shenandoah Valley, while my grandkids come
up and say, ``You know, you were there. How did you deal with
it?'' The answer is that we should come together in a
bipartisan way to deal with Medicare, Medicaid, and Social
Security so we can continue to have other investments.
If we continue the current process without looking at the
entitlements, I will tell you another group that is going to
suffer. The poor. In the tax bill that the Obama administration
and the Republicans in this Congress supported that I voted
against about a month ago, the 2 percent reduction in the
payroll tax for social security gave a break to Jimmy Buffet
and Warren Buffett. That cost us $112 billion, and the Obama
administration and the Congress, Republicans and Democrats,
said they were going to make up for that by borrowing from the
general fund. The general fund is broke. We borrow from China.
China that has Catholic bishops in jail, Protestant pastors in
jail, has plundered Tibet and is spying against us. We are
borrowing from them, and we are borrowing from the Saudis who
are funding radical Wahhabism, which led to 9/11 and led to
what is taking place in Afghanistan and Pakistan. And here we
gave the Buffet brothers or cousins, or if they know each
other, a big opportunity under Social Security. So the poor
will suffer, too.
So I think you have got to deal with these entitlement
issues. In a certain period of time, about twelve to fifteen
years, every penny that comes in will go for Medicare,
Medicaid, Social Security and interest on the debt. There will
be no money for the space program, no money for education, and
no money for anything else. Mr. Aderholt.

OIG FINDINGS ON CONSTELLATION SPENDING UNDER THE CR, CONTINUED

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the first
questions you asked, I think the chairman asked you about the
methodology of your findings. And basically how, again just
briefly, what was that methodology to, that you, how you
arrived at your findings?
Mr. Martin. You are talking about the Constellation letter
that we sent to Congress?
Mr. Aderholt. Yes.
Mr. Martin. We went to the program. We went to NASA
Headquarters and we went to the Constellation program people
and asked them this specific question: if you were not bound by
the language in the CR, which aspects would you walk away from,
or diminish, reduce? These are their numbers. These are their
answers. These are their numbers.
Mr. Aderholt. All right. So, you know, of course I am from
Alabama and of course represent the area around Marshall. So
you spoke with the folks there at Marshall?
Mr. Martin. We did. The Deputy Program Manager of the
Constellation program and the Associate Administrator at NASA
Headquarters.
Mr. Aderholt. Here in Washington?
Mr. Martin. Correct.
Mr. Aderholt. In your letter that was dated on January 13,
2011 you state that the upper stage and related avionics
elements of the Ares program are ``insufficient use of
funding,'' citing a conversation with unnamed NASA officials.
When you talked with them did they offer evidence that provide
that these elements were not applicable to the new heavy lift
system?
Mr. Martin. No, we did not.
Mr. Aderholt. And as far as the letter to Congress
contradicts NASA's ninety-day report to Congress, which states
that the Ares project five segment boosters, J-2X upper stage
engine, and the Ares I upper stage malfunctioning concepts and
instrument unit assembly also could be applicable for SLS. How
do you reconcile those two things?
Mr. Martin. I am sorry, I am not sure I followed all of
that. But NASA has not decided yet, again we do not do policy,
we do not say liquid fuel, solid fuel, that is not what the
Inspector General does. But clearly NASA has not decided yet
which architecture it is going to use to implement the launch
program directives as well as the crew capsule directives in
the Authorization Act. They have an idea and Congress has given
them the impetus to look first at shuttle technology and
existing Constellation technology. So again, in this letter we
are not making a judgment call. We asked the program people if
you were freed from the constraints of the language in the CR,
which aspects of Constellation that you are funding now would
you either reduce, diminish, or defer? These are their answers.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Why are these two contracts for the
heavy lift vehicle being recompeted when number one, they are
crucial to the HLV, and number two, appropriation language says
existing contracts should be utilized?
Mr. Martin. You really need to ask the Administrator or the
General Counsel. I know they are looking at the issue of
whether or not they can extend the current Constellation
contracts and morph them into the new vehicles that are
directed under the Authorization Act, or whether they would
need to recompete.

COMMERCIAL SPACEFLIGHT

Mr. Aderholt. NASA is paying private companies to resupply
the Space Station with commercial resupply funds, yet none of
these private companies have proven that they are capable of
going to the Space Station. Could you share your concern with
that?
Mr. Martin. I do not really have a concern with that.
Again, it is a policy call where NASA and the Congress is going
to put NASA's money. I will note that one of the companies,
SpaceX, Space Exploration, had two successful flights, first in
July, and a second in December. The December flight with a
dummy capsule that they called the Dragon capsule. That is the
name for their, at some point, potentially crew-based capsule.
Leaving the atmosphere, circling the earth twice, and splashing
down. So I think they are still perhaps, you know, it depends
on who you ask, anywhere from one to three years away from
being viable and certified to take cargo from the earth up to
the Space Station. But again, it is not my policy call that
that is where NASA should put its money or they should build
their own.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. All right. That is all I have got right
now. I may have some follow up.
Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Let me explore some of this question about
privatization or commercial crew, if you would. You said about
85 percent of NASA's dollars are now contracted out to private
sector companies? In fact, some of the private sector companies
that are involved in the Constellation also are involved in
commercial crew, right? That is to say that this notion as if
this is a foreign effort that we would rely on the private
sector which is, you know, the big push here and which is part
of the compromise that is in the authorization is that there
would be commercial crew and that there would be this
continuation of some parts of Constellation, even though it is
not said like that. But it is this whole heavy lift capability.
But that in truth, the same company, a lot of the same
companies that either contract with NASA now would be competing
on the commercial side, right? So is that an accurate
reflection?
Mr. Martin. My understanding is that is accurate, yes.
Mr. Fattah. Right. So that NASA has always had a close
reliance and connection and has been intertwined, it has been a
public/private venture from way back under the, you know, I
mean there was a time in Philadelphia with the GE reentry
systems for the original moon flights. There were thousands of
engineers, Mr. Chairman, who worked in Philadelphia on the
reentry system. So I think that in the public debate about
this, somehow we act as if NASA has been acting as a government
entity with government bureaucrats building spaceships and now
that the administration wants to use commercial companies to do
it, it is really commercial companies that have been
intricately involved in this activity from day one and will be
going forward. That this really is a question in the decision
package related to whether or not we want to use the private
sector. Because that is the great engine of innovation in our
country, and use entrepreneurial activities and risk taking to
deal with some of the kind of normalized lower space, low orbit
travel. And then to use what would be much more risky, and
obviously require heavy investment, something only the
government could do, is to focus on going into deep space and
to Mars or to an asteroid, and so on.
So that this notion that we have not come to some agreement
I think is defied by the fact that we passed the authorization.
I mean, there is a deal. We call them deals in our business.
There is a deal for how we are going to go forward. And all we
need to do now is to effectuate or actualize it in the
appropriations process, and then we can go on. And I think then
the agency will have clarity. Because beating up on an agency
for not having clarity when we are the ones who created the
confusion just does not make any sense to me.
So Mr. Chairman, I think that the sooner we do the CR, and
whatever clarity that can be arrived at in which the House and
the Senate and the White House can decide how to go forward,
then we can get NASA to kind of lift off and not be kind of
mired down. And it is kind of hard to reconcile the scientists
with the politicians. And some of this has to do with jobs. I
guess it is almost like an earmark. If you have a NASA
facility, you have got a lot of jobs, and you have got a lot of
interest. But we have got to have the national interest rise
above that and think about where we are going, what we are
doing. And we should get started because our competitors are
not standing still. So we risk our own decline. And none of us
as Americans should be interested in that. We should be trying
to move our country forward, and NASA should be at the front
edge of that.

CHINESE INFORMATION SECURITY ATTACKS AGAINST NASA

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. Keying off of that, I just
have one last question and then I will go to the other members.
China uses information stolen from other countries to make up
for gaps in its own technical knowledge. This allows the
Chinese to make programmatic advances much faster than would
otherwise be possible while simultaneously eroding the
competitive edge of our own programs. To what extent can we
trace recent advances in China's space program to theft of
information from NASA?
Mr. Martin. Mr. Chairman, I cannot make that direct
linkage. I can tell you----
Mr. Wolf. Well, but I would like you then to look at it, to
come back----
Mr. Martin. I would be pleased to look at it.
Mr. Wolf. If you can come back in thirty days and tell us,
we would appreciate it.
Mr. Martin. I can tell you that NASA as an agency is
probably one of the top three or four targets of both economic
and foreign government cyberattacks.
Mr. Wolf. That was my next question. Can you tell us about
the cyberattacks against NASA?
Mr. Martin. They are frequent and they are detrimental.
Mr. Wolf. And what country is making the attacks?
Mr. Martin. Different countries. They have been traced to
China. They have been traced to Russia. They have been traced
to Estonia and other parts of Eastern Europe. They have been
traced to Africa.
Mr. Wolf. And how often does that take place?
Mr. Martin. I cannot tell you the frequency, but it is not
infrequent. And again, it is detrimental. I was pleased to
inherit a very, very robust computer crimes division in the
IG's office. And we have had our special agents flying to
Estonia and China and other parts of the world to work these
cases. So we take this incredibly seriously.
Mr. Wolf. I know the press is here and covering this. Can
we honestly say that China or whoever is doing the
cyberattacks? I know it is China. But whoever is doing the
cyberattacks, there have been detrimental impacts to our space
program that have also given information out that helps others.
Is that right?
Mr. Martin. There have been improper releases of NASA data
that have been traced to computers or individuals in the
countries I identified, yes.
Mr. Wolf. And China has been part of the process of
cyberattacks against NASA?
Mr. Martin. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Mr. Martin. Now China as a government or Chinese citizens?
I cannot make that----
Mr. Wolf. It is the same. They have got one of the most
comprehensive cyber programs in the People's Liberation Army
and the government. It is China. I think we have got to say it.
It is the same country that is spying against us, that has
cyberattacks against us, that has Catholic bishops and
Protestant pastors in jail, and is shooting people and taking
their organs to sell for $50,000 to $55,000. Anyone who is out
there and wants to see the video, we will show you the video of
the Chinese People's Liberation Army executing people, then
taking their corneas and kidneys out. So it is the same
government.
But I think this is something we have to face. So if you
can get back to us in less than thirty days about the threat
from China. Just tell us, both in a classified version and then
an unclassified version. Then we can let other members know
what takes place with regard to that. Thank you. Mr. Bonner or
Mr. Aderholt.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bonner. Mr. Chairman, I have got one question that I
might submit for the record but I will pass to Mr. Aderholt who
has one final question.
Mr. Wolf. Sure, sure. Without objection then.

JAMES WEBB SPACE TELESCOPE

Mr. Aderholt. In an IG report released last year you cited
that four-year delay and $5 billion overrun for the James Webb
Space Telescope. Do you believe or anticipate there will be
further delays or cost overruns for the program?
Mr. Martin. There was an independent review that I
mentioned in my opening statement that was done in November of
last year that anticipated that the earliest they could launch
that incredibly important, incredibly sophisticated space
telescope was September 2015. But that was only if, as the
panel said, critical management changes in NASA's operation of
the program were made, and an additional $500 million was added
to the money that was already in the budget, the NASA budget
for that. So do I think there are going to be additional
delays? I would think so. I do not see where the Congress is
going to come up with an additional $500 million on top of what
is budgeted already for the Webb telescope.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony. The
hearing is adjourned.
Mr. Martin. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I N D E X

----------

Testimony before Appropriations Subcommittee, Feb. 9, 2011
Department of Commerce
Inspector General Todd J. Zinser

Page
2010 Census Budget............................................... 50-51
2020 Decennial Census Planning...............................4,30,53-54
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act...........................     3
Census Planning.................................................. 36,37
Exports and International Trade...............................25-26, 30
IG's Resource Allocation......................................... 43-44
International Trade/Commercial Foreign Service...................    53
IT Security................................................3, 38, 39-41
NOAA Environmental Satellite Programs............................     3
NOAA Satellite Programs................................23-25, 30-33, 42
Program Duplication and Overlap........................33-35, 36-37, 54
PSIC Grant Program............................................... 51-52
Recovery Act Grant Programs......................................    38
Recovery Act and BTOP (Broadband Program)........................ 44-46
Recovery Act and Construction Grants.............................46, 48
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office....................3, 41-42, 48-49, 52
USPTO and IT Security............................................ 49-50

Department of Justice
Acting Inspector General Cynthia A. Schnedar

AFT's Project Gunrunner.........................................133-136
Civil Rights Division...........................................138-139
Counter-Terrorism...............................................123-124
DNA Backlog................................................125-126, 132
Explosives Coordination between FBI & ATF.......................139-140
Federal Bureau of Prisons.......................................136-138
Foreign Language Translation.....................................   121
Gang Enforcement................................................131-132
Guantanamo Detainees.............................................   123
High Value Detainee Interrogation Group.........................121-123
Human Trafficking................................................   126
Information Technology..........................................124-125
Information Technology Contracting/FBI Sentinel.................126-131
Management and Performance Challenges at Department of Justice...99-101
Restoring Confidence in the Department..........................140-141
Sexual Abuse of Prisoners........................................   139

National Science Foundation
Inspector General Allison C. Lerner

Attempts to Improve the Efficiency of the Merit Review Process..207-209
Cyber Security.............................................213-215, 220
Contracting Practices...........................................215-217
Dissemination of Stem Education Findings.........................   218
Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory..............   219
Grants Management...............................................217-218
Ice Breaking....................................................181-182
NSF's Grant Funding Eligibility Requirements....................179-181
NSF's Management of Stimulus Funding............................170-171
NSF Policy on Refreshments for Merit Review Panelists............   177
NSF Pornography Scandal Followup................................212-213
Opening Remarks, Ranking Member Fattah...........................   157
Opening Remarks, Inspector General Lerner........................   157
Opening Remarks, Chairman Wolf...................................   157
Possible NSF Budget Savings......................................   169
Recompetition of the Antarctic Support Contract.................178-179
Responsiveness of NSF...........................................167-169
Trends in Grant Applications, Extensions and Award Rules.........   209

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Inspector General Paul K. Martin

Challenges with Cost Estimation and Project Management..........243-244
Chinese Information Security Attacks Against NASA...............260-261
Commercial Spaceflight..........................................258-260
Conflicting Visions for NASA....................................248-250
Ethical Conflicts at NASA........................................   255
Finding Savings in the NASA Budget.....................242-243, 250-254
Impact on NASA of Major Budget Reductions.......................254-255
Implementation of the NASA Authorization Act....................244-248
Need for Entitlement Reform.....................................256-257
Opening Remarks, Inspector General Martin.......................231-232
OIG Findings on Constellation Spending Under the CR........243, 257-258


