- FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT
APPROPRIATIONS
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri, Chair
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JO BONNER, Alabama                 BARBARA LEE, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
TOM GRAVES, Georgia                ED PASTOR, Arizona
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
John Martens, Winnie Chang, Kelly Shea, and Ariana Sarar,
Subcommittee Staff

________

PART 5
Page
U.S. Postal Service Inspector General............................    1
U.S. Election Assistance Commission..............................   47
Small Business Administration....................................   83
Consumer Product Safety Commission...............................  141
Office of Personnel Management...................................  267

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
Part 5

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION

________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT
APPROPRIATIONS
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri, Chair
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JO BONNER, Alabama                 BARBARA LEE, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
TOM GRAVES, Georgia                ED PASTOR, Arizona
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
John Martens, Winnie Chang, Kelly Shea, and Ariana Sarar,
Subcommittee Staff

________

PART 5
Page
U.S. Postal Service Inspector General............................    1
U.S. Election Assistance Commission..............................   47
Small Business Administration....................................   83
Consumer Product Safety Commission...............................  141
Office of Personnel Management...................................  267

S

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-791                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Friday, February 11, 2011.

U.S. POSTAL SERVICE INSPECTOR GENERAL

WITNESS

DAVID C. WILLIAMS, INSPECTOR GENERAL
Mrs. Emerson. We will come to order. And I want to thank
everybody for being here. Good morning.
Good morning, Inspector General Williams. Thank you so much
for being here today. We are happy to have you.
And I want to welcome my colleagues, our ranking member,
Joe Serrano, from the Bronx, New York.
And you haven't been here to hear our repartee about the
Yankees and the Cardinals. We will refrain from that. We did a
little bit yesterday. And, actually, I have a Kansas City
Royals fan down here, but I do have another Cardinals fan, so
that is pretty nice.
Mr. Serrano. The Cardinals are still in the league?
Mrs. Emerson. That is a good one, Joe. We are going to have
to have running bets on Pujols, all right?
And Mr. Diaz-Balart.
So, anyway, thank you so much for being here. And you have
a tough job, a really tough job. And I know that a lot of my
colleagues are not familiar with the way that the Postal
Service works and don't know that it is the largest civilian
Federal agency, with 599,000 career employees and operating a
total of about 37,000 facilities nationwide.
The Postal Service has annual spending expenses of
approximately $75 billion and, in fiscal year 2010, had an $8.5
billion deficit.
With few exceptions, the Postal Service operations are
self-funded and not in our jurisdiction on the Appropriations
Committee. We only provide $75 million for mail for the blind
and people with disabilities and for overseas voting. An
additional $29 million is provided in our bill for
reimbursement of insufficient appropriations to the Postal
Service for fiscal years 1991 through 1993.
While the committee has limited jurisdiction over the
Postal Service, it does provide $244 million for the Office of
the Inspector General, of which $98 million is for audits to
improve USPS operations and $147 million is for investigations
into waste, fraud, and abuse.
With one of the largest inspector general budgets in the
Federal Government, we do want to understand how you all are
using your resources. Additionally, with the Postal Service
facing long-term financial challenges, we also want to know how
you all are using the resources we give you to improve Postal
Service operations and identify inefficiencies.
I look forward to your testimony.
And, with that, I would like to recognize the
subcommittee's ranking member, Mr. Serrano, for any opening
statements you wish to make, Joe.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you so much.
I would also like to welcome you, Inspector General David
C. Williams, to this hearing of the Financial Services and
General Government Subcommittee. I am looking forward to
hearing your testimony and having the opportunity to ask
questions about your ongoing investigations.
The Postal Service plays, as we all know, a very important
role in the lives of all of us who are dependent on timely mail
delivery. I also understand that, because of declining mail
volume, the Postal Service is now facing a significant
budgetary shortfall.
In 2010, the postal OIG published a report addressing
questions of whether there were possible overpayments made by
the Postal Service to the Civil Service Retirement System
pension fund. I look forward to discussing the results of this
study and other issues with you at today's hearing.
I also want to mention how pleased I was with the 2009
report entitled, ``U.S. Postal Service Electrification of
Delivery Vehicles,'' which concluded that the use of electric
vehicles would be operationally feasible, but requires a way to
address the significant front-end cost issue. I will discuss
this issue with you further during our question period.
So we thank you for the testimony you are about to give us.
We thank you for your service. We know that the Postal Service
is one agency we all want to be supportive of; we just, in all
honesty, don't know how to deal with this major problem. But
something will have to be done unless we just wrap it up, and I
don't see that happening. So it continues to be one of the most
dramatic challenges that we have around here.
So, once again, thank you for being before us today.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, Joe.
I also want to recognize Ms. Barbara Lee from Oakland,
California.
Now I will recognize you, Inspector General Williams. If
you wouldn't mind keeping your statement to 5 minutes so that
we have as much time as possible for questions and answers.
Thank you.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Madam Chairman, Mr. Serrano, and
members of the subcommittee.
The Postal Service's situation is serious. Its leadership
anticipates running out of money in September. Mail volume has
dropped by 20 percent since 2006. And the monopoly no longer
finances universal mail service for the Nation.
The situation is the product of an oversized postal
networks, crippling payments for benefit funds, the lingering
recession, and the disruption of the digital age. Lastly, the
Postal Service's mission to bind the Nation together through a
common communication infrastructure is evolving faster than the
Postal Service can adapt.
Burdensome and flawed benefit payments have contributed to
almost 90 percent of the $20 billion loss in the past 4 years.
This has raised the cost of the infrastructure, postage rates,
and forced the Postal Service to incur debt. My office has
produced a series of reports highlighting the exaggerated
estimates, enormous overcharges, and excessive prefunding
levels that plague the retiree pension and health-care systems.
To continue contributing to funds that now appear to exceed
the 100-percent funding levels is even more egregious when
compared against benchmarks in the public and private sector
and OPM's levels. I agree with Senator Susan Collins's call in
September 2010 for OPM to change, under the current law, its
calculation of Postal Service CSRS pension fund payments.
In the near term, the Postal Service and Congress should
consider halting further payments to benefit funds until the
surplus is used, funds restructured, and mistakes corrected.
The Postal Service can use this time to learn how to live below
or within the Consumer Price Index, shed its debt, and find its
role in the digital age.
The Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act incentivizes
the Postal Service to adopt a leaner, volume-driven
infrastructure to assure readiness for the 21st century. This
will require optimization of the network of post offices and
plants; conversion to evaluated letter carrier routes to allow
effective management; flexible work rules to match the ebb and
flow of mail; a comprehensive delivery point strategy that
maximizes curbside delivery and cluster boxes; simplification
of mail acceptance and pricing; and evaluating the need for 74
districts, 7 areas, and 2 law enforcement agencies.
I mentioned earlier the disruption of the digital age as
contributing to the Postal Service's instability. The digital
age and globalization have put America on the cusp of a new
age. Technological advances have given America low-cost instant
communications, sophisticated data organization, search
engines, hyperlinks, impressive mobility, and more.
However, the twin forces of the digital age and
globalization grew at an unbridled pace. And as they leave
their infancy, we see insecure platforms for financial
transactions, a lengthening trail of American digital refugees,
lack of confidentiality for communication content, predatory
practices in the conversion of digital cash to currency,
patterns of invasive digital profiling by infrastructure
operators, emerging issues associated with Net neutrality, and
a shocking loss of privacy.
These practices and others are unwelcome by many Americans.
The Nation has not fully explored the respective roles of the
private sector and governmental entities in addressing these
issues.
Additionally, substantial elements of the Nation's
communications infrastructure have passed from governmental to
corporate hands. This transition has important positive
aspects, but such sweeping change suggests the need for
thoughtful examination to ensure that segments of society are
not excluded and America's leading edge continues to advance.
Postal products and technological solutions are imperfect,
but joining the two together might address some of the
shortcomings of each and provide a set of solutions and serve
as a bridge to the 21st century.
I have outlined the need for substantial change to increase
the readiness and recognize the Postal Service's role in
positioning America in the communications revolution. The
engine for this transformation is innovation, and the Postal
Service needs to strengthen its systems for innovation.
Innovators collaborate with customers, take risks, make
mistakes; stop failures quickly and replicate successes. The
Postal Service's success depends on embracing this environment.
Federal financial raids on the Postal Service have to be
halted; and the Postal Service should be taken back off-budget
as originally designed, and the benefit funds restructured. We
will need strong collaborative efforts to enable the Postal
Service to serve Americans in the 21st century.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.006

Mrs. Emerson. Thanks so much, Mr. Williams.
There are lots of questions to ask and lots of different
areas to cover, but let me start with an easy one, perhaps an
easy one, at the beginning.
As you are well aware, we are doing our very, very best to
find ways to reduce Federal spending. And we have to, in our
Financial Services and General Government Subcommittee, at
least try to get our numbers back to 2008 fiscal year levels.
Your Office of Inspector General is the largest civilian IG
office and has the largest budget, at $244 million. So, have
you all actually scrubbed your budget to identify savings and
efficiencies that we will see in the next round, in the 2012
budget proposal?
Mr. Williams. We have in the past, and I promise you that
we will in the future. And if I may, I will give you a couple
of highlights.
Cuts to our office have not begun recently. It is something
we have taken seriously from when I stepped on the property. We
have never had a budget that matched inflation; it has always
been lower than inflation.
In 2006, we took over enormous new jurisdiction from the
Inspection Service. Seven hundred people were supposed to
travel with that. We left 387 on the table for savings to the
Postal Service and tried it with a much smaller number, and it
has succeeded so far. We have been able to pick up the slack on
that.
In 2008, we cut $5 million; in 2009, $10 million. And then
last year, we cut 60 more positions, and that had $8 million
associated with it.
Probably the thing that is coming up next, and I alluded to
in the testimony, was whether or not the two law enforcement
agencies should come together. That would eclipse all of the
savings that have occurred in the past.
Mrs. Emerson. Why don't you describe for my colleagues,
some of whom are new to this subcommittee, precisely what those
two law enforcement agencies do.
Mr. Williams. The postal IG is targeted toward internal
kinds of problems at the Postal Service. Our largest areas of
investigation, for instance, that takes the bulk of the
resources, as you pointed out in your opening statement.
Embezzlement and financial fraud and health-care fraud, both on
the part of claimants but also on the part of providers, which
is big business at the Postal Service. Mail theft,
unfortunately, is something where we need to have a nationwide
presence to combat.
And contract fraud has been--we have delivered some of the
largest cases in the Federal Government in the area of contract
fraud because of the huge portfolio that the Postal Service
has. We do about $13 billion of new business every year, and
the ongoing portfolio is closer to $50 billion.
The Inspection Service looks outward, and they look more at
the victimization of people by fraudsters that are using the
mail in order to complete the fraud. And they also look at mail
theft not done by postal employees or postal contractors but by
criminal groups in the neighborhoods.
So they are more focused outward, we are more focused upon
the Postal Service.
Mrs. Emerson. So, do you think it is possible to merge
these and perhaps do more with less?
Mr. Williams. What I see in terms of--the early experiment,
the one where we lost all those hundreds of people and still
maintained a level of service, gives me hope. We are trying to
migrate more toward automation and data-mining and the kinds of
things that make the investigations shorter and richer. So I am
hopeful that there is still more out there for that.
I think that having two law enforcement agencies in a
department whose mission is not law enforcement is, in my mind,
a little unusual. I was also the inspector general at the
Treasury Tax Administration. And there, the law enforcement
agency, the Inspection Service there, became the IG. So that, I
have to say, is in my mind, that it is a possibility for
achieving economies and efficiencies.
We do have two sets of offices and of the managers and of
mission support functions that could be made more lean. And we
could focus a bit more resources on postal-related matters.
Some of the mail frauds tend to stray a bit from the mission of
the Postal Service. We could curtail those.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. I appreciate that. And this is a
portfolio that most people wouldn't anticipate that comes
underneath you. So that is why I wanted you to explain it. And
I really do appreciate it.
So then, as part of your mission, how are you using your
resources, to identify waste and fraud and abuse in the Postal
Service? And you were very general about the types of crimes
and fraud that you all are encountering, but give us a few more
examples of that.
So, two separate questions.
Mr. Williams. Thanks.
One large area for the auditors is the preparation of the
financial statement. We work with Ernst & Young to do that. We
provide most of the fieldwork, and then they examine that and
come up with an opinion. So we end up doing the lion's share of
the hours that are expended, which is a good deal for them, the
government. We are far less expensive.
It is an unusual financial statement, too. For most
departments, it is just the execution of the budget, but we are
watching the money come in as well as go out. So it is a large
effort.
We have aligned the rest of the audit resources to each of
the major enterprises of the Postal Service, whether it is the
delivery of the mission and the plants and post offices and
delivery, or mission support, such as engineering the new
automated tools that are coming in.
So we have those aligned--we have fairly small audit teams
aligned to each of those that are normally headed by a postal
vice president. And that has been very useful. They undergo the
learning curve. And they have it when they walk into the audit;
they can begin quickly.
On the investigative side, we have to have a nationwide
presence. You mentioned the 37,000 locations. So the auditors
can be aligned to the issues, but the investigators have to be
geographically aligned to where the crimes are occurring, the
space in which the crimes are occurring.
In the contract area, which has been very large, we have
done a number of investigations that have focused on--a
particularly vulnerable area is a multitude of transportation
contracts with small firms. There has been a lot of dishonesty
that we have discerned.
Mrs. Emerson. These are third-party contractors instead of
Postal Service employees who deliver mail from point to point
to point?
Mr. Williams. Yes, ma'am. They move the mail across the
country, and then the postal workers largely take over once it
arrives for local distribution.
Mrs. Emerson. And that would either be--well, I guess it
could be by rail, by plane, by truck?
Mr. Williams. Increasingly, it has been migrating more and
more to truck. And I think there are some concerns on the
homeland-security side with regard to air cargo, including
mail. So there has been a fairly substantial migration to
trucks.
Also, trains tend not to go to where we have the mail
distribution places. So trucking is a very attractive
alternative.
Mrs. Emerson. Don't you share resources with Federal
Express, though, in a lot of the delivery? I mean, as a matter
of fact, in my district, I have a person who owns, a regional
air carrier, I guess you would call it, who works for FedEx,
but they actually carry USPS mail.
Mr. Williams. Much of what remains in the air, we have
worked with FedEx and others to transport that. They are in the
air cargo business as opposed to passenger, which is much less
of a concern for the area of terrorism.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. Thanks.
Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Can you take a moment to explain to us in some detail how
you reached the conclusion that there was $75 billion of
overpayment by the Postal Service to the Civil Service
Retirement System pension fund and your thoughts on how this
can best be resolved?
And, secondly, this is clearly a complicated issue with
huge budgetary impacts on both sides. In the current economic
environment, what is your advice for getting this matter
resolved?
Mr. Williams. Thank you, sir.
We began studying the funds early on after my arrival, and
we began to see things that didn't make sense. One of them was
the moment in which the Postal Service received its own health
funds and own pension funds.
They were shifted over in 1970 and 1971. At that point, the
Office of Personnel Management said that, ``In the future, you
ought to collect these fees. We will pay for everything in the
past; you pay for everything in the future.''
What we discovered had happened is that, in 1971, when that
began, the exact same contribution began to be made. But OPM
decided that they would pay--your final pension is a product of
the number of years you work and your final salary. They
decided that they were going to cut off that salary at the 1970
levels instead of the retirement levels.
Now, they were collecting fees in order to pay at the final
salary, so there was a huge windfall from them when they
stopped. We began looking at that and realized, for example, if
someone worked 15 years for the Postal Service and 15 years for
the Federal Government, the Postal Service would pay 70 percent
of the retirement and the Federal Government only 30 percent.
Obviously, that ought to have been 50-50 given the provisions
of the plan.
So we looked at that and issued that report. And we worked
with actuarial firms for that expertise.
The Postal Regulatory Commission came in and looked at it a
second time, working closely with the committees on the Hill.
They came up with a very similar conclusion, that that ought
not to have occurred. OPM collected a full contribution and
only paid a partial benefit. That, over those years, resulted
in a $75 billion overpayment.
I think it is going to be difficult to know how best to
return those funds where they ought to have been. It is
commingled Postal money and people's private money. But what I
would recommend is that the money be used--until the surplus is
gone--and there is a large surplus--they be used to make our
annual payments until they are gone. That would result in
relief to the Postal Service----
Mr. Serrano. And the annual payments are how much?
Mr. Williams. The annual payments, all together, are over
$10 billion. So that would pay that entire amount for some
years.
That $75 billion is the largest of the segments, but there
are other segments of overpayments that have occurred. And
they----
Mr. Serrano. By the Postal Service or by other agencies?
Mr. Williams. By the Postal Service. For instance, our FERS
is overpaid by $6.8 billion. And we really need to stop doing
that. It is causing the infrastructure that is intended for
businesses and people to be clogged up with extra expenses.
Mr. Serrano. Mr. Williams, to your knowledge--and I know
that you are here to answer questions about the Postal Service,
but, to your knowledge, have other agencies overpaid, other
departments in the Federal Government?
Mr. Williams. We took a look in the FERS area, which is the
one I mentioned, the new retirement system that we have
overpaid in, and it appears as though they collected exactly
the right amount of money. And we have been unable to solve the
mystery of how it is that we overpaid and others paid about the
right amount.
Mr. Serrano. And yet, if we were to, say, arrange the fair
thing, which is return that $75 billion, or use it at this rate
to pay dues, if you will, the premiums for the next 10 years,
it would probably then break the system, because other people
are living on that, I mean, so to speak.
Mr. Williams. Both systems were intended to ride
separately, primarily because, at the moment that they did it,
the administration was fearful that the Postal Service would be
using Federal employees' money.
Mr. Serrano. Right.
Mr. Williams. It turns out that that is not the case.
Actually, the reverse is more the danger today.
They are not supposed to be commingled. They are both
supposed to stand alone and be collecting and expending
responsible amounts. The Federal side, something is going on
there, and I think the IG over there is studying it now. But it
ought not to be commingled with this other fund. It was set up
so that it not be commingled.
Mr. Serrano. Right.
I have one more question, Madam Chair, in this round.
Without significant intervention, the Postal Service will
hit its statutory borrowing ceiling of $15 billion and will not
be able to borrow or pay this year's contributions to the
Retiree Health Benefit Fund.
What is the impact this September 30th of this impending
insolvency? I mean, we keep talking about doomsday, but what
will doomsday really look like? Do they have to close shop?
Mr. Williams. We are anxious to see what that looks like
ourselves. No one has ever experienced it before.
But come September, when we make those payments to funds
that appear to be overfunded, we won't just be at zero, we will
be in the hole by $2.7 billion. And all of the money will have
been borrowed. So it becomes very serious at that point.
I think discussions have occurred and probably need to
occur with regard to whether to make those payments or not. If
they are not made, it will allow time to resolve the issue. If
they are made, it gets very serious.
I am sure that the Postal Service will try to pay its
people for as long as possible, but payments to vendors--and,
predictably, if you look at other companies, payments to
vendors begin to get stretched out and all sorts of measures
begin to occur once that level of catastrophe occurs.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Mr. Williams. Yes, sir.
Mrs. Emerson. I am sure we are going to have lots more
questions about this, Mr. Williams.
I am going to call on Mr. Womack to start the next round.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you, Mr. Inspector General, not only for your
service to the Postal Service, but the litany of other high-
ranking, high-achieving positions that you have held, including
service to our country through the United States Army. So thank
you very much for your service to our country.
Mr. Williams. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. And I may have some other questions later, but
there are a number of things that rush through my mind when we
are talking about the fiscal condition that you articulate. And
I suppose that, at that 30,000-foot level, I think of the
impact of this new technological age on, say, the use of
landline telephone service and how it is diminishing over time
with cell phone usage. And I look at the impact of the media,
the new technology on a lot of other issues. And, certainly, I
believe that this technological impact is showing up in your
business, as well.
Maybe this question is more appropriate for Mr. Donahoe or
another person in the administrative chain of command, but what
are we doing to get ahead of change so that--it is almost like
we are fighting old age. You can fight it and you can fight it
and you can fight it, but at end of the day it is going to
happen.
So what are we doing to get out ahead of change so that we
can reverse the trend that not only plagues the U.S. Postal
Service but also plagues every other agency in the United
States Government?
Mr. Williams. That is probably the area that I care most
about and I am most excited about.
There has been a hesitancy, and it has been a good bias on
the part of the government, not to interfere with the
technological advance, the march of advance through things. And
it has been tremendously disruptive but also tremendously
promising and exciting.
I can't answer for all those other enterprises. I know a
lot of industries have been devastated and changed and evolved.
With regard to the Postal Service, though, as I said, I think
there are--we need to understand this. And we need to become
part of that. It is not the enemy. The future is not our enemy.
But it is misunderstood. And it has been disruptive to date.
I think there are a lot of things we can do to develop a
symbiotic relationship between digital technology and physical
networks and infrastructure of the Postal Service and of
others. We need to explore that, though. And we have been
standing back for fear of inflicting harm on--and that is a
good bias to have. But, at this point, somebody needs to begin
to study, what is the role of the Federal Government in looking
out for Americans? We can sort of figure out where it is headed
now, and we need to do something about it.
At the Postal Service, we haven't been very good with
innovation. Our customers have some great ideas, and people
that are in the digital business have some great ideas. We need
to sit with them, and we need to make space for innovation. It
has been very difficult for someone with an idea to come to the
Postal Service. They have been rejected. And if they can
somehow get in the system, it has been lost. We need to make
space for innovation.
And we need to imagine how best--I can give you a couple of
examples--how best to work with the digital age to make--this
really isn't about whether the Postal Service survives. It only
matters what America needs. And I think they have some needs in
the digital age. I mentioned a few of the problems. We can
address some of those at the Postal Service, if we will engage
with them.
Debt collection would be an easy one. Debt collection is
very time-sensitive. If you don't collect it in the first 100
days, you may not collect that debt. Bills are being sent out
digitally. It would be a good strategy if someone would
understand that the best combination, the most effective, is to
send out a bill digitally, and if there was a delay in the
payment, to send it out by letter. Because we know that is
much, much more effective than digital billing, in terms of
causing debt to be paid.
Hybrid mail, where you send it digitally to the point of
delivery rather than transport it, with all of the problems
associated with that, and have it printed and delivered locally
would save so much and be so good for the United States.
This is not quite that, but right now we have--we made a
decision a long time ago that every train would not have its
own railroad tracks in the United States. There would be a set
of railroad tracks, and it would do so much good. We probably
should consider last-mile delivery as a decision like that,
where all of the deliveries go on a single truck. We shouldn't
be taking huge trucks into every neighborhood of the United
States every day. It is dangerous, it is wasteful, and it
serves no end.
So there is a lot that can be done. There is nothing more
exciting than what is coming at us. But we haven't been ready
for it, and we need to suddenly become ready for it. Our entire
organization is set up for physical mail. We need to make some
space for the arrival of the digital age. It is late, but it
isn't serious if we will do it.
Mr. Womack. My other question is related to the people
nature of your business. Obviously, with--I think the number is
590,000, almost 600,000 employees, it is an extremely expensive
enterprise, from a people perspective.
And this question may, indeed, show my ignorance on the
subject, and if that is the case, then so be it. But my
experience has been, when an organization that has a lot of
people, particularly those that are represented in collective
bargaining agreements, begins to hemorrhage, that there are
renegotiations or discussions about benefits.
And I have always held the position that, boy, it is best
to have a job, as opposed to trying to maintain some level of
benefit that you are used to having, and to run the risk on
losing that job as a result of some kind of default or fiscal
peril.
Are we renegotiating some of our benefit programs, and are
we appealing to the people in your organization to help us
achieve some of the solutions that go right to the heart of our
fiscal gap, if you will?
Mr. Williams. Currently and next year, the labor contracts
are being negotiated. It would be a very unusual role for me to
enter into that picture, and I have not done so. But I know
that there are some exciting ideas being brought to the table
by the unions and by management.
With regard to making the infrastructure smaller, that has
been a huge part of the recent past. We have 112,000 fewer
employees than we did a couple of years ago. Eleven billion
dollars has been cut out of the budget.
And I would say much more of that--we are poised to engage
in a lot more of that, where we make sure that the plants are
carefully aligned to volume and the post offices are carefully
aligned to demand within the post offices. We know that if you
do that, we are too large. And I know that there is aggressive
planning under way to right-size that, to make that a lighter,
leaner infrastructure.
And I know that that is probably going to be the most
dramatic, visible sign of Postal Service action on that front.
But I know the labor leaders. One of the gentlemen is here
today. And I know that they care a lot about this, and they are
committed to giving the Postal Service and the American public
the very best they can.
Mr. Womack. Well, later this month, I will attend a hearing
in Fort Smith, Arkansas, regarding the consolidation of mail-
sorting operations to another area. And it becomes a major turf
battle. And that concerns me, that we should applaud an
organization that looks for efficient ways of doing the same
amount of work with perhaps fewer people so long as you do not
disrupt the timeliness of delivery or some of the guarantees.
And I know the Postal Service has certain guarantees for
overnight delivery, this sort of thing.
So I truly appreciate and respect those. But I do worry
about the turf battles that we seem to want to fight every time
we try to consolidate and become a more efficient organization,
which I believe gives government the bad name.
Mr. Williams. Thanks.
That has been difficult. And that is a very human instinct.
This isn't about good people and bad people. I think that those
interests need to be expressed and put on the table. But we do
need to go forward, and we haven't always done that, with the
action that is best for the American people.
I know that people locally feel very strongly, but you are
absolutely right, that, to some degree, we have to be resistant
to anything other than serving the Americans. And that is going
to call for some tough decisions with regard to consolidations
and creating the proper structure and the right-sized
structure.
Mr. Womack. Thank you for your response.
And, Madam Chairwoman, I may have additional questions, but
I yield back. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Thanks, Mr. Womack.
Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Good morning.
Mr. Williams. Good morning.
Ms. Lee. First, let me just say, my grandfather was the
first African American letter carrier in El Paso, Texas. This,
of course--I saw pictures of him--this was before my time, I
mean, when he was carrying mail by horseback. And he was----
Mrs. Emerson. The Pony Express days.
Ms. Lee. Pony Express, yeah. And he spoke fluent Spanish.
And I remember--of course, when I was born, he was retired.
But I remember his retirement checks coming. And I remember how
happy we were, I think it was the first of the month, once a
month--I don't know how often they come now--because that
retirement check helped take care of our family. And so, I
shudder to think of what would happen or what could happen if
the health and pension benefits somehow get stuck in this mess,
the budget mess.
And so I hope that at the top of your priorities, the top
of all of our priorities is to make sure that pensions are
preserved, health benefits are preserved, and that people get
their due when they retire.
Having said that, let me say a couple of things. One is,
tough decisions are going to have to be made, but I certainly
hope we don't talk about cutting back hours and cutting back
staff. Given the economic crisis and the job crisis we have, we
need to keep that really, I think, off of the table.
You know, and as we move into--and I know we are behind in
terms of the digital age, but--and I think about grocery stores
now. As we move into this new age of technology, you know, they
have now the computerized checkouts.
Mr. Williams. Right.
Ms. Lee. Well, I refuse to do that, because I know that is
a job or two or three that is gone. And so, as we talk about
computerizing and coming up into the 21st century, I think we
have to make sure there is that balance and that we don't get
to the point where we are wiping out all of our postal workers
and employees because we have so embraced technology that
people don't matter anymore.
And so, I know that is a delicate balance, and I know we
have to get to where we need to get in terms of technology. But
I hope there are other ways to do that than to shortchange, you
know, our postal workers and our letter carriers and our
employees.
I wanted to ask you about--well, first of all, stamps keep
going up, the cost of stamps. I mean, I still go to the post
office and I buy stamps, because I want to make sure I support
the Postal Service. But I think the public wonders and I am
wondering every time I am in the post office, how in the world
are we----
Mrs. Emerson. Would the gentlewoman yield?
You should buy Forever Stamps. Then they stay forever at 44
cents.
Ms. Lee. But I am trying to support the Postal Service,
though, so a few more pennies I am willing to pay.
But I think the public is going to get to that point, where
they are going to say, we keep paying more and more and more
for stamps, and we keep hearing all of these stories about the
budget deficit and the budget crisis at the Postal Service. So,
somehow you all are going to have to figure out how to let the
public know what is really going on as the price of stamps
continues to rise.
And so let me ask you about how you see preserving, though,
as we move forward, postal services for the most vulnerable
populations. There is still a huge digital divide in our
country. And we can't forget about these people, because these
people who don't have computers, many senior citizens, you
know, many low-income individuals, many people in communities
of color, they just haven't had the resources yet--schools
haven't been able to catch up.
Mr. Williams. Right.
Ms. Lee. So how does the Postal Service intend to preserve
the valuable services for communities based on what we now are
witnessing in terms of the digital divide?
And then my second question is, in terms of minority
vendors and minority contractors, how are you doing? Do you
have a plan? I know Congressman Fattah had requested a
diversity plan, in terms of the advertising contracts as it
relates to minority subcontracting opportunities. I know you do
a lot of that. And I would like to get some information on how
you are doing in terms of contracting with companies--African
American, Latino, and Asian Pacific American companies.
Mr. Williams. I am sorry, I just had a senior moment, I
think. Can you give me the first question again?
Ms. Lee. Regarding the digital divide.
Mr. Williams. Thanks.
Ms. Lee. How are you going to preserve services for the
most vulnerable populations, who are still stuck with the
problems around the digital divide?
Mr. Williams. Thanks.
I think the Postal Service might be best situated. Today, I
do worry about people in small towns and rural areas and also
in large cities, in neighborhoods that are underserved by banks
and by digital kinds of services. I think the Postal Service
might be the best hope for making--well, I am sorry, I worry
about them today. Tomorrow I worry about a much larger group of
people. We are not sure where this is all headed.
But the Postal Service's primary mission of binding the
Nation together and remaining inclusive and making sure nobody
is left behind is going to become very, very important. It has
always been important, but I think it is going to be crucially
important.
Increasingly, I think people in service jobs and at the
lower end of the income spectrum are going to be paid with
value-stored cards. There is not capacity, particularly in
those areas, rural and urban areas, for turning those into
cash. I would love to see the Postal Service expand its current
money-order enterprise in order to make banking available to
people that have no banking.
I also think that it is important that we remain----
Ms. Lee. As long as we don't charge 20 or 30 percent like
payday loan scam artists do.
Mr. Williams. In my statement, I alluded to predatory
practices that are seen now. I think those are going to
seriously expand if something is not being done. If there was
an alternative and we were that alternative, that would serve--
efficient market forces would cause that kind of predatory
practice to disappear.
With regard to multichannel communications, I think, as the
digital age begins to shut down and darken the possibility of
receiving your bills in the mail and so forth, it becomes
important for the Postal Service to be there to make sure that
people have choice, and also, particularly where their choices
are limited, that we are there for them.
And so I think we are about--I hope we have always been
important, but I think we are about to serve a very important
role with that lengthening trail of digital refugees. It is
just in its infancy. We don't know where it is going. And I
love the leading edge, but I care about the people that are
left behind. And that could be something that we are important
in helping.
Ms. Lee. And minority contracting?
Mr. Williams. Minority contracting, I know that the Postal
Service is not subject to either small business or minority
contracting. I know that voluntarily they have turned to that,
they have adopted some of the practices that the departments
have with regard to attention on that.
I know that they have a fairly good record, certainly with
regard to the other departments, with regard to our hiring and
promotion practices. We focus mostly on that. The----
Ms. Lee. But you spend a lot of money in advertising.
Mr. Williams. Yes, there is. There is a tremendous amount.
And it hasn't always been a competitive process. So there is
progress that ought to be done there.
If we may, so that we understand better, we would like to
come and meet with your staff, and we will engage in a body of
work that focuses on your question. I have to admit that it
hasn't been an area where I have gained a lot of knowledge. It
is also possible someone in my office knows more about it than
I do, and we will send you a note. But I have a feeling that
what we really ought to do is a body of work for you. And, if
we may, we will contact your staff.
Ms. Lee. Okay. I would love to work with you on that. And
thank you very much. Good to meet you.
Mr. Williams. Yes, ma'am. Good to meet you, too.
Mrs. Emerson. Thanks.
Mr. Yoder.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to have a chance to have this conversation with the
inspector general.
I do want to note, Madam Chair, that I was just sitting
here for a second reminding myself of 1985 and the World
Series. If you will recall, the Kansas City Royals and the St.
Louis Cardinals played a seven-game series. And I don't quite
remember the outcome----
Mrs. Emerson. I was going to say, how old were you?
Mr. Yoder. I don't quite remember the outcome, but I
wondered if the chair could remind the committee what the
result was.
Mrs. Emerson. I know. I do have a husband who is from
Kansas City, so I hear it all the time. Yes, the Cardinals
lost, and barely lost, but that is beside the point.
Mr. Yoder. Thanks for reminding us of that, Madam Chair.
Mr. Serrano. That is one way of making money, if you do a
stamp for the Kansas City Royals.
Mr. Yoder. There you go. We will do it.
Sir, I appreciate your comments and your testimony today.
And I have been listening to the dialogue from the members of
the committee. And I take particular note of the debt that the
Postal Service is under. And it appears, in 2010, there is a
deficit of $8.5 billion.
I guess I would like a little bit more information on how
this deficit--how it works, what the process is, what the
accumulation is, is there an overall debt that is accumulated
over time, what the procedure is for having that paid back, and
who is ultimately liable for that debt----
Mr. Williams. Yes, sir.
Mr. Yoder [continuing]. As we go forward.
Mr. Williams. In a word, the entire debt was accumulated
because of the mischarges made against the Postal Service to
its benefit funds. I believe 90 percent of the $20 billion came
directly from having to pay those funds, which were not owed.
Here is how the debt accumulated. It began in earnest in
2008, where we went $2.8 billion; in 2009, $3.7 billion under;
2010 was the worst, $8.5 billion. And we are looking at a
shortfall of $6.4 billion this year. Our payments into that
fund are $10 billion, so I think you can see how I got there.
It is important to try to maintain some sort of a
liquidity, as well. The Postal Service's aim is to try to have
30-day liquidity, which is $7 billion. The leading experts--and
J.P. Morgan did a great study on this--is about 50 days. So it
is quite modest. We haven't had that for a while, and it is
going to get very serious.
We have a lending limit of $15 billion. We are going to hit
that. We are over $13 billion now, and during the year we are
going to hit the max. We can legally borrow no more money.
If somehow you closed your eyes and opened them on a Postal
Service that was gone, we would easily be able to pay that
back. In fully depreciated property, we have $20 billion. So
the money is not at risk, but it is very, very serious with
regard to continuing the operation as a going concern.
Mr. Yoder. Well, how does it get paid back going forward?
We are not going to liquidate all the property of the Postal
Service.
Mr. Williams. No, no.
Mr. Yoder. So, clearly, it is secured by those assets. But
how do those last few years actually get paid back? Are you
looking for congressional legislation that would fix the
overpayment of benefits? Is that what we need to do here?
Mr. Williams. There are a number of pieces of legislation,
some from your committee, that are aiming at correcting this.
The Postal Service needs to be saved from the Federal
Government. And I can't imagine anybody except you that is
going to do that. We are being victimized. We have to get out
from under it. It has now caused the price of stamps to go up,
it has caused the system to break down. We can't borrow any
more money. And it is all about that.
Mr. Yoder. Well, and that is interesting, because we had
some dialogue here about the innovation and the efficiencies
that need to be gained. And it sounds like, regardless of the
$8.5 billion deficit, there are going to be moments in the
future where, regardless of the pension situation, that the
Postal Service is going to have to change how it operates. Is
that correct?
Mr. Williams. Yes, I strongly believe that. I talked about
some of the measures that need to occur in my testimony.
Optimization, right-sizing the organization for the amount of
mail coming through and the number of people coming into our
Post Offices are important also.
Mr. Yoder. But is there a projection, unrelated to if the
pension overpayment was fixed, are there projected deficits
moving forward?
Mr. Williams. The new Postmaster General is working on a
plan now that will allow the cuts to zero out the losses that
are occurring. It can't occur tomorrow, though. I think his
efforts are directed at a further horizon. It is very timely,
it is very strong action. The early actions he has taken are
very decisive. So that is all going to help.
But, really, what we need is for that infrastructure to be
as lean as possible. Regardless of whether we are making money
or losing money, we need to get that down as lean as possible
for the sake of the businesses and the citizens.
Mr. Yoder. I guess that is what I am trying to understand.
We have the pension deficit, or the deficit that is created by
the pension overpayment. But if that matter were to be fixed,
what are the projected deficits that require the post office to
innovate?
Because my assumption is, if their books are balanced, that
there is not going to be a necessity that would create the need
or the desire to change how business is done. So is there a
projected deficit after this retirement concern was fixed?
Mr. Williams. If the retirement issue was fixed, there
would be no deficit. As a matter of fact, for some time there
would be additional funds available to address the debt. And
then, beyond that, I think you need to combine it with some
other actions, just because we want to be the best that we
could possibly be. But correcting the benefit fund overcharges
and raids would remove the problem in the near term and allow
us to pay back the debt.
We do need to optimize. We need the right number of post
offices and plants. We need a delivery point strategy in the
United States where, instead of all these historic accidents
with regard to how your mail is delivered, if there was a
strategy for either delivering mail to the curb or in collected
housing areas to a cluster, that would be several billion
dollars. There are all kinds of levers we could pull, and are
in the process of beginning to pull, that would make this much
better.
But we also need that last digital piece. We need to come
into the 21st century.
Mr. Yoder. Well, as the Postal Service looks to reduce
expenditures, you know, there have been closures in our
community of postal offices. The chairwoman noted the 37,000
facilities nationwide and the 590,000 employees. What do you
see as the optimal amount of facilities and the amount of
employees?
And is that 590,000 and are those 37,000 facilities, where
do those rank in terms of--you know, how has this gone over
time? Are we at a high point, or have we eliminated facilities
over time and that is a lower point?
And the same thing with the postal employees. Is 590,000 a
high point, or have we been higher than that? And what does the
future hold for the amount of Federal employees we need to
disseminate the mail service in this country?
Mr. Williams. It was much higher than that. There was a
time in which I believe I am right in saying there were 800,000
employees. So it has come down. I would say, by the time we
arrive at the proper number, it will come down further, almost
certainly.
With regard to the reduction of the plants for sorting,
there has been a fairly vigorous removal of the small
facilities that surround our large sorting facilities, which
are called P&DCs. There hasn't been much progress in closing
P&DCs, but I would say that that is coming. We have done many
studies of the throughput of the mail. We know how many that is
going to require. And I would say that there is plenty of room
for further reduction of those plants, while assuring that the
service to the public remains the same or better.
With regard to the post offices, we think probably about a
third of those need to be validated with regard to whether they
ought to continue or not. Generally, in the smaller areas, it
appears that we have too many in certain places. They are
stacked a mile away from one another. In the cities, there
appears to be about the right number, but they need a few more
windows.
So we need to make some adjustments, but, at the end of the
day, it is going to be smaller. It ought to be. If you look at
other people in the business--drug stores, grocery stores--it
is very instructive, and it is a much more compact
infrastructure.
Mr. Yoder. And lastly--and I appreciate you, sort of,
helping us understand this--there has been some concern or
there has been discussion about 6-day delivery. People ask me
about this issue a lot, or it comes up from time to time, I
guess.
Is that being actively discussed in the Postal Service,
moving to a 5-day delivery? What is the prognosis on that? And
what would be your recommendation?
Mr. Williams. They are looking at it right now at the
Postal Service, but we stood back from looking at it because it
has gone to the Postal Regulatory Commission for examination.
The kind of examination that we would normally do is by
legislation given to the Postal Regulatory Commission.
They are very close to issuing their report on the issue of
5 days, whether to allow it or recommend against it.
Mr. Yoder. And do we know what their report is going to be?
Mr. Williams. We do not.
Mr. Yoder. And who ultimately makes that decision? Is that
a decision that Congress has oversight over, or is that a
decision that the Postal Service makes?
Mr. Williams. I am going to have to refresh my memory with
regard to whether there is a final congressional approval
required. But I know that the Postal Rate Commission--a lot of
deferral is being made to the Postal Rate Commission's decision
on this. And I would say that a lot of the action is going to
surround that.
After that decision--I have a great staff here--after that
decision, it will require congressional action.
Mr. Yoder. It will require congressional action to change
from a 6-day to a 5-day delivery?
Mr. Williams. And if I may, I will send you kind of a
detailed note concerning that and exactly what would be
required.
Mr. Yoder. I would appreciate that. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Emerson. I might inform our colleague from Kansas
that, traditionally, our bill contains a rider preventing the
Postal Service from going to a 5-day from a 6-day. And your
chairperson is in favor of keeping it 6-day for the moment.
And I am going to interrupt, because I know it is Mr.
Bonner's turn. But here is a problem. There are so many ways,
in looking at the organizational chart of the Postal Service--
and I want to go over this with you--there is so much room for
efficiency. Too many high salaries, too many layers of
management, that does not impact your customers and should be
addressed before any kind of reduction in service, particularly
when you think about the fact that there is so much mail-order
pharmacy, for example, that if there is a 3-day holiday and you
all aren't delivering mail on the Monday for that holiday, and
I am a senior citizen and I am waiting to get my 90-day supply
of medicine, we got big trouble here because I can't get it if
I am going to run out on that Monday.
And so, how do you deal with those types of issues? And,
unfortunately, there is no other way other than through the
Postal Service.
But, anyway, I want to ask you about those, and I will let
Mr. Bonner go. Thanks.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Williams, I think we all associate with Mr. Womack's
earlier comments, in reading your bio, not only for your
distinguished service, Bronze Star in Vietnam, but I think, by
my staff's unofficial count, some 10 different Federal agencies
and departments that you have worked in, many in senior
positions, as you are in today. Thank you. It was incredibly
impressive.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, sir. That is kind of you.
Mr. Bonner. I am going to try to focus on three quick
questions that I would just like your experience on.
Having been at these different departments and agencies,
and now in the senior position that you are in with the Postal
Service, how do the problems and the challenges of the Postal
Service differ from some of the other government agencies and
departments that you have served in? And are these differences
of kind or differences of degree, or are they both?
Mr. Williams. There were two departments that are very like
the Postal Service, in my mind: the Social Security and the
Internal Revenue Service.
They both have ranks of senior people that have been with
them their entire careers. I think all of them could probably
benefit from the introduction of new people into their ranks.
Now, true, there is a very difficult learning curve also,
particularly at the IRS and at the Postal Service, for
newcomers. But the infusion of new ideas, I think, would be
something that would help all three of those departments very
much.
There is a surrogate for that. You can begin active
dialogue with the stakeholders and bring them in and get ideas
from the entire world. It has never been easier. And the
digital age is part of the reason. You can have blogs and
forums; you can have people come in. You can have a very
strong, clear way of inviting outsiders in to bring in new
ideas and the best ideas.
And I think that probably the Postal Service is in that
category of depending too much on ``if it is not invented here,
it can't be worth anything,'' and of throwing their arms open
to other people in the digital business and among our own
customers, in looking at new product lines. It would make
things a lot better.
We are not in the business of protecting and defending the
existence of the Postal Service. We are in the business of
taking care of Americans. And if we forget for even a second,
we have missed the entire point of our existence.
Mr. Bonner. Well, that is a great lead-in to my second
question. How receptive has the Postal Service been to your and
your staff's suggestions and recommendations over the years?
Mr. Williams. They have been more receptive than any place
I have ever been. Usually, there is sort of an arm's length;
here I am sort of being dragged behind the rapidly moving
vehicle.
When we complete studies of the plants and we look at
closures and consolidations on the part of Congress, the Postal
Service takes it to the bottom line before we can put it in
writing. And they are constantly demanding that we look at
important issues. I have never been so close to the heartbeat
of an organization.
And I think it is probably because of the crisis. I don't
think those other people were bad and these people are angelic
or anything, but they do business here. They can't spend any
money if they don't make that money. And so, there is a very
different feel here with regard to its auditor. They want to
cut costs; they want to look for new opportunities.
And I have enjoyed it here, I obviously have. I have stayed
for a while, and I never do that.
Mr. Bonner. Well--and I don't mean to cast a blanket
critique. That is not fair when people do that of Congress; it
is not fair to do it of the Postal Service. I would love,
though, for the tone upon which you have responded just to this
panel's questions, the assurance you gave Ms. Lee about getting
back in touch with her, and other Members, I would love to
think that that customer service, that we exist but for the
taxpayers of this country, were more readily noticeable.
I will give you a quick example. And, again, this isn't
fair. It certainly doesn't fall under your purview. But my wife
and I were going to take our children on a trip overseas. I am
from Mobile, Alabama, the greatest city in the world, other
than the great cities that are also represented at this table.
And so my wife took the passport applications to the Postal
Service window at the downtown post office in Mobile. And after
waiting in line for 45 minutes, there was only one other person
in front of her. The clerk took a break, came back, and said,
``Well, where is the father of these children?'' And she said,
``Well, the father is not here today.'' And she got into about
a 20-minute argument about the fact that I needed to physically
be there to sign a piece of paper or to vouch that the children
were there. Well, guess what? I was here. I wasn't there.
So the answer that the postal clerk gave to my wife was,
``You know what, ma'am, you just need to call the
congressman.'' And she said, ``Well, actually, I sleep with
him, so I will be happy to.'' I am not trying to embarrass
anyone back in Mobile, I am not trying to embarrass my wife on
Valentine's weekend.
But the point is this. I spent a day with one of the other
package delivery firms--I won't call their name. As unpopular
as Congress is, they might not want us saying that we spent a
day with them. But it was fascinating, unloading that cargo,
those packages, off the plane at 5:00 in the morning, getting
in that truck, putting on the uniform with shorts and brown
socks----
Mrs. Emerson. I did that, too. It was fun.
Mr. Bonner [continuing]. And driving all over. But down to
the point of knowing how many right turns they are going to
make so that they can more efficiently manage their gas and
make sure that their timing is right and that they get back in.
I would love to think that, both from a customer service
spirit and also an efficiency, when you have the kind of deep
hole that the Postal Service is in financially, that there
would be a new esprit de corps that would be coming from the
top down and from the bottom up that would say, this is a
really--as you noted in your testimony and in answers to the
questions, the challenges of the digital age and coming into
it, the Postal Service can either embrace it and lead on it and
become a vibrant part of the fabric of this country for the
next 100 years, or it can go the way of the dinosaurs down at
the Smithsonian Institute. I think we all hope that it is the
former, not the latter.
But I really do salute you for the example that you have
shown today. And I hope that others in this room and others
around the country see that this is not an individual, but this
is a reflection of an attitude that needs to be adopted at all
levels of government, not just the Postal Service--certainly
here in Congress, as well.
I promise you one thing. If my staff told a constituent who
called, ``Well, you need to call the Senator's office; we can't
help you,'' then these 2-year terms would end much sooner for
us than they do for--anyway, thank you very much.
Mr. Williams. Yes, sir.
If I might very quickly, that is a very disturbing story.
The new Postmaster General has set out the customer
experience--he set out as a goal to substantially improve the
customer experience. And it is problematic in places.
And there are many other instances where the opposite is
the case. During Katrina, postal workers from their own funds
fed and made sure water was supplied to elderly customers and
things. It is all over the board.
But he is committed to make that steadfast and much
improved.
The other thing is, we have too many post offices. As those
come together, we want them to be more full-service. We don't
want postmasters to go to lunch together and close the place
down for 2 hours. So that is a goal, too.
With regard to the trucks that--Pat Donahoe has just asked
that we begin looking at smart trucks, ones that can be part of
the digital age and can operate with unparalleled efficiency.
Someday, we hope our competitors come and compare themselves to
us in that area.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you all. You did do a great job, I must
say, on the Christmas commercials with the flat-rate boxes, I
must say.
Mr. Williams. Thanks, I liked those, too.
Mrs. Emerson. Hopefully the advertising agency did not
charge too much, but it really was quite good.
Let me ask you one question and then I want to get back to
the whole management structure within the Postal Service. So,
on the retirement fund issue, your office says that it is a $75
billion problem. And the Postal Regulatory Commission says it
is a $50 billion to $55 billion problem, and that is a fairly
significant difference. Are you all basing those on different
actuarial bases? Why is there such a discrepancy?
Mr. Williams. The regulatory commission acknowledged that
the way we computed it, they could see how we would get there.
I think they were trying to adopt a middle ground and one of
moderation. That is--I think that the Postal Service is trying
to do that as well. And so a lot of the savings are revolving
around the Postal Rate Commission's more moderate figure of the
55.
I do want to point out, though, that that is not the only
problem that exists. FERS, as I mentioned, is overfunded by
some $6 billion. And then the rate of inflation we believe that
OPM has set is much more aggressive than the private sector and
other government entities. The delta is 5 versus 7 percent,
which is another $6 billion. There are a lot of corrections
that need to be made.
What I would most like to see is that the Postal Service
make a proposal to Congress with regard to its pension and
health funds, rather than have it imposed by OPM. When we
benchmarked pensions, we discovered that the gold standard was
80 percent, not 100 percent prefunding. And for health, it was
30 percent, not 100 percent. And if you look at OPM's own
prefunding, it is only 40 percent. It is far below the gold
standard for pension and it is zero for health. I am always
suspicious of someone saying I have a fabulous idea for you,
but I don't want any part of it. That is basically what we are
suffering under.
Mrs. Emerson. I am going to play the devil's advocate and
ask you this question. That is, I believe, that the Congress
has passed legislation twice within the last decade--2003 and
2008--to address obligations, health benefits funding and the
like, but yet here we are back again. So what promises could be
made that hypothetically if we were to--okay, arrive at some
figure of overfunding and it was fixed, how can you assure us
that is not going to happen again, since we have already dealt
with this twice in the last 10 years?
Mr. Williams. Actually, what we are seeing are a series of
errors on the part of OPM that are quite serious and
congressional action earlier addressed those errors. We hope
they were errors. We hope they were not intentional. But we
were seriously overcharged earlier. When I arrived, those had
already occurred. But we saw that things still weren't right.
I don't know if there is more there or there is not more
there, but no one is asking for--no one is asking for relief or
a bailout or a penny to be given to us. The Postal Service is
trying to look for a competent way to run its benefit plans,
which we care very much about, as does Congresswoman Lee. That
has not been the case. I am wondering if it is time for OPM to
step away from the plate and let someone come in here that is
able to construct a model of a world-class pension and health
care fund, because I know it would be much more reasonable than
it is today.
Mrs. Emerson. Do you believe that OPM actually has the
authority to recalculate? Because OPM does not think they do.
But you all believe that they can do this without legislative
action?
Mr. Williams. I do. I don't know if they ever said they
didn't have the authority. They said they didn't want to; that
there are lots of ways to do those things and they are doing it
one way, and if someone wants them to do it differently, then
they should be told. Not to try to do it on their own. They are
awaiting instructions from legislation. I believe they do have
the authority.
Congress has now, based on this bad information that they
had received, the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act did
structure payments, and that would require congressional action
to stop those once we realize that an error has been made.
With regard to correcting the error, I think all of us feel
that OPM can--I believe OPM does, too. The difference is
whether they will and should. They are telling us they would
rather be told to do it rather than do it on their own.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. That is something we need to explore
more fully with the authorizing committee.
Back on the whole management structure, I was pleased to
hear in your testimony that the Postal Service was going to
reduce the number of regional offices from 74--I don't know how
many they plan to have, but I still don't understand why we
don't have one per State and one for each of the territories. I
just want you to notice that I have begun to use ``the
territories'' every time I mention the States for the last 2
years.
Mr. Serrano. And I appreciate that, really.
Mrs. Emerson. You really do get used to it and that, I
think, is a very important distinction that we all should make,
Joe.
Mr. Serrano. Yes. And let me say publicly that you were
very supportive the last 4 years when it really started. We
started pushing that in the last 4 years. We have all of these
folks, and when I look at----
Mr. Womack. I didn't know the Bronx was a territory.
Mr. Serrano. And here I was going to praise you. I was
going to say that no one more than those who have been in the
military understand and respect the folks in the territories,
because they served side by side with folks from the
territories. So that is one thing, you know, that we always ask
around here: How are you treating the territories? Because they
seem to be an afterthought.
But I am still praising you. The Bronx is a State all by
itself.
Mrs. Emerson. So anyway, the idea of having 74 offices to
me is ridiculous. And somehow I think that there are much more
efficient models. For example, we have two in Missouri. I have
one in Kansas City and one in St. Louis, and even though my
district is closer to St. Louis, Kansas City has jurisdiction
over all but one of my counties. It is ridiculous, it is
stupid, and it is inefficient.
And just the management structure at the local level, it is
crazy as far as too many different people trying to tell people
what to do, instead of having just much more defined reporting
assignments. I spent a lot of years in the private sector so I
am sensitive to that sort of thing.
And then at the D.C. headquarters, I am aware that a lot of
the senior management folks who are out in the field have been
brought back to management so that senior management at the
D.C. headquarters will say, yes, we have reduced the number of
people out in the field. And so it just seems to me--I wanted
to ask, have you all actually looked at organizational
structure?
Mr. Williams. We did a study of the areas and districts.
And also if you looked at this structure, it is going to remind
you of the government. And it did go back to a time when we
were part of the government, particularly with the area
structures.
We did a study and we said that the number of districts
ought to be--the districts are the lower level, the areas are
the higher level--that the number of districts needed to be
looked at, and we recommend that we have sort of a modest and
increasingly aggressive reduction in those numbers.
With regard to the areas, those are a bit of a historic
artifact, and we recommended that some thought be given to
whether those could all be brought back to Washington and
joined together for messaging. For one thing, it invites
fiefdoms, and everybody does it in a different way, which is as
expensive as it can be. And it is personality based, where
based on somebody's code of ethics, they are treated
differently than they ought to be.
So the reason for them has been, of course, command and
control. It is a huge organization. It is still 600,000. But we
see that a lot of the messaging that goes down and that goes up
could be automated, and we think that if the data, the
performance data were automated, many of the physical things
that occur, and the meetings that occur, and the time that it
takes from postmasters and from plant managers would be reduced
if it was an automated environment.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, and certainly with the digital age, if
you will, and the sophisticated machinery that you use for
sorting and the like, certainly I believe those area offices
are probably obsolete.
Do you happen to know how many people work in the
Government Affairs Department of the Postal Service
headquarters here in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Williams. I am going to look to the staff and ask them.
It is about 50 people.
Mrs. Emerson. And how many--and what do those 50 people do?
Mr. Williams. The job of the office is to manage
correspondence and then visits to the----
Mrs. Emerson. And how many pieces of correspondence does
the Government Affairs Department average a year?
Mr. Williams. I don't have that information.
Mrs. Emerson. Can anybody tell me?
Mr. Williams. We can't tell you today, but we will do--if
we may, we will come and sit with you and look at that. We have
not looked at it and we would be happy----
Mrs. Emerson. I would appreciate it, given the fact, just
to give you an example, I think we are pretty lean and mean in
our offices and we average 1,500 e-mails or letters a week. And
I have three people and a quarter to do that, to answer them
within a turnaround time of, I don't know, 3 to 4 weeks,
because sometimes we get backed up. And all of those people
attend all of my committee meetings.
I guess my point is 50 is outrageous, because I bet you you
all don't have as much mail as I have in my office on a monthly
base--on a yearly basis. I would bet that. So I would really
appreciate you getting back to me on that. It is a little
thing, but it is annoying, because to me your face is out
there, out in the public in our communities. And I love my post
offices, and I love most all of the people who work at them,
and the people who deliver the mail, et cetera. But that is
where you really need to be. Obviously, you have got--but I
think you are real heavy here, and I would certainly like to
see much more management efficiency here to start helping to
reduce costs there. And go ahead.
Mr. Williams. We will be happy to undertake and will meet
with your staff right away to do that. To be fair, I should say
in the early hours of the new postmaster general's time after
coming on board, he reduced the number of direct reports that
he had. He reduced the layering of Senior Vice Presidents
overseeing Vice Presidents. He did away with that. And he also
tried to, in addition to making the place more lean, he did try
to align the place more to the mission and to the customers, to
make it clear that that alignment was strong. So it has been
started.
Mrs. Emerson. That is good. And he is a very nice man and I
know he has got a tough job to do. But there was a job I think
advertised--you have a head of Government Affairs, and suddenly
somebody was going to get hired above her at $250,000 a year.
Mr. Williams. That is true. That is----
Mrs. Emerson. She was perfectly good at what she did.
Mr. Williams. That clearly is a piece of the solution to
this.
Mrs. Emerson. That is why a very, very detailed and close
examination. And I know at one time PriceWaterhouse or somebody
came in and tried to do something to make it more lean and
mean, and I thought it was still excessively bulky. But that is
from personal experience.
I also recommend, and I know that Steve will be happy if I
say that, if you look at the way that Wal-Mart does its
distribution system and it moves things around this country.
They do it in a very cost-effective way, but a lot of what they
do is what you do. And so there are some lessons to be learned
that to me would make good sense just for purposes of trying to
save money.
Because the easy things are, yeah, we will go to 6-day
delivery. Okay. We will close all of these rural post offices
that are the heart and soul of a community, when, quite
frankly, if it cost $100,000 a year to run, you got people
making 800,000 bucks a year at the Postal Service, and so let
them take a pay cut and leave a post office open. I just don't
think the decisions--you are picking easy--not you
specifically, but easy things are being picked; but the hard
decisions are it is way too top-heavy with management, just
from what I have seen of your organizational charts.
Mr. Womack. If the gentlelady would yield for just a
minute. Good point, Ms. Emerson.
A few years ago, while serving as a mayor of a city of
about 50,000 people, we had a catastrophic failure on an
automation platform system involving our courts. It was a
serious issue. And rather than being tempted to throw a lot of
money at the problem from my job as a mayor into a major IT
fact-finding mission and potential solution, I turned, as the
gentlewoman has just recommended, I turned to the private
sector. And in this case it was J.B. Hunt Trucking, not because
of the heavy computer assets involved in a logistical
perspective, but I turned to the J.B. Hunt Corporation, to
people in that entity, and asked them if that was their
problem, how would they solve it. And I was able to fix a
problem a lot faster because the private sector knows how to do
this stuff in a much more efficient way than we in government
ever hope to be able to do that.
And that is why I think that she is on to something here.
That when we are looking for solutions, are we indeed looking
into the private sector to people who have these logistical
frameworks already established that do some of the same things
you do? And are we, shall we say, plagiarizing some of that
effort?
Mrs. Emerson. No need to reinvent the wheel. Stealing good
ideas is smart business in my opinion. You know, not
intellectual property, but rather if somebody has a good idea,
it saves me from having to think about the idea.
I want to ask you one more question. And--oh, I want to
know if it is true. Is it true that the Postal Service actually
has vehicles made specifically for it, as opposed to buying
platforms from General Motors or Chrysler or Ford? Does it
actually design and have trucks and/or other vehicles made for
it, as opposed to--not anymore? Okay.
Mr. Williams. The idea is to build the box on top of an----
Mrs. Emerson. Of an existing platform?
Mr. Williams. Ford or General Motors.
Mrs. Emerson. When did they stop actually having them made?
Do you all know?
Mr. Williams. About 20--I arrived after that occurred. As
long as I have been there they have used----
Mrs. Emerson. They have actually used the existing
platform. All right. That is good. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Williams. If I may, I would like to say that my
office--and a lot of it has been at the request of Pat Donohoe,
having engaged in benchmarking, and UPS and FedEx have both
been great about joining in that. Target department stores have
some fabulous inventory techniques along with Wal-Mart. There
is a lot to be learned, and they have done great stuff and we
are trying to understand it.
Mrs. Emerson. That is good to know. Seriously, it really is
easier, because they will give you advice for free and you
don't have to pay an expensive consultant to do it.
Mr. Williams. They have, and sometimes they are more real
world than the consultants are.
Mrs. Emerson. Consultants just want your money.
Mr. Williams. Yes, I think you might be on to something
there as well.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. The good news is that President Mubarak has
stepped down. I don't know whether to believe that or not. He
steps down more times than Jack Benny celebrated his 39th
birthday.
Mr. Womack. He is probably scuba diving in Sharm el-Sheikh.
Mr. Serrano. Yes, probably. Every so often in these
hearings, we say something which brings about another
discussion. And so after hearing you and after hearing Mr.
Womack comment on the private sector, I guess it is my duty to
say, yes, I think we have to always consult with the private
sector. I mean, be supportive of it so it grows. And we have to
consult with academia and make sure that they are included.
But I think what we have to be careful about, especially in
the next couple of years as we get more and more folks who say
that the private sector is the way is that while the private
sector has played a major role in building the country that we
have today, it wasn't the private sector that said that
children should not work; it was government who said that there
should be a child labor law.
It won't be the private sector that will care at times too
much about whether the rivers are clean or who is dumping into
them. It was government that stepped in. It was not the private
sector, for the most part, who said you shouldn't work more
than 40 hours a week and you should have certain pay. It
certainly wasn't the private sector who, on their own,
volunteered to treat minorities and women better; it was
government.
So I think it is important, perhaps more than ever, to say
the private sector and our universities have to play a role.
But you know, there is something for government to do. And
which invites me to say something I have been rehearsing
recently, I want to try it on you. I am sick and tired of
hearing TV reporters saying, Go up to a businessman and say if
you ran your business the way the government runs theirs, what
would you have? And then they would say, We would be bankrupt.
Well, if they ran their business the way we run ours, they
would have a business that has been around since 1776, that has
been the envy of the world, that played a major role in
stopping Hitler and the Nazis from taking over the world, that
every so often checks on itself, looks back and corrects past
injustices, and whose doors are still being knocked on a daily
basis by people who want to come into this place.
So government has problems. But you know, for a couple of
hundred years now, we have created a pretty good place that a
lot of people want to be a part of. In the process of making it
better, let's not throw out government. Because if you let the
other guys do it alone, it could be a mess.
Mrs. Emerson. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Serrano. Sure.
Mrs. Emerson. Please note that I was not at all talking
about changing the governmental function of the Postal Service.
I was suggesting that they get free advice from a distribution
system that actually works as to how to make themselves more
efficient. So it was not replacing the government with the
private sector.
Mr. Serrano. I understand that. And I understand Steve
Womack's statement, which I take very seriously, that he had
the ability and the vision to say it doesn't have to be
government; let me go see how they do it. And he accomplished
it. I just know that there is a sense in this country right
now, by a small group but a very vocal group, that we don't
need a government.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, I disagree. I agree that there is a
group that are----
Mr. Serrano. There are people that are asking a President
to step down because they want a government that looks like
ours. Trust me.
Mrs. Emerson. Joe, I don't disagree with your statement.
You did a nice job on that statement. I liked that. You
practiced it well.
Mr. Serrano. I did. I have a Spanish version of it, too.
Mrs. Emerson. Let's see, we are willing to listen to that
too.
Mr. Serrano. Before I ask my last round of questions here,
in defense of the Postal Service, my understanding is as to Mr.
Bonner's statement, my understanding is that the Postal Service
basically carries out the instructions given out by the State
Department on how to handle it. That is my understanding. They
set the rules for how you get a passport, and then the Postal
Service just does what they are told. That is my understanding.
Anyway let's get to one of my favorite issues. This report
that came out about electric trucks. I know again it is a small
thing, small in the sense that it may take a while to go to
that point of having a full fleet. And not everybody in this
country is sold yet on the idea of moving in that direction.
Lastly, that they are not $10,000 trucks. They are quite
expensive.
So what can you tell us about that report? And what can you
tell us about the possibility and the feasibility of the Postal
Service moving in that direction?
Mr. Williams. We were very--actually, you asked us to do
that. We were very excited at the results though. I am not sure
we would have thought of it on our own, which is not good. We
should have thought of it. Today--the technology is getting
better all the time, but today an electric truck that could
carry our load could go 40 miles very, very reliably. That
covers all but 3 percent of our routes. Only 3 percent would
begin to test the outer limits of that.
So it would seem that we would be a very good candidate for
that, in addition to, of course, there not being fuel
consumption and there being exhaust in all the neighborhoods of
the United States. It seemed to be a very forward-looking,
great initiative to undertake.
The Nation is also about to go, as you told us and we
verified, to taking the electric grid and reducing it--or
expanding it, rather, to allow vehicles to be plugged into it,
the batteries of vehicles to be plugged into it. There is a
requirement that electric utilities maintain a certain margin
of excess in order to assure that we will all receive
electricity when we need it.
With vehicle-to-grid, V-to-G, it allows, rather than us to
manufacture more of that by burning coal or oil or nuclear
solution, it allows them to rely on the dormant batteries of
vehicles. We are really well positioned for that because we
don't drive our vehicles at night. That could be a huge fleet
of vehicles that would take care of a national issue and allow
for a national economy. It would also jump-start a new
technology and create new jobs and it would allow those--the
price of those vehicles to come down, as all technologies do
when they are finally embraced.
We were tremendously excited about what you did and what we
found.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. And just for the record, to remind
the chairwoman that this was something that we asked for in the
committee, and this report came back. And I understand that
part of the problem is you have 146,000 delivery vehicles which
average 10 miles per gallon; am I right?
Mr. Williams. That is correct.
Mr. Serrano. Is that a huge problem? And we always talk
about our dependency on foreign oil and we seem to do little.
Although I see more happening, certainly in the last 5 to 10
years. Where is this at? You did your report. Is there any
desire on the part of the Postal Service to move in that
direction?
Mr. Williams. It is also a fleet at the end of its life. So
to introduce this, whether it is in our trucks now or whether
we would do new vehicles--I ought to have added that at the
end--I think there was concern on the part of postal
management, but I never had a clear statement of how they
received this. But there was some concern that the technology
was new and they wanted to select a vendor that they were
confident would be around, because the vehicles last a very
long time. I think that was the things that concerned them. And
I think there was also interest in this.
I think with each year that passes, as you said, sometimes
progress is slow. But the arc of the progress seems to suggest
that this is a very promising direction and route that you have
embarked the Postal Service on. We have a new postmaster
general. I will be glad to express to him--remind him of what
we have done, and express your desire and interest in the area.
Mr. Serrano. I have, Madam Chair, just one more question
and then we can submit some for the record. Under the heading
of innovation, is there anything you think or that has been
suggested that the Postal Service could be doing to sort of
help themselves acquire more revenue? I am not suggesting that
they sell T-shirts in the lobbies of the Postal Service. But
you wonder if e-mail--and we are all guilty of it--if e-mail
has taken away from the Postal Service--I am not trying to be
funny, but should the Postal Service get into the business of
being another AOL where it provides e-mail service to the
public? I know that sounds crazy, but you know--no, nothing
that I say sounds crazy.
Mr. Williams. No, it does not.
Mr. Serrano. What could they be doing? Is there, you know,
are there five people sitting in a room somewhere at the Postal
Service trying to figure out where we could go?
Mr. Williams. At this point I would say all the near-term
efforts are the ones that I outlined. And I think there is an
openness to this idea, but we need there to be an excitement
about it and we need to run to it.
I think some of the time was lost dreading it and fighting,
and some in the past were chagrined over its arrival. There are
some wonderful opportunities. There could be a symbiotic
relationship between the various communication vehicles,
whether they are physical or digital, that could be combined,
that would place American businesses and American people in a
much stronger position than they have ever been.
And there are all of those difficulties I said that need to
be addressed with regard to the digital age, too. The Postal
Service could be part of that solution. We need to aggressively
engage with the other players in the digital area and our own
customers, and also the people who are not our customers but
they ought to be. And we begin to need a very vigorous dialogue
with regard to that. And we need a very disciplined process
with regard to inviting innovation, triaging the ideas and
designing them, and then implementation.
I have seen some really great ideas that we stumbled on on
implementation of them in the field. But there are wonderful
ideas for products out there. I think people would love to see
an integration of their digital mail and their physical mail on
the same list, for instance. Sort of a reverse hybrid. Hybrid
mail is clean, fast, and it is the future. I would love to see
us be a part of that.
I think we need to guard against giving middlemen money for
nothing. It isn't just hard to the Postal Service. It is
picking winners and losers. And that is not something that is a
very American idea for an infrastructure. There is a ton to do.
We need to create processes for that. We need to clear out some
space to meet the future and to embrace it.
Mr. Serrano. One quick question. Do we make money, does the
Postal Service make money on those commemorative stamps every
time we honor someone? And please understand that I am not
knocking it. I attended the Frank Sinatra stamp ceremony in New
York and it was wonderful and what a great ceremony that was.
And there were people from all over the city, stamp collectors
and fans. Does it make money? I know that a lot of these things
just kind of tap a little bit into the problem.
Mr. Williams. I think the idea behind the commemorative
stamp--there have hardly been any. Of course, the breast cancer
stamp was certainly the most dynamic and important of those
initiatives. The Postal Service makes the usual amount of
money, and the charity receives anything above and beyond the
Postal Service's normal income. So it is split.
Mr. Serrano. It is split?
Mr. Williams. It is, sir. Yes.
Mr. Serrano. Okay. All right. Just in closing, let me thank
the chairwoman for reiterating our position. And it was our
position before, and I am glad it is still going to be our
position this year that sometimes it is easy when you look at
the Postal Service to take the easy shot. And the easy shot is
5-day delivery, without thinking of what that does for service
and, in all honesty, what it does for jobs, even part-time
jobs. And this is not the time to be cutting jobs anywhere.
So I think the message that she is sending is the message
that I try to send. Let's focus on the hard decisions and not
go after the easy one, which is 5-day delivery. I thank you for
that. And I thank you for your testimony and your service, and
that concludes my questions.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you. Mr. Womack?
Mr. Womack. I have nothing further, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Emerson. Are you certain?
Mr. Williams, thank you. I do want to ask you one more
question and that has to do with closing and consolidating post
offices. I know as part of the Postal Service's action plan,
they want to close or consolidate I think about 2,000 retail
facilities. You alluded to that in your opening statement.
I understand that the Postal Regulatory Commission is
actually investigating whether the Postal Service has been
improperly using reasons such as lease expirations to suspend
service. And obviously this impacts us, and it would be more in
Mr. Womack's and my districts rather than Joe's, just because
we have very rural populations. So have you all examined this
issue as well?
And then my follow-up question would be, do you think the
Postal Service is taking responsible steps in its efforts to
restructure those operations?
Mr. Williams. Actually, early on--I am unfamiliar with the
PRC's work in the area. It is actually early on. There haven't
been many that, of course, closed that I am aware of. But we
are obviously right at the edge of an aggressive initiative in
the area of the 2,000. And there are also about 400 that are in
process, so it is actually a bit larger than that. I am unaware
of those, but I talk and interact with the PRC all the time. I
would be glad to find out what concerns they have. And I will
also keep an eye out for it with regard to that.
The process around this is new. They recently developed a
way that is far more expedited than in the past. We are about
to review on that and the moment we are done with it, we
forward it--if we find something disturbing----
Mrs. Emerson. I would be appreciative. I am sure all of us
would.
Mr. Williams. It is a new process. We will be glad to watch
that and report back to you.
Mrs. Emerson. ``New'' meaning it just started or ``new''
meaning it is a different type of process than what you have
done?
Mr. Williams. It is going to be an aggressive effort. I am
certainly not against that effort. As I indicated, I think
probably the network is too large. But 2,000 is more than we
have ever done. And there is also a new process with regard to
expediting and putting it in a more automated environment. That
is the one that we have embarked on studying, now that it is
complete.
Mrs. Emerson. Any information that you can get to us as
soon as possible would be great.
Mr. Williams. We will.
Mrs. Emerson. Especially any in conversations with the PRC
as well.
Mr. Williams. I will meet with them before they are out of
the room.
Mrs. Emerson. Terrific. Thank you so very much for being
here today and for your patience. You did a great job answering
questions and we will look forward to working with you in the
future.
Mr. Williams. I do as well. And thank you so much for
having me.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.015

Wednesday, March 2, 2011.

U.S. ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION

WITNESS

CURTIS W. CRIDER, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. ELECTION ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you so much for being here, Inspector
General Crider. We look forward to hearing your testimony. As
you may know, this committee is committed to reducing
nonsecurity discretionary spending to fiscal year 2008 levels,
and so we have asked several Inspectors General to meet with us
so that you all can help us identify savings where we can, in
fact, achieve it.
Your oversight is valuable, not only to ensure that
taxpayer dollars are used in the most cost-effective manner
possible, but also to determine whether the Commission is
contributing to the integrity of our Federal elections. While
the Election Assistance Commission has taken on a number of
roles, it was specifically established to help States meet new
voting standards and the overall enhancement of election
administration called for under the Help America Vote Act.
In order for our democracy to thrive, people must be able
to place complete confidence in the integrity of our Federal
voting system. In general, I am interested in hearing your
perspective on the Commission's operating expenses, the
necessity of having so many high-level administrative staff, as
well as the Commission's overall management practices. While it
appears that the Commission has matured since it was first set
up, my observation of some of its decisions and activities
suggests that the EAC still has a lot of work to do.
In addition, I continue to find it interesting that so many
of the States that received grant funding under HAVA have yet
to spend significant amounts of the funding provided to them in
spite of the fact that it has been available for a number of
years. I would like to hear your views on the Commission's
management of those funds.
I look forward to your testimony and to gaining a better
understanding of your efforts to hold the Election Assistance
Commission accountable.
I would now like to recognize my good friend, Ranking
Member Jose Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you so much.
I would also like to welcome Inspector General Crider to
this hearing today. The Inspector General's Office has the
important job of reducing waste, fraud, and abuse not just at
the Election Assistance Commission but also among the States
and territories that have received and used Help America Vote
Act funds.
As you know the Help America Vote Act was passed in the
wake of the 2000 elections. The goal of the act was to help
States to upgrade their voting equipment and election
administration, to help develop an ongoing series of testing
standards and best practices in these areas, and to create a
clearinghouse of information for States to use. I am looking
forward to hearing more about how well the EAC has done this
job and what they can do to improve their efforts. In addition,
I am interested in learning more about how States have used
their Help America Vote Act funds to improve their voting
systems and election administration.
From your testimony, I understand that you are concerned
about the amount of money the Election Assistance Commission
spends on management activities. While I think this should be
an area of concern, I would like to point out that many of
these activities, in particular, the public meetings and
advisory board activities, are mandated by law. These are
activities that improve the EAC's transparency and
accountability to the States it provides assistance to and to
the public as a whole. As we move forward with the fiscal year
2012 budget request and as we continue to work on the
continuing resolution for 2011, I would hope that we remember
that.
I always like to say that the Election Assistance
Commission is a small agency with a big job: to help ensure
that our elections are open, accessible, and secure. The IG's
Office plays an important role in ensuring that the EAC
performs its work to the best of its ability. I look forward to
your testimony.
Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, Joe.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Crider, we will now recognize you for
your opening statement. If you would be so kind as to try to
keep it to 5 minutes, that will give us more time to ask
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Crider. Good morning, Chairwoman Emerson, Ranking
Member Serrano, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to come today to talk to you about the U.S.
Election Assistance Commission and our operations in the Office
of Inspector General.
My office is an independent office in the EAC. Our role is
to review EAC programs and operations with an eye toward
helping the agency be more efficient and more effective. We
also audit the funds distributed by the EAC to ensure the money
is spent for the right purposes and in keeping with Federal
rules.
A large portion of our resources have been dedicated to
auditing the Help America Vote Act grants that have been given
to the States. The EAC has distributed $3.3 billion in funding
to the States for election equipment and procedures. To date,
we have completed 31 audits of 28 States covering $1.3 billion.
We examined State expenditures to determine if they were made
for appropriate purposes, were properly charged to HAVA grants,
and were supported by appropriate and sufficient records.
Our audits have shown that, by and large, States use HAVA
funds for appropriate purposes and that they have the needed
documentation to support those charges. We have identified
$31.3 million in questioned costs and additional program income
in our 31 audits.
The EAC has also distributed $50.9 million in discretionary
grants in the six smaller programs. We have only audited a few
of these smaller grants. However, those audits have raised some
concerns about these funds and the manner in which they were
used.
In 2009, we received a congressional request to audit two
small grants under the Help America Vote College Program. We
began what we believed would be a very simple, straightforward
audit of $33,000. What we found was that the grantee did not
have records to support his charges to the grant. We questioned
all of the costs charged to the grant, and the grantee is in
the process of repaying those funds now.
The second major focus of our work was on EAC operations.
We oversee the annual audit of the EAC's financial statements
and fiscal compliance reviews which is done by outside
contractors. In addition, we have issued seven reports covering
six reviews and one investigation of EAC operations.
Our reports have revealed the good and the bad about EAC
operations. Not all of our reports are negative. We conducted
reviews of the EAC's Internet usage and the use of appropriate
funds for settlement. We determined the EAC had proper controls
to prevent access to adult content, gambling, and shopping
sites. That is what our report says. We also found that the EAC
followed the laws in using its funds to settle a prohibited
personnel practices claim.
Our reports have also identified areas where EAC can
improve its operations. For example, in 2008, we issued a major
report on the assessment of EAC's financial and program
operations. We found that the EAC did not have internal
controls or policies and procedures in place to guide its
programs and operations. We made 29 recommendations related to
needed policies and procedures. The EAC has implemented the
vast majority of these recommendations and adopted policies and
procedures in most of its programs.
We also found a situation where EAC did not violate law or
regulation, but where better choices could have been made in
the use of Federal funds. One such example was our review of
the EAC purchase of T-shirts. While this was only a $7,000
purchase, the EAC bought 5 shirts for each of its employees as
an employee incentive award, and they still had about 200
shirts in inventory. While this purchase was not illegal, it
was just not a good use of taxpayers' funds.
Our investigation in the EAC's operating environment also
showed no violation of Federal antidiscrimination laws or
whistleblower laws but did reveal employees fear retaliation
for making complaints or identifying wrongdoing. It also showed
that employees believe that it was an ``us versus them''
atmosphere at the EAC.
In the failure of the EAC's employee service in 2007, 2008,
and 2009, they showed that an information divide exists between
management and staff. The 2010 survey results are now in, and
the EAC is in the process of evaluating those. Those results
should be available the middle of March, and we are hoping that
there is significant improvement in the results of the survey.
The EAC's fiscal year 2012 budget request seeks $13.7
million, with $3.25 million being transferred to the National
Institute of Standards and Technology. The EAC proposes the
operating budget of $10.45 million. This is a 27.7 percent
reduction from its operating budget in 2010. The OIG takes its
fair share of that cut. Our portion of the EAC budget will be
$1.56 million. While this is a sizeable reduction from our
previous budgets, we will continue to conduct audits and
investigations, albeit just a few less than we have done in
previous years.
We know that members of this committee have previously
raised concerns about EAC's overhead and management costs. This
budget would appear to verify those concerns. More than 51
percent of the EAC's fiscal year 2012 budget is dedicated to
overhead and management charges. The EAC should take a hard
look at its management and overhead costs to determine if
savings could be achieved to bring management costs more in
line with program costs.
The EAC has committed to doing this analysis. In their
transmittal with the budget justification that was provided to
Congress, they have indicated they are willing to do a study
and make the necessary changes to bring the costs in line. We
think this committee should hold the EAC accountable to its
word, make sure this analysis is conducted and whatever changes
that need to be made are made by the EAC.
Our role is to make recommendations that improve the EAC
and to protect the taxpayers' investment in our Nation's
election process. We will continue to work with the EAC and
this committee to make the EAC's programs and operations
economical, effective, and efficient.
It is my pleasure to be here today, and I will be more than
happy to answer any questions you have.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you so much, Mr. Crider.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.027

Mrs. Emerson. As you are well aware, our country's debt is
about $14 trillion, and we in Congress are soon going to have
to face the hard decision of whether or not to raise the debt
limit. Our committee has a responsibility to address the
unsustainable debt by reducing spending, and certainly I intend
to do my best to make sure that the reductions we make in our
budget are reasonable and sustainable. We are looking for any
cost savings we possibly can find.
While I am pleased to note that the EAC requested $4
million less for fiscal year 2012, which is a 24 percent
reduction--and it would be good if all agencies could reduce
their request by that much--I wonder if you believe that they
could reduce costs by operating more efficiently; and, if so,
what specific areas of their operations would you highlight?
Mr. Crider. The management administrative costs in
particular are something that need to be looked at. It is that
they have a very large management staff at EAC, and that is an
area where I think that some savings could be generated. As I
stated earlier, the EAC is committed to doing that type of an
analysis, but I would think this committee should hold them
accountable for that, to make sure that it does in fact get
done.
There are opportunities to contract certain activities out
to other Federal agencies such as human resources, accounting;
procurement to other Federal agencies, such as the Bureau of
Public Debt. Now, there will need to be resources on the EAC
side to manage those functions or to make sure those functions
are performed properly. But there are agencies that do this for
other Federal agencies; like I said, the Bureau of Public Debt.
That might be an area where we could take a look at in terms of
okay, what do we need to do in-house and what can we let
somebody else do for us?
When we have a contract in the IG's Office that needs to be
let, we use the National Business Center to do our contracting
because I don't have a contracting officer. We used the EAC to
do one contract for us, but for all intents and purposes, we
contract that function out to another Federal agency.
When we need an investigation done--I don't have an
investigator on staff, and for a small agency like EAC, that
may not be practical--I contract with another Federal agency to
perform those services for us. So there may be areas like that
that they could take a look at in terms how we can conserve
some funds there.
Mrs. Emerson. I appreciate that. The Bowles-Simpson
Commission Report--I don't know whether you have read the whole
thing or not--recommended significant reductions in government
travel, printing, and other administrative costs. I believe the
EAC should be able to achieve reductions or savings in those
areas.
There have been some reports that the EAC has sent numerous
representatives to conferences around the country, where simply
a few staffers or perhaps one might have sufficed. Do you
believe that the EAC could further reduce its costs in areas
recommended by Bowles-Simpson?
Mr. Crider. It is my understanding the EAC is taking a very
hard look at that. In terms of the printing costs, there was a
proposal put forward in terms of not printing the State plans
in the Federal Register, which would save a fairly significant
amount of money in terms of the EAC. And it is my understanding
from talking to staff at the EAC, that they are taking a very
hard look at the number of people that are going on this travel
and trying to see whether they can reduce it. But I do think
those are areas that need to be looked at. Like we don't
travel. We do everything by conference call that we possibly
can in order to cut our travel costs, and I think that is
something the EAC should be looking at also, and I believe that
they are looking at that.
Mrs. Emerson. I appreciate that, and I also appreciate the
fact that you are finding significant savings within your own
office by using other parts of the government who have
expertise in those areas.
It is my understanding that the EAC actually determines how
much funding your office should request in the annual budget
process, and I find that troubling given the fact that you are
an independent office, given your oversight of the Commission.
Do you find that that arrangement limits your ability to seek
the level of resources you all need to accomplish your mission?
Mr. Crider. I put my budget in separately in terms--I
submit a separate budget package to the EAC detailing how much
money that we need. The cut that we are taking this year is at
the direction of OMB. The cash drawer is empty, and we all have
to conserve money. We all have to understand that there is not
near as much money as we would like to have necessary for
operations.
We are not a line item in the budget. The budget is then
allocated back by the EAC, back to my office. We have not had
any major problems in the past in terms of getting those funds
back, but it is an area that could--it is just a matter of time
before I irritate the agency again because that is just the
nature of my work. They could take that out and say, okay, we
are not going to give you any finding, or we are going to cut
your funding. And my only recourse at that point in time would
be to go to OMB and then to appeal to our oversight committee
saying, they are doing this to us. But if nobody stepped up and
said, okay, you can't do this, then they could, in fact, do
that.
So we are concerned about it. We would like to be a line
item in the budget to protect that funding, and I think that
would give us--that would help our independence. It is just
something we would like.
Mrs. Emerson. Are there any other agencies whose IG budget
is not a separate line item?
Mr. Crider. Yes, there are a number of them, okay. We are
small. We are considered a DFE, a Designated Federal Entity IG,
and a number of us are very small. And like I said, we are not
necessarily line items. We would like to be a line item.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. I appreciate that. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Before I ask you a couple of questions, something comes to
mind that I just think we need to remember. You know, if we are
thinking only about cutting budgets--and that is what we are
doing now--this statement could be true for every agency that
we face on any subcommittee, which is that we have to try to
balance what we do with the services that are rendered by those
agencies.
One of the characteristics of human beings is that we tend
to forget--and we are looking now at the EAC--it is a small
agency that may have problems and that a lot of people are not
ready to stand up and support during difficult budget times,
and it may disappear in the future. The law may be one of those
that also doesn't get fully implemented, unfortunately.
We forget HAVA came about because in 2000 we had a very,
very, very difficult election result; and when I say difficult,
that count that went on and the uncertainty and the pain, and
the gentleman's State went through a very difficult time, and
it doesn't matter what side of the equation you are on, Bush or
Gore. It was painful for our country, and HAVA came about
because of that, to try to remedy that.
And I think as we move forward we have to remember that. We
shouldn't forget that that was the reason the EAC was created,
to hope that in the future we never have a situation like the
one we had. Because when you see folks all over the world
clamoring for systems that look a lot like ours, then you have
to make sure you keep reinforcing ours and give everyone a
chance. It is not enough to say we have the greatest system on
Earth of any kind. The question is, is everyone participating
equally? Is everyone getting the opportunity to participate?
And that is what HAVA is supposed to accomplish.
Inspector General, the last page of your testimony sums up
what I believe is one of the biggest challenges facing the EAC
today. Only two of the four commissioner positions are filled.
Without a full Commission, the EAC cannot vote or act to make
policy and strategic changes. Understanding that these
vacancies are not the most pressing issue before Congress right
now, what can the EAC do to address your concerns right now?
Without the other two commissioners, what is realistic?
Mr. Crider. The agency can function, according to the
General Counsel's Office. They can perform a lot of their
duties and responsibilities. While they cannot set policy, they
can undertake some of the other actions that might be warranted
at this point. We agree we would like to see the commissioners
appointed. I think that would be a very beneficial thing for
EAC to stabilize the organization, get the new commissioners
in, and let the agency move forward if it is to continue to
exist.
But we do agree with you, we would like to see the two
commissioners appointed, but they can still do a lot of stuff.
They can award grants. They can conduct oversight. They can
continue with their testing and certification programs. Their
research projects can continue. So the EAC can continue to
function on an operational level.
Mr. Serrano. And you don't feel that not having the
commissioners fully in place may leave open challenges where
people say, well, the Commission was not fully put together
when it made that decision?
Mr. Crider. I would--there is that possibility. Like I
said, we would like to see the two commissioners appointed,
because I think that would be best for the organization, and it
would forestall anything like that. There was another small
commission that had only 2 commissioners. They continued to
operate, and the Supreme Court basically set aside a lot of the
work that they had done because they did not have a quorum. And
like I said, we obviously want to make sure that doesn't happen
at the EAC.
Mr. Serrano. Okay. We all want our tax dollars to be used
efficiently and effectively. That is not an issue of
disagreement, and we all want open, fair, and accessible
elections. With that established, what are the most important
steps that you believe the EAC should take to increase
efficiency?
Mr. Crider. We would like to see them not only to take a
look at the administrative and management side to see, okay,
can we streamline this, can we move some of the money back into
the program side to help the programs perform their mission and
objective? That is the issue in the human capital management at
the EAC, or areas where we would like to see aggressive--things
being addressed aggressively so that the EAC can move forward.
The EAC is a very good organization. I think it has a
mission to perform, but it needs to be managing itself
efficiently and effectively.
Mr. Serrano. Now, how does that balance with my comments in
my opening statement that some of these decisions, if not all,
are mandated by law?
Mr. Crider. There are only a few positions mandated by law.
Mr. Serrano. Okay. And the rest you think are just fat that
could be removed in some cases?
Mr. Crider. I don't want to use the term ``fat''. This is
where they need to do their analysis to determine what
resources level they need and what skill-sets they need. We are
not necessarily talking here about numbers of bodies, we are
talking about skill-sets. What skill-sets are needed by the
agency and do we have those skill-sets, and can we then trim in
terms of anything that we don't feel is a success at this
point?
I realize we are talking about human beings and their jobs,
but in the tight budgetary times that we have, we have to be
efficient and effective.
Mr. Serrano. But your suggestion is, trim it and then use
it for programmatic----
Mr. Crider. If there are ways we can trim it, and can we
move the funds now to the program side?
Mr. Serrano. One last question for this round. The
President's budget for the EAC for fiscal year 2012 is $13.7
million, of which 3.25 million will be transferred to the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. This leaves EAC
with $10.5 million for fiscal year 2012, which is $4.2 million
below the fiscal year 2010 level in terms of operating
expenses. Isn't the reduction in budget for the EAC proof that
this agency has, in fact, found efficiencies already? Are you
advocating for further reductions in the budget?
Mr. Crider. The budget reductions have not--are just now
starting to occur, and the EAC has got to look at its
operations in terms of how much money we are going to have and
how we are then going to get the work done. And this is where
we think they need to look at the administrative side, because
they are still operating at $17.9 million in terms of the
continuing resolution. So this is going to be a very drastic
reduction in 2012, and we think that they need to start
planning for that now, looking at their administrative side and
determining what resources they do need.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. How
are you, sir? Thanks for being here.
Do you know approximately how many States that have HAVA
grants, how many of them are yet to be audited?
Mr. Crider. There are 55 jurisdictions, and we have
completed audits of 28 States.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Any idea what the timetable is of the
completion of those that have not been completed?
Mr. Crider. There is still a fairly significant amount of
money out in the States that has not been spent; in excess of
$800 million. So a lot will depend upon, in terms of how fast
the States spend those funds. I mean, they control how fast
they spend it. So a lot will depend on how fast they spend it.
We are able to do--this year, we have 10 audits underway
right now and covering another $800 million in costs, which
will bring our total audit up to about $2 billion, and that
will leave about 1.3, $1.4 billion still out there to be
audited at that point.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Eight hundred million dollars that still
has not been spent. That is quite a substantial amount of
money. Do we know why is it----
Mr. Crider. I don't know the answer to that, sir. The EAC
may have a better understanding of that. When we go out, we
just look at how much they have spent.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Great. It is my understanding that your
office did an audit of two EAC project vote grants----
Mr. Crider. Yes, we did.
Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. Which funds subsequently went
to ACORN?
Mr. Crider. Yes, sir.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And it is also my understanding they
provided no records of where the money went. Is that correct?
Is my understanding correct?
Mr. Crider. Yes. Yes, it is.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Any ideas of how to prevent similar
situations like that one from happening in the future?
Mr. Crider. Well, audit is one. By going out and doing
audits is how we find this stuff, so I think audits are very
important. But I also think oversight--is that when we looked
at the records at the EAC, is that we found they should have
had some additional records that they did not have, and I think
that would have helped them. But you know, when you go out and
grantees do what they do, and usually you find out after the
fact in terms of whether or not the records are adequate or
not. Like I said, that is where audit comes into play.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Absolutely. That is why it is crucial you
are there to do your job. Is that an unusual situation, where
no records are found to follow the money?
Mr. Crider. Unusual. Like I said, we thought we would be in
and out in a couple of weeks. It is not that much money
involved. So we were a little bit dismayed when we found that
they had no records. I hope I don't find we are in that
situation again. Now, we run into problems with States
periodically where their records are inadequate, but usually we
work through the issue with the State. But in this particular
case, like I said, there were just no records.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Who is responsible so that that doesn't
happen? You know, are the States the ones who are responsible
for that? Who is supposed to be tracking that at the time?
Obviously you go back and you do audits afterwards, but at the
time, who is responsible? And the reason for my question is: Is
there any accountability for those who are responsible; or is
there a clear, you know, chain of responsibility in a case like
that?
Mr. Crider. The grantees are required to maintain their
records. So that is where that responsibility lies. As the
grantor, the agency has limited ability at times to go--because
that is what audit is all about.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. True. I think I know the answer to the
next one, but I have to ask it. In the fiscal year 2012 budget
request for your office, I believe it shows 50 percent of your
proposed funding will go to management expenses compared to
10.9 for research and 12.5 for testing and certification. You
know, in a vacuum, one would say, wow, that is a lot of money
for management. I think you have kind of addressed that, but I
think it is important that we hear it from you as to why those
numbers look like that, because obviously if you looked at it
in a vacuum, it wouldn't look that good.
Mr. Crider. There is no doubt we are concerned about the
amount of overhead at the EAC, and as Ranking Minority Member
Serrano indicated, it is a small agency and there are certain
functions the EAC has to perform. They need to look at ways to
be more efficient and more effective, and that is what we are
asking them to do. Like I said, as a part of their budget
package, they have indicated their willingness to do that. I
talked to the person doing the analysis this morning. They are
doing the analysis, and hopefully we will have some results
here shortly in terms of what the analysis shows.
But I think it is important for this committee to also
monitor that to make sure, in fact, it does get done; and if
reductions are identified, that those reductions, in fact, do
occur.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Right. Because, again, in a vacuum, if you
looked at an agency where it is 50 percent management and then,
what, 12.5 and 11 for testing and certification and research,
it gets to the point where you think, again, they are small--I
understand that--but it gets to the point if they are that
small and they are spending this little on research and
testing, and then are they really even doing what they are
charged to do? It may not be their fault because they don't
have enough budget, but the fact may be the same that they are
basically spending all their money, in essence, on management
and not doing much else.
Mr. Crider. And that is what our concern is, okay, and that
is why we think it needs to be looked at.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Emerson. This is interesting because when we had the
Commission members, or at least the Chair, before us last year,
and we brought up the management issue, we were told that they
needed all the management staff. Of course, now we know that
other agencies, whether it is GSA or the Debt Commission or
whomever, can perform those functions for the smaller agencies,
and it is an interesting contrast.
Mr. Crider. What happened was they were over here and then
they got over here. The answer is somewhere in the spectrum
here in terms of where they need to be, and I think they are
starting to recognize that themselves and they are willing to
look at it. And I think it is a very positive step on their
part that they are willing to look at it. We just need to make
sure they do it.
Mrs. Emerson. I appreciate that. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning. Thank you
for being here.
Let me ask you how the EAC carries out its core mission of
ensuring the voting systems are in place and are accessible for
everyone; also, to count both quickly and accurately and to
ensure that any contested elections can be resolved so that we
don't face the uncertainty of the 2000 elections again.
I don't believe, and correct me if I am wrong, that you
asked detailed questions about the specific failure of
electronic machines. And so if you don't do that, how do you
measure the performance of voting systems that you certify if
you don't ask States how the voting systems are performing or
failing to perform in actual elections? I think all of us know
the difficulties and some of the problems with voting machines
in the past, and so we thought that probably the EAC would be
able now to assess their performance and know what the States
are doing as it relates to these machines.
Mr. Crider. Congresswoman, I am going to have to punt back
to the agency. The EAC is the best one to be able to answer
that question for you. I am not in a position to provide that
information. So I think you need to go to the EAC for that.
We have put an audit in our work plan for 2011 to go out
and try to do an operational review of the testing and
certification program. We will have to contract that audit out
because we do not have the wherewithal internally to do it. The
IG's Office is only three people, and it is a fairly technical
review. We have actually had some conversations with GAO about
the review and actually tried to get GAO to do it because they
have already done--they did two policy reviews of the EAC
testing and certification program. We are not going to be able
to do that audit in 2011. Due to budgetary situations, we can't
award a contract. Like I say, we have to contract the review
out. We won't get it done this year, but we do agree that the
program should be looked at. So if you guys would like to
request GAO do that, we would be more than happy to help GAO on
that.
Ms. Lee. So you think it should be looked at?
Mr. Crider. It should be looked at, okay. The program is
moving now into actually testing equipment, certifying
equipment. Now is the time to do operational review and say,
okay, is it working properly? In order for us to get the voting
public confidence in this equipment, we have to make sure the
certification program is working properly, and I think that
will help people get some confidence in our voting process, and
like I said, we just don't have the wherewithal to do it right
now, but we do think it needs to be done.
Ms. Lee. Well, have you requested that it be done or
requested us to ask for it to be done?
Mr. Crider. Well, this is our first opportunity to testify
before this committee. So, like I said, you know, we have
talked to GAO and they have indicated that they don't have--
they have got a lot of requests, too, and we did talk to House
Admin last year about maybe trying to get them to get it done,
but it hasn't been done yet. Like I said, it is something that
needs to be done, and if you would like to get a letter from us
indicating----
Ms. Lee. I would like to do that because we have been
asking for quite a while. There seem to be roadblocks and we
would like to get a letter.
Mr. Crider. Okay.
Ms. Lee. And then I would definitely pursue how we can get
that done.
Mr. Crider. Okay. Thank you very much. We appreciate the
help.
Ms. Lee. Thank you again. Can I ask one more question? When
you do these audits, do you do them--when you contract out with
minority women-owned audit companies and accounting companies--
or how do you make sure that the audit functions are inclusive
of diversity in the industry?
Mr. Crider. The first contract we awarded for our grant
audits was a straight competitive procurement, and we tried to
make sure that the solicitation was sent to some minority
firms. The firm that was selected to do the financial audit is
a minority firm. We targeted small businesses, minority firms
for that particular award, because it is perfect. And so like I
say, we had it split.
But we are very cognizant of those goals and we try to make
sure that we do make sure that when we do have a solicitation
it goes to all appropriate problems.
Ms. Lee. Do you use the 8A program through SBA?
Mr. Crider. No, we do not. We have not used it in the past.
We use the GSA schedules, and like I said, we did target this
one for a----
Ms. Lee. Well, if you have a breakdown of the money that
you use, the money that is spent on audit services and the
breakdown of the contracts or the companies, I would like to
see that.
Mr. Crider. Sure. We can provide that to you.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.028

Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I apologize
for my late arrival.
You are a CPA?
Mr. Crider. Yes, sir.
Mr. Womack. So numbers mean something to you. When I look
on the management side--and I know in response to Mr. Balart's
question a minute ago, you talked about that--I want to drill
down just a little bit further on it--$5.4 million to manage
programs totaling $3.4 million; is that correct?
Mr. Crider. Yes, sir.
Mr. Womack. How do you justify that?
Mr. Crider. That is something you need to talk to the EAC
about, okay, in terms of what their justification for that is.
We share your concerns.
Mr. Womack. Now, I heard you use the ``hope'' word just a
minute ago in response. I think it was to some audits or
accountability. I was taught a long time ago in my military
service that ``hope'' is not a method. And I think from hearing
colleagues here talk about these very problems, that we are
looking for solutions, real solutions, and more importantly
than that, we are looking for some benchmarks and for some
timelines, suspense dates, when certain things are going to be
fixed or this can gets kicked down the road. And so I am
hopeful, hopeful, that the words actually mean something and
they are not just an appeasement to us at the committee level.
So, your response.
Mr. Crider. I agree with you. That is why I would think
this committee's oversight in terms of making sure the EAC does
what it needs to do is very, very important. One of the reasons
is that--we got the recommendations implemented from our
assessment report that we issued in 2008--was that
Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren, when she was the chair of the
Subcommittee on Elections as part of House Admin, required that
the EAC report to her on a monthly basis in terms of where they
were at in implementing those recommendations. That
congressional oversight I think was extraordinarily valuable
and critical in terms of getting those recommendations
implemented. And I think that is a very valid approach for this
subcommittee is to request that type of information from the
EAC to make sure they do what they are supposed to do.
Mr. Womack. What would happen if there is a bill pending
that you reference in your testimony from Representative Harper
about abolishment of the EAC. And I realize, you know, you
can't speak to do that, but what would be the net effect in
America if the EAC and its programs went away?
Mr. Crider. I can't speak necessarily to the EAC side of
the house in terms of their programs and operations. But I can
speak to my operation in terms of what it would mean for us, or
what it would mean, is that those funds would not be audited
that are sitting out there unless the audit function was to
move to another Federal entity, which is possible. That is
doable, okay. It happens. So we would like to make sure that
those type things and make sure that there is an opportunity
for States to draw down their money. The States need to know
where to file their financial reports. And the audit function,
whether or not that should continue, whether or not it is moved
to another Federal agency or stays in the EAC is somebody
else's decision.
But in terms of the implication on the rest of the Nation,
they are talking about moving the testing and certification
program to another Federal entity. I think the EAC would be in
the best position to address your concerns, sir, in terms of
what impact that would have.
Mr. Womack. That is fair. Thank you for your testimony.
Mrs. Emerson. I want to go back to the grants just a little
bit, if you don't mind. While I understand the funding has left
the Federal Government coffers and is being held by the States,
is there any realistic way that you can see for us to return
some of that money to the U.S. Treasury since the States aren't
using it?
Mr. Crider. No, ma'am. I don't think so. Chairwoman
Emerson, GAO issued an opinion on this matter last year or the
year before. These are considered formula grants, and that the
money is obligated based on law, and that the States have a
legal right to those funds at that particular point. So getting
the money back does not seem to be a legal, viable option, in
my view.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. So, in light of that, what is your
assessment of the EAC's management of that funding?
Mr. Crider. They really don't--they send the funds out. The
funds go out up front. The States have to put up their match
and they have to file their certifications, and then the States
are able to draw down their funds. They then file annual
financial reports to the agency in terms of what they spent the
money on. The States then are allowed to--the States do come in
and request periodic guidance and things of that nature, but we
have never really looked at their management and administration
of those funds. Like I said, we have been focusing on the
States at this point.
The EAC has just now developed policies and procedures for
most of its operations as of September 2010. So we have
somewhat held off on issuing the same report over and over
again until they got their structure in place. And we couldn't
see making the same recommendation multiple times: You need
policies and procedures.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. So to what degree have you examined the
manner in which the States are spending this funding? Have you
uncovered any instances where the funding has been spent in a
manner inconsistent with the intent under HAVA?
Mr. Crider. We have questioned $31 million in costs that we
have audited, which is not a huge percentage of the amount of
money we audited.
Now, we have had a situation down in New Mexico where the
Attorney General's Office of the State of New Mexico is
actually prosecuting four individuals related to a contract
that was awarded by the State for educational training and
advertisements of the public media campaign, and the Attorney
General's Office is prosecuting, like I said, four individuals,
and two of the individuals have been indicted for Federal
income tax evasion charges.
So, I mean, we do have situations, like I said, and we have
had two inquiries from the FBI on two grants in two localities.
With the FBI, they get information from you and they don't
always tell you what they do. But like I said, we have a couple
cases where things have happened.
Mrs. Emerson. Have you actually found fraud in looking at
the grants yourself, or has the FBI found out separately. How
has that worked?
Mr. Crider. The New Mexico situation came out of one of our
audits, okay. We had been requested by the new Secretary of
State to come down several years ago and take a look at that
program. And based on the results of the audit is that the
State then picked it up from where we finished and followed the
money all the way through. We went to the contractor. They took
the money from the contractor after that point, and that is
where it seems to be most of the activity occurred according to
the indictment. That could have come out of one of our audits.
We have actually been very impressed with the States. I
mean, they want to do the job right. They want to make sure the
money is spent properly. They want to make sure they have
adequate documentation. So, I mean, we are very impressed with
the States. They have a very--they are very dedicated to the
program. Like I say, they want to make sure they do it right,
and we have had I think a fairly good working relationship with
most of the States.
Now, one of the things they do do is sort of an
interesting--is that when we publish a report, they all read
that report and say, okay, do we have this problem? So a lot of
times when we go out there, they have already fixed things that
they had done that might have been questioned, and we welcome
that. We think that is a wonderful mechanism in terms of trying
to make sure the program is run properly.
We also publish a semiannual newsletter where we try to put
out results so people are aware of what is going on. So, you
know, if they have a problem in their program, they can fix it.
Mrs. Emerson. That is good. Let me shift gears for just a
minute to some contracting issues.
Chairman Lungren of the House Administration Committee and
I have both raised concerns in the past with regard to the
Commission's contracting practices and, specifically, we raised
some questions concerning the EAC's practice of awarding
contracts noncompetitively or in instances where they received
only one bid. Additionally, we questioned the degree to which
EAC contracted out positions that contain inherently
governmental roles. Have you looked into their contracting
practices; and if so, what recommendations have you issued in
response?
Mr. Crider. We have had that particular view in our work
plan for 2 years running now, but because of resource
limitations, we have not been able to get to it. But we do
think it is a review that needs to be done, but we just haven't
had an opportunity to get to it. We looked at, well, should we
contract the review out in order to get it done? That is
something we are looking at this year in terms of possibly
contracting it out, but due to budgetary situations we have not
been able to get there yet.
Mrs. Emerson. I guess that begs the bigger question, then:
do you think it is more cost effective for EAC to hire
contractors for many of the missions it is responsible for,
including you?
Mr. Crider. You have to look at each situation specifically
in terms of what is being done and what is inherently
governmental and what the results--what their accomplishments
are. There is no blanket answer to that one because there are
certain things that are inherently governmental that you can't
contract out.
Mrs. Emerson. All right. I appreciate that. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you so much. You know, we talk about
budget cuts and budget cuts, but I see from the proposed budget
that you are asked to take an 11.7 decrease, your own office,
from fiscal year 2010 to 2012. How will this affect you? What
are you planning to do? Will you reduce the number of
contractors that you use?
Mr. Crider. Yes, that is exactly it. We won't do a couple
of audits, possibly. That is how we will do it. We will absorb
it through our contracting.
Mr. Serrano. You still feel confident that you can do the
job, accomplish your mission?
Mr. Crider. Well, we contract our grant audits out, and
that is where we will take the cut. We just won't do a couple
grant audits. Will it extend the audit cycle? Yes, it will, but
I have to live within the parameters of the budget that we are
given because, like I said, the money is tight.
Mr. Serrano. Now, in your testimony, you point to the fact
that the EAC has made strides in several areas. They showed
improvement in financial management processes and in compliance
with the Federal Information Security Management Act. Can you
tell us about these improvements?
Mr. Crider. Yes, sir. Whenever we did the first financial
in 2008, the EAC received a disclaimer which is not unusual for
a first-year audit, but they were not able to produce the
records that the auditors needed to conduct their audit. There
were a lot of internal control issues identified. There were a
lot of problems in terms of their financial reports. They
actually had to hire somebody, a contractor, to come in and
help them figure out how much money they had left to spend. So
there were a lot of issues involved.
They have subsequently gotten an unqualified opinion. They
received an unqualified opinion on their financial statements
last year, which is extremely good. So they made a tremendous
amount of steps and improvements in that area, and I do want to
give them compliments for that. They went from being in total
disarray to having an auditable financial system.
In terms of the FISMA, they actually had no FISMA--they had
no IT security program at all when I first got there, and we
were issuing reports on an annual basis: You have no IT
security program. They now have an IT security program. They
are starting to address the PII data in terms of security. So
they have made a lot of steps in that area, also. Like I say,
they should be very pleased and very proud of what they have
accomplished.
Mr. Serrano. Let me ask you a quick question. Our
chairwoman was asking you whether those dollars that went to
the States and are not being used, can they be returned, and
you said no.
Mr. Crider. Right.
Mr. Serrano. I don't know if you answered this part or if
she asked. Why would the States not be using the money or what
is the problem locally?
Mr. Crider. I don't know the answer----
Mr. Serrano. And you are hearing this from a person who
represents a State that we almost had to drag into submission
at one point. Probably will not go well back home that I said
that. But you know, folks, there is money here, can we get it
going, you know; and I think we were the last ones to use the
scanning machine and so on, which I thought was kind of cool
because you could see the whole ballot.
You know, I don't know how it is in your State, but in New
York, you are placed on the ballot based on the size of your
district. So if you represent the whole borough of the Bronx at
a local level, you will appear on top of a Member of Congress
because that is a smaller district. So on election day when you
look at our numbers and you see lower numbers than the other
parts of the country, some of the reasons are I have one of the
youngest districts in the Nation, I have a lot of, as you know,
a lot of immigrants, poor folks at times, but it is line number
24 to find Serrano. I mean, it is very----
Mrs. Emerson. So, small physically. Is that what they are
talking about?
Mr. Serrano. Yes. So, for instance, we have a position
called Bronx borough president--I am not mocking that. It is
like county executive, except it really isn't. So that person
represents the whole county of the Bronx. If we got on the
ballot the same year, that person would be higher than the
Member of Congress. Yet the Senator goes on top. So you see
Schumer and Gillibrand, and then you have to go through a
thousand judges and everybody else to get to your local
Congressman. You know, very painful and very difficult for your
ego, you know. Don't you know I am a Federal official,
Federales, you know?
I don't know, I don't know what the question was, but if
you can answer it.
Mr. Crider. Well, Ranking Member Serrano, I think you have
a valid question, but I don't have an answer for you in terms
of why the States are not spending their money. Maybe the EAC
would be able to give you some perspective on that, but I don't
know. But it is a good question, and I wish I had an answer for
you.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. Incidentally, nothing--a great
sense of pride in the Balart family who would understand this,
but my son is a State senator. So, in addition, try in a
primary Jose Serrano for Congress and then you have underneath
Jose M. Serrano for State senate. You have a heart attack until
they count the votes.
Mrs. Emerson. You ought to try running twice in the same
election like I did the first time in two different parties.
That was even more interesting.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Mario.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I am fine.
Ms. Lee. Well, I do have to follow up on this whole issue
of unexpended funds in the States. I am just looking at my
State, for example. What is it, $181 million California has
not----
Mr. Crider. Right.
Ms. Lee. What precludes States with budget deficits from
using this money? And I know there are Federal strings attached
that have to do with, you know, HAVA; but what precludes them
from back-filling, using this to backfill budget deficits?
And then, secondly, if they are not using the money, why
don't we give them a waiver to use it for other efforts? If
they don't use it for--if everything has been completed as it
relates to HAVA, then what is the problem?
Mr. Crider. Well, what prevents them from using the money
for other purposes is me.
Ms. Lee. Is what?
Mr. Crider. Is me. When I go out and do the audits, that is
what we look for: Are you using the money for its designated
purposes; are you using it for HAVA purposes, and of course
with the law? That is what we do, and so that is where the
benefit of audit comes into play.
Now, there are always activities related to some
improvement of Federal elections in terms of there are always
things that probably can be done. Now, if the Congress wanted
to give them waivers to allow them to use the money for other
purposes, that would would be up to the Congress. That is a
legislative thing but that is a congressional initiative.
Ms. Lee. But if they are not using it for HAVA, are they
given suggestions on--maybe they haven't completed the work. Is
that a possibility why these funds haven't been expended? Are
they holding it for the next election, or what could be some of
the reasons? I know you haven't had--goodness, if we cut your
budget, how are you ever going to find out?
Mr. Crider. Like I said, that is something you try to
direct to the EAC and see if they have any knowledge as to why
these States are not expending their funds, but they are
facing, as you pointed out, tough budgetary times, too, and
some of this equipment at some point in time will have to be
replaced. This is electronic equipment, and we are seeing some
States are now having to replace some of the equipment.
I think Florida did it, and they were allowed to use the
Federal funds for that. So, I mean, there will be a point in
time where this equipment has to be replaced. It is electronic.
So there are future expenditures that may be required.
Ms. Lee. So they could be holding them for future kinds of
efforts?
Mr. Crider. The money is in an interest-bearing account,
and the interest can be used by the State for program purposes.
Now, that is a unique aspect of the HAVA law is that most
States, when we have Federal funds in an interest-bearing
account, the interest goes back to the Federal Government. HAVA
was unique. It allowed the States to use those funds.
Ms. Lee. Only for program purposes relating to HAVA,
though.
Mr. Crider. Yes.
Ms. Lee. That is good. So the States that haven't expended
their funds, we don't need to assume they are using it for
other purposes.
Mr. Crider. Right.
Ms. Lee. Also that they don't need it; they probably do
need it for future expenditures.
Mr. Crider. Like I say, maybe the EAC will have a better
perspective on that than I do. Okay, I am sorry I am not really
able to address that for you.
Ms. Lee. Well, is there a way we can find out?
Mrs. Emerson. We can have a meeting with the EAC
commissioners if you would like. We could do a hearing, but we
might get more out of a meeting.
Ms. Lee. I think that would be a good idea.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. I am happy to do that.
Let me ask you, Mr. Crider, you have investigated a number
of questionable management practices within the EAC. Would you
do me a favor and elaborate on some of the issues and the
recommendations that you have offered to address them?
Mr. Crider. When you go back and read our assessment report
in 2008, like I say, it contained 29 recommendations about
policies and procedures and changes and strengthening internal
controls. And that was a very significant report.
In the financial audit in 2008, we issued a number of
recommendations there in terms of how to tighten the financial
management system, how to improve the internal controls over
the financial management.
The investigative report, we did not make any
recommendations in the investigative report that was done by
the Department of the Interior for us on the hostile work
environment, because that was something that I think I should
be held responsible for. We should have made recommendations in
that report, and I did not. There are a number of issues in
that report I think the EAC needed to address in terms of how
its employees felt about managers, the employee appraisal
system, things of that nature, that we should have made
recommendations to them that we did not.
We just did a little review on an incident that happened at
the Christmas party. We made recommendations in that report for
additional EEO training for all of its employees, make sure
supervisors were aware of their responsibilities regarding EEO,
and if they see something that happens, how they needed to
address it.
Mrs. Emerson. Have you seen any cultural or management
changes in the past several months that have been made there at
the EAC?
Mr. Crider. They have a new general counsel on staff, and I
think that he brings a perspective to the organization that
will be very beneficial to the organization. He is the one that
is doing the analysis of the administrative workload at the
EAC, and I think that he recognizes that certain things need to
be done at the EAC in terms of EEO training and EEO processes.
And I am very hopeful that his leadership will be very
beneficial to the EAC in helping them move forward in some of
these areas.
Mrs. Emerson. Will you be able to report back to us in
about 3 months and let us know how that is going?
Mr. Crider. We will do that, yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Emerson. All right. I would appreciate that very much.
Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. See, here is the concern that I have. Again, I
think the EAC is an easy target for people who want to cut
budgets, and when I say ``people,'' everybody wants to cut
budgets, some people want to cut more than others. And at what
point do we know if the States are set up to conduct elections
with less or perhaps none of the concerns that we had in 2000
that brought us to create the EAC to begin with?
Mr. Serrano. As I said before, these discussions go across
the government. You know, I just came from a hearing of the
Interior Subcommittee with the EPA. And you know, the
discussion by one side, or 1\1/2\ sides of both aisles, will be
when you cut, you know, how much do you cut EPA's ability to
look after our water and our air and so on? What is the future
going to be?
So, what is within your mechanism, within your setup, to
tell Congress, you or someone else in the future, you know,
States are doing what you wanted them to do or what you hoped
would be accomplished by these grants and by this kind of
oversight and this involvement? Because, you know, we--and
again, this is just a statement for the record; everyone in
this room can make the same statement.
We speak about the budget. We speak about the system. We
speak about the future of the country. But at the center of all
of that is this great ability we have to go to the polls in
November and pick the people who will lead us at the local
level or at the Federal level. So, to me, this agency is small
but extremely important. Is there a setup, an ability to tell
the Congress, to tell the American people we have reached a
point where things are going well at the local level?
Mr. Crider. It is a changing target. A lot of these
officials at the local level are elected. Most secretaries of
state are elected. So there is turnover there. There is change.
So I am not sure how you will ever get to that point where you
are saying, yeah, everything is going to work perfectly,
because it probably won't. Elections are a very complicated,
very difficult process. There are going to be problems
periodically. And whether or not those problems rise to the
level of a national crisis, I don't know the answer to that. I
don't have a good answer for you, Ranking Member Serrano. I
don't.
Part of it is a political decision on the part of the
United States Congress: Do they feel like we have gone far
enough or not gone far enough or whatever they think needs to
be done? I don't have a good answer for you.
Mr. Serrano. Just for the record, the reason I asked you,
because I don't have an answer at all. So don't feel bad.
Madam Chair, I have a couple more questions that I would
like to submit for the record.
Mrs. Emerson. Absolutely.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Diaz-Balart, do you have any questions?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. No, Madam Chairman. I am looking forward,
though, to getting some answers on the other issue of the
unspent funds.
Mrs. Emerson. I think it is a great idea for us to have a
meeting with the Commission members.
Mr. Crider, just to follow up with what Joe asked you, are
you in a position to tell us whether or not the EAC actually
provides States with useful information on voting technology
and on administration?
Mr. Crider. Not at this point. We have not looked at those
particular programmatic areas. And like I said, we would like
to take a look at the testing and certification program because
I think that is the linchpin program of EAC. That is their
flagship.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, I certainly think this does warrant us
to have a meeting.
You touched on this in your testimony and this is my last
question, and I have a couple to submit for the record as well.
We didn't pursue it, but you said the secretaries of state and
State election officials are, they are calling for the
dissolution of the EAC, and it confounds me. Do you have some
thoughts on this?
Mr. Crider. We have talked about it. We don't have an
answer as to why they want to have EAC abolished. You know, it
would be nice to know if there was an inherent problem or an
issue that we need to address internally at the EAC or whether
or not it is just a political decision or what it is. I don't
have an answer for you. EAC may have a better feel for that
than I do.
Mrs. Emerson. All right. Well, certainly we have given the
Commission these funds, and perhaps it is just ``you have given
us the money and now let us do our job'' attitude. Who knows?
But it certainly is something that we need to pursue. It is
just puzzling to me, if nothing else.
With that, we will submit the rest of our questions for the
record.
Mrs. Emerson. And we thank you so very much for being here
today.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.030

Tuesday, March 8, 2011.

SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

KAREN G. MILLS, ADMINISTRATOR, SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
Mrs. Emerson. The subcommittee will come to order. Good
afternoon to my colleagues, especially good afternoon to you,
Administrator Mills, and welcome to our subcommittee. We
appreciate your being here and greatly appreciate all the work
you do on behalf of our small businesses around the country. We
all know because of our districts--whether Joe's or Rodney's or
mine--that small businesses are critical to improving the
health of our economy. And with unemployment a wee bit better
but still almost at 9 percent, job creation is the most
important goal that we have.
America's small businesses account for half of the
country's Gross Domestic Product, and we are responsible for
creating 65 percent of net new jobs between 1993 and 2009. And
I believe very strongly that the Federal government must find
innovative ways to assist small business development and
expansion. And I think you all are doing a good job.
And because of the critical role you play in assisting
small businesses through capital--giving them opportunities to
compete for government contracts and for all the work that you
do with regard to technical assistance, I know that without
SBA, an awful lot of businesses in my district would probably
not even be there, so we are grateful to you.
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget request for the
Small Business Administration totals $985 million, $161
million, or an approximately 20 percent increase over fiscal
year 2010. This includes a $132 million increase in the 7(a)
lending subsidy, and a $90 million increase in administration
for the disaster loans account. And I am worried about
flooding. Heaven knows we are going to have some real
challenges with regard to the whole disaster loan account.
I do understand that carryover from prior year
supplementals previously supported costs associated with
administering the disaster loan account and that this funding
has run out.
I would like to see the administration find better ways to
use the SBA to provide small business assistance instead of
burdening entrepreneurs with additional tax and regulatory
hurdles. And I am also concerned that in implementing massive
new regulations on the health care and financial industry, the
administration is overregulating our small businesses and
slowing their ability to expand operations and create new jobs.
With that being said, I am very interested and I know my
colleagues are too in really listening to your ideas on how to
stimulate job growth. I look forward to your testimony. I know
you all are working tirelessly to help all American small
businesses and we are grateful for your efforts.
Let me recognize our ranking member, Mr. Serrano, for his
remarks and then we will go to you. Joe.
Mr. Serrano. Could you do me a favor? Could you bang that
gavel once?
No, no, no. Bang it. Elections have consequences for the
chairwoman, and I want you to use that gavel with all your
strength.
Mrs. Emerson. I have been using it on the House floor quite
a bit.
Mr. Serrano. Yes, you have. If you have analyzed what I
just said, in some weird way, it is a compliment.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, I appreciate that. And it helps get rid
of my frustrations, because I actually was thinking about who I
was smashing.
Mr. Serrano. Once I got the gavel I used it well.
Mrs. Emerson. You did indeed, I agree.
Mr. Serrano. If it comes back again, I will use it very
hard.
Mrs. Emerson. We will do our best to make sure that doesn't
happen.
Mr. Serrano. I am sure.
Mrs. Emerson. As much as I love you.
Mr. Serrano. You and a lot of other folks. Thank you and we
welcome you, Ms. Mills, to this hearing today. Because of the
crucial part that small businesses play in job creation in our
continued economic recovery, the SBA has a very important role
in promoting job growth. SBA facilitates small business
development, training, technical assistance and company
programs, government contracting programs and advocacy. The
agency also helps businesses and homeowners affected by
disasters through its disaster loan programs.
The agency's budget request for fiscal year 2012 is $985
million in new budget authority. And I look forward to
discussing this request with you during our questions. I am
disappointed, however, that once again, this budget request
underfunds some small business assistance programs that
specifically help low income populations.
For example, Microloan Technical Assistance, a program that
assists our smallest business owners, would be cut by $9.2
million from fiscal year 2010.
Zero funding was requested for the Program for Investment
on Micro Entrepreneurs, or PRIME. This program provides grants
to help with training and technical assistance for
disadvantaged business owners, particularly those in very low
income areas. Particularly during difficult economic times
these are not the programs we should be targeting for cuts.
I look forward to talking to you today about these programs
and learning more about the progress you are making in some of
your newer efforts. Again, we welcome you and we thank you for
your service to this agency and to our country, thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Administrator Mills, please go ahead.
Ms. Mills. Well, thank you very much, Chairwoman Emerson
and Ranking Member Serrano and members of the committee. I am
pleased to testify before you. Small businesses, as the
chairwoman said, are the backbone of the economy, they create
two out of every three jobs. And more than half of working
Americans own or work for a small business. The SBA is a small
agency, but we have a big mission. We put the maximum possible
resources directly into the hands of small businesses, focusing
on the 3 Cs, capital, counseling, contracting.
Last year we helped over 50,000 small businesses get the
capital to grow and hire. We helped put about $100 billion in
Federal contracts in the hands of small businesses, and we
counseled more than a million small businesses across your
districts and throughout the country.
We put these resources in their hands while providing
taxpayers a big bang for their buck. For example after credit
froze in 2008, the Recovery Act and the Small Business Jobs Act
supported more than $42 billion in SBA loans at a subsidy cost
of $1.2 billion. Many small businesses suffered greatly from
the recession. Our job is to support them as they grow and
create jobs, and this job is not done.
The President's proposed fiscal year 2012 budget for the
SBA of $985 million, will support up to $27 billion in loan
guarantees, as well as many other tools and resources to help
our small businesses across the country.
At the same time, this budget reflects a commitment to
tighten our belts, to streamline our processes, and to
eliminate duplication. This includes some of your ideas. For
example, we looked hard at our technical assistance programs,
and as a result, we do propose eliminating the PRIME program
that the ranking member referenced.
With the work of our microlenders and some new efforts to
recruit community-based lenders, we can continue to provide
technical assistance just in a more cost effective way. In
addition to the process reengineering, our disaster loan
operations are now much more efficient. We can preserve our
level of preparedness, with steady state core staff levels of
850, instead of 1,000, along with our 2,000 reservists.
The largest increase in our budget reflects the fact that
we have reached the statutory limit of fees that we can assess.
We request additional subsidy because losses, including those
from loans approved when collateral such as real estate was
inflated, have pushed up subsidy costs. We also request a
legislative fix to return to near zero subsidy. We also request
incremental increases for our new women's contracting program,
and continued efforts to remove fraud, waste and abuse in
contracting.
Overall, our priorities are twofold. We placed a focus on
SBA programs that put money and support directly into the hands
of small business owners in the places where they live. And we
will continue to invest in oversight, to preserve the integrity
of these programs, and to protect the interests of taxpayers.
I look forward to working with all of you, to continue to
insure that small businesses are succeeding, because as you
know, when they succeed, America succeeds.
Thank you very much, I would be happy to take your
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.037

Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, very, very, much. I will go ahead
and start the questions, and welcome to Mr. Womack too.
As you have heard, as you have seen, at least with the
continuing resolution that was passed a couple of weeks ago,
the House majority is committed to reducing non-security
discretionary spending to fiscal year 2008 levels. And for this
subcommittee, that represents a 17 percent reduction. Though I
will readily admit I am not sure that a reduction to 2008
levels is good for the SBA with employment at 8.9 percent, we
are still asking agencies to tell us what it would look like to
live at that 2008 level. So hypothetically, hopefully
hypothetically, what is the impact of a 17 percent reduction to
your agency's operations?
Ms. Mills. Well, that would be a tremendous impact if we
went back to 2008 levels. As you know, we are a small agency,
and as I described, we have a big mission, and it is a most
difficult time to this day because small businesses have not
recovered completely from the recession.
So it would have an enormous impact. For instance, we would
run out of money in our loan program. Because of the subsidy
issues that I described, we would not be able to make loans
after the money ran out, and that would curtail what has been a
very, very effective program to provide access and opportunity
to small businesses as the capital markets froze.
In addition, we would curtail the tremendous progress that
we have been making, or reduce the level of the progress we
have been making in curtailing fraud, waste and abuse. And
finally, of great concern, is our preparedness would go back to
Hurricane Katrina levels which is unacceptable for the level of
preparedness that we need to support our small businesses and
homeowners in times of distress and disaster.
Mrs. Emerson. So----
Ms. Mills. From the point of view of small business, it
would be a real setback.
Mrs. Emerson. And if you couldn't reduce the budget or we
didn't feel that it was appropriate to reduce the budget by the
17 percent to go back to 2008 levels, the cuts that you all
have self directed, do you think that you have gotten to the
bare bones at this point in time, in order to fulfill your
mission? We talk about the subsidy levels and that is why you
have asked for an increase, et cetera. I mean, because if we
can actually come up with a figure that works, I mean, we can
sell it on our sides of the aisle. Joe has the luxury of--isn't
that the luxury of supporting increases from 2011 levels?
Mr. Serrano. I have the responsibility of not destroying
government.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, in this case we are leveraging for the
private sector so this is kind of one of those in between
agencies as far as I am concerned. I think 17 percent impacts
your mission, I will readily admit that. My other colleagues
may not agree, I think it does.
You know, I was at--on Friday, at a small business that is
owned by a 23-year-old woman who started this clothing store in
a place where there were no sort of fashions for the 25- to 40-
year olds. She had this dream, 21 years old, she saved a lot of
money, then she was able to get some help through an SBA loan
and cosigning. I think the grandparents may have cosigned.
However, she is making a lot of money, she is 23 years old,
and a half, I think. And were it not for that SBA loan--I mean,
it is remarkable, and I can't imagine being and being willing
to take the risk, especially because she kind of started in a
down economy, but by God, she has got it figured out. So I am
obviously a huge fan. Nonetheless, we really have to be
realistic. I am not going to make you answer that question.
But Bowles Simpson recommended lots of reductions for
things like travel, and vehicles, and printing. Do you all
think that you can make savings, at least in those types of
categories? Does that impact your mission very much?
Ms. Mills. Well, as you know we are a small agency and much
of our activity happens on the ground helping small businesses
one by one. You have described, I think, the great joy of this
job, which is supporting entrepreneurs because it is the
entrepreneurs and the small businesses that actually create the
jobs.
When we have looked through our budget, we have submitted a
budget that has difficult cuts in it for us, that streamlines
operations, that eliminates duplication and that really
tightens our belts. And we are trying to do that while
preserving the two priorities. The priority is to get the money
into the hands of the small businesses, through our system out
where it is helping them, either as a loan or counseling or a
government contract or disaster assistance. When we do spend
money, we want to make sure that it is to oversee taxpayers
interest in terms of oversight and eliminating fraud, waste and
abuse.
Mrs. Emerson. When your staff travels to visit with small
businesses around, people who are trying to either expand their
business and perhaps need an SBA loan guaranteed, for example,
or something to just make the bank feel a little bit more
comfortable and others. I mean, I have to believe that your
staff gets faced with the same questions that we get faced with
with regard to regulations and more and more government, not
necessarily regulations through the SBA, but rather other types
of policies, whether it is greenhouse gas emissions, financial
regulatory reform, health care. And how does your Office of
Advocacy help them, or does it, because I think that is what
their mission is to navigate through endless regulations. How
exactly does it work?
Ms. Mills. Well, we share a goal, I think, that is very
much a bipartisan goal, which is to reduce the regulatory
burdens on small businesses. And that is part of the agency's
goals and activities across the board and through our ombudsman
activity, and also part of the Office of Advocacy which is our
independent operation that is highly focused on that.
As you know, the President has issued a memorandum in
January on regulatory flexibility, small business and job
creation where he says that reinforcing the need for Federal
agencies to consider ways to reduce, to reduce regulatory
burdens on small business. And talks about requiring agencies
to provide justifications when those flexibilities are not
included in the proposed regulations.
So across the administration, the President has led the
charge that we have long been fully committed to, which is to
reduce the unintended consequences of regulation on small
business. We are active in a day-to-day manner, both through
advocacy and our own internal ombudsman on that front.
Mrs. Emerson. So how does that information get fed into
like the Domestic Policy Council or people at the White House?
Do you feed through OMB, for example? You have your SBA
regional person for region 7, which I think is me. Anyway, that
person is out among lots of different businesses, and they are
talking and they are hearing, 75 percent of the people say this
isn't going to work and this isn't going to work, or this
really is going to make doing business far too expensive. So
they feed that into you, somehow I am sure. But then how does
that get fed into the White House decisionmakers? Is it through
OMB? I mean, I am just curious more than anything.
Ms. Mills. Yes, it is through the OIRA function of OMB, and
we have a series of ongoing roundtables conducted by our
ombudsman and our regional network where we invite small
businesses and talk about these regulatory issues on an ongoing
basis. And we have just announced, an eight-city tour, I
believe it is, on regulatory issues and barriers to
entrepreneurs and high-growth businesses. And we kicked off the
first one of those in Durham last week on Thursday.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, hopefully I think you all have the
appropriate sensitivity to all of this. I hope that it is
appreciated and/or understood by the folks at the top who are
making decisions like at OMB. I mean, because even when we were
in charge of the White House, we were driven crazy by OMB.
Ms. Mills. There is a top-level commitment behind this.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. I appreciate that. Joe.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you so much. And you are right the
minority party gives you--the status gives you the ability to
say let's do this and let's do that, and you have to come up
with the final decisions. But it is a joint thing, joint
decision.
My concern is exactly as you said that there's a
contradiction when you set out to cut, cut, cut, cut without
analyzing. Maybe there isn't enough time to analyze as much as
I want. Two things come to mind, when you say to the Small
Business Administration, we are going to cut you 17 percent
perhaps, if we do everything across the board, you devastate an
agency which is then a contradiction to the majority party's
and the minority party's claims that we want to help small
business.
If they are overregulating, that is one issue. But to cut
them where they can't help people help set up a small business
and create jobs, that is a contradiction. There is something
else that is happening in this Congress and has been happening
for the last 10, 12 years, which is a dangerous thing for me to
say. I hope it doesn't affect anybody on this panel, but there
seems to be a movement in the country of electing people, and
you take great pride in electing Members of Congress who have
never held public office before, that is a great thing. I think
that is a terrible thing.
I believe you were a mayor, right? We may not agree, Mr.
Womack, on cuts exactly where they go. But when you tell me the
Federal Government treats mayors this way or the Federal
Government treats localities this way, I have to listen because
you were there. I was in the State legislature for 16 years,
you were a mayor. We understand each other before we got here.
Some folks who got here, with all due respect to them, in the
last couple of months, have never served before and that is why
we are different, and we are going to cut everything. Well, you
just can't cut everything, you have to think, stop for a
second. We are not going to cut everything. There are some
places that we are just never going to touch.
I want to say something, I speak for myself, I don't speak
for my party. I am a believer that if you get into a little
debt because you are saving the people after Katrina and trying
to put them back on their feet, so be it. If you have to get
into a little debt to build the best school system in the world
again, so be it. Do you have to get into debt looking for
weapons of mass destruction that never existed? I am not sure.
But certainly in supporting the troops, you get into debt, and
so what? Some things you have to do.
So the word ``debt'' sounds horrible, but not all debt is
bad. After all, we have to behave like the American people who
balance their checkbook every month. Not true. They all have a
mortgage or they have a car payment that they are going to pay
for a long time. They are borrowing too. I am not suggesting
that we continue to get into debt the way we have been, but I
am suggesting that we can't just cut, cut, cut. And we
certainly can't contradict ourselves. If we are going to create
jobs, then you have to be supportive, your agency has to be
supportive.
If it is about overregulating, I am open for discussion,
but just cutting across the board and enjoying this statement
that I never served in public office before, therefore I am the
greatest. No, he is a better Congressman because he was a
mayor, you know. And when you used to come here without public
service before, you didn't brag about it, you just kind of kept
that to yourself. Now it seems to be like a badge of honor.
Well, I did 16 years of budgets in New York State and I think
that helps me on this committee. That is my speech for the day.
Now a question.
What are you seeing in terms of lending to small
businesses? Has the Recovery Act and the extensions of its
funding been effective in unfreezing the credit market for
small businesses? And what do you think has been more helpful,
the fee reductions or the guarantee increases?
Ms. Mills. Well, thank you to this Congress and to this
committee for its support in the timeframe where really all
credit had frozen, October 2008. We were able to step up,
thanks to the Recovery Act and the multiple extensions that you
granted with $42 billion in money that went into the hands of
small business. The subsidy cost on that was $1.2 billion. So a
pretty good, as I said earlier, bang for the taxpayer's buck.
We were able to raise our guarantee to 90 percent and
reduce or eliminate our fees. I spent a lot of time traveling
all over the country and I asked that question many times, and
I got both answers. To some, it was a 90-percent guarantee that
allowed the bank to step up and take the risk because they only
had to put up 10 percent of the capital and this was a business
they wanted to fund. And other times it really was that people
saw, well, there is an incentive here, and maybe I will invest
in that next piece of equipment and hire that next person, and
maybe this is enough incentive to get that economy rolling. So
both were very, very critical.
We had the largest quarter in SBA lending in the quarter
ending in December. We did $11 billion in loans, and those were
just critical in filling the capital gap. We now know that
there is some recovery, but that there are still holes, there
are still gaps that exist. One is in underserved areas, and the
other is in smaller loans, and that is why we introduced our
Small Loan Advantage program and our Community Advantage
program, two things that operate within, without incremental
funding, but they are targeted to fill the continued gaps,
particularly in underserved markets where the access and
opportunity is the last to return.
Mr. Serrano. Now you said this was your largest quarter
ever, or in the last year or so?
Ms. Mills. Largest quarter ever.
Mr. Serrano. Now we get unemployment numbers, we get
economic recovery numbers, we get all those numbers. What do
those numbers tell you if it was the best quarter that people
feel free to set up a business to invest? What does it mean?
Ms. Mills. We are seeing the rate of business formation and
entrepreneurship go up. We know that some of the best
businesses were actually started in recessions looking back. We
see encouraging signs from our small businesses in that they
are taking advantage of things like accelerated depreciation to
buy that piece of equipment and hire someone, but they are not
out of the woods yet. The economy is still fragile. Small
businesses took a tremendous hit, and they still very much need
to be supported with access to capital, which the capital
markets are not fully functioning and not fully back beyond the
SBA, the traditional capital banking markets.
And they need the opportunities to provide access to
government contracting, and they very much need our counseling
and advice because that shows that there are greater success
rates when you have a long-term counselor and you hire more
people.
Mr. Serrano. May I ask one more question?
Mrs. Emerson. Sure.
Mr. Serrano. You are requesting a $161 million increase
over the fiscal year 2010 level for the SBA and of this amount,
$131.6 million, to a 7(a) loan program to cover subsidies which
has not been the case in the past. Now in the past, as you
know, it was zeroed out and then we would kind of force you
guys to take the money in a way. What does this funding cover
and why is it needed now? What is the difference this time? And
how much of the regular 7(a) appropriation for fiscal year
2010, which was $80 million has been spent thus far?
Ms. Mills. The request, the largest increases as I said in
our budget, go to subsidy. And the reason is that we have fully
used our fees and brought them to the fee caps. The subsidy
rates are up because of losses that we are seeing from the 2005
to 2008 cohorts. In that time period, as you know, small
business owners used their real estate as collateral, and their
house or their building had inflated values in that time
period, 2005 to 2008.
So as we look now, we see that those values are not there,
and they are creating loss rates that have gone up as have
rates for traditional lenders, our subsidy rates and our loss
rates have gone up. Those subsidy rates calculations, when
applied to the 2012 budget, require incremental funding that we
cannot cover with our fees because we have maxed out to our
statutory fee limits. We have asked for the ability to adjust
fees and have flexibility in 2013, because we believe that if
we can, we should move our loans to zero subsidy.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, Joe. Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Ms. Mills, it is
good to see you. You mentioned something about preparedness
program, and you mentioned something about Hurricane Katrina.
Can you tell us what that means?
Ms. Mills. I am sorry, I didn't quite hear the last part.
Mr. Alexander. Preparedness program, you said something
about it in relation to Hurricane Katrina, and you were hoping
to do better than we were prepared during Hurricane Katrina.
Ms. Mills. As you know, we have completely revamped our
disaster loan program in the post-Katrina era to significantly
elevate our state of readiness, and our commitment has been
significant. In Hurricane Katrina era, we had 366 seats at our
processing centers. And it took us 70 days to process loans.
Right now, we have 1,750 seats, and it takes us 7 to 10
days to process loans. We operate a new technology system that
allows us to have 10,000 concurrent users on it versus 800 in
the Katrina level. And we have 2,000 ready reservists, they are
not on payroll, but they are on call. So actually, when we call
them up, following a disaster, they will go from the ice storms
in Maine, and then they will travel to the wildfires in
California, and then the flooding in the Midwest, and then the
tornados, and then the hurricane, and then they do it again. So
our staffing levels fluctuate up and down depending on the
need.
Our commitment is to maintain that level of preparedness.
And what we have done is look for cost savings. In this budget,
we deliver to you $8 million of cost savings by taking our
steady state of readiness down to 850 permanent staffing or
steady state staffing versus 1,000. And we have done that by
process engineering and streamlining our centers, not by
reducing our level of readiness.
Mr. Alexander. Okay. In your opening statement, you said
over the past 2 years we have provided taxpayers with a big
bang for their buck. The Transportation Department argues that
for every dollar spent, we benefit by $3. Can you compare what
you mean by big bangs for their bucks compared to the
Transportation Department?
Ms. Mills. In the one example I gave there, the subsidy
costs of our SBA loans was $1.2 billion, and the amount of
money that actually went into people's hands, because we
provide guarantees, was $42 billion. But this is true across
our various programs. We have partnered with the private sector
and others in our Small Business Development Centers, in our
SBIC programs, so that we really try to give a lot of activity
off of a smaller budget number.
Mr. Alexander. Okay, out there in the public when some of
the banks that we hear about who are denying loans, there is an
appeals process that one can go through. Do you all have a
similar process? If a loan is denied, is there an appeals
process?
Ms. Mills. Yes, and we do review loans, multiple times. We
have lots of ways that small businesses can get help. I will
give you one statistic which is in our North Carolina center.
We were able to take those who were denied loans, and we got 60
percent of them funding by working with them in counseling and
on their business plan and then bringing them back and
introducing them to banks who, you know, were interested in
making loans in their particular area.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Emerson. Are you finished for this round?
Mr. Alexander. I am.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It is good to see
you, Ms. Mills. I appreciate the work that your agency does and
continues to do for small business and job creation. I just
have a couple of questions, and then I have to step out; I have
got to go to the floor here in just a minute.
But one of the things that the gentleman from across the
way, Mr. Serrano, has indicated that I am a former mayor and a
former small business man. So I think my background is pretty
unique in terms that I have seen it from virtually every side.
I think I would look at it this way; one of the things that
I have always been in favor of is the capacity to leverage
public dollars, that too often we get caught up in the notion
that we are going use someone else's money in total, and to try
to accomplish some desired outcomes in small business or
whatever the case is. I am huge on the leveraging piece of it.
In other words, I like to see more than one person, i.e.
Our Federal Government, have skin in the game when we are
talking about making major investments in small business. I
certainly agree the facts speak for themselves, that our way
out of this economic mess is through the creation of jobs in
the private sector.
So what are you doing to encourage the leveraging of the
support that comes through your agency in the public-private
arena to ensure that the Federal Government's not absorbing all
of its cost? Instead, that we have our stakeholders in the
game? That is a big question, that is a broad subject area, so
you can probably go a lot of different directions with it, but
I am curious about your response.
Ms. Mills. We share your objective of using public-private
partnerships to get more leverage for the small businesses that
are out there. And let me just give you a couple of examples.
In our SBIC program, small business investment companies, they
actually run at a zero subsidy level because we provide the
debenture guarantees for other partners, and we are able to put
billions of dollars out into small and growing businesses, all
across the country and with zero subsidy cost.
We also have a program we call SCORE, and there we use
private sector individuals, 12,000 of them, who are volunteer
small business people who have had the experience of growing
their own business. And they counsel, for free, small
businesses that we put into their network.
A third quick example, we have just announced something
called Startup America, which is going to be led in the public-
private partnership by Steve Case, a fabulous entrepreneur who
started AOL. And a number of companies have joined this public-
private partnership to help in Entrepreneurial Mentor Corps and
other activities which are going to grow our small high-growth
businesses that are really one of the most important job
creators for the country.
Mr. Womack. How active is your agency, say, in some of the
business-directed institutions on campuses of higher education?
How do you interact with different schools of business?
Ms. Mills. We have multiple interactions with different
schools of businesses. I was just informed this morning that we
have a joint partnership with one of the top, top-tier business
schools who is helping us establish an entrepreneurial center
in partnership with our small business development center. So
we do everything from work with them in our emerging leaders,
entrepreneurship education program to our local guidance and
counseling and advice.
Mr. Womack. It goes back to my question of leveraging,
because I really think that all the major stakeholders--health
care, education, higher education, government, business
industry, I think, there are unlimited opportunities for us to
work through a lot of those stakeholders in bringing formations
of capital and expertise, counseling, et cetera, to the table.
And I would like to see a lot more of that.
The last thing I want to ask, and this is as close to
editorializing as the gentleman a few minutes ago was doing and
issuing some opinions. You have an impressive background in
consulting and management and helping small business. What are
you hearing right now about what I believe is one of the single
biggest barriers to the growth of jobs, particularly in the
private sector, the overreach of our government into areas that
just cause the potential entrepreneur to throw his hands up and
say, it is just not worth it, it is just not cost effective.
It will cost me a lot more to do this than it is worth.
What wonderful opportunities are we throwing away because we
just live in such a terrible and inefficient, burdensome
regulatory environment?
Ms. Mills. Well, I thank you for the question and the kind
comments. I did grow up in the world of small business, and we
travel around the country and listen to small businesses all
the time, talk about this issue of the unintended consequences
of regulation. I will say I am very, very happy that across the
administration in OMB and OIRA, and the President himself have
made very strong statements in support of small business and
making sure that they don't have unintended consequences from
this excess regulation.
We have been proactive. We have our day-to-day operations
and our ombudsmen and our advocacy. But we have been even more
proactive in recent months by initiating an effort to go around
the country and listening to small businesses in the high-
growth entrepreneur area, talk about specific barriers that
they have.
And it might be regulatory barriers, it might be can they
get paid on time. But whatever those barriers are, this forum,
which is under the Startup America Initiative, is explicitly
designed to listen and then take action on those kinds of
barriers and concerns. The goal is to help entrepreneurs, put
some wind at their back, and let them do what they do best,
which is grow their companies and create jobs.
Mr. Womack. I represent the third district of Arkansas, and
once upon time back in the 1960s, there was a very small
business, it started ironically enough, the first--and you know
where I am going with this probably--the first store happened
to be, Mr. Serrano, in Rogers, Arkansas. That is where the very
first Wal-Mart store happened to be located. I can take you to
the site just around the block from my city hall.
Mr. Walton is not here to confirm or deny this opinion that
I will give, but it is in my strong opinion that that small
business, which later would become one of America's most famous
companies and certainly one the largest in the world, may not
have ever survived a regulatory environment quite like we have
right now. And if small business people are ever going to be
able to live that American dream, I don't know how they
survive. A lot of the things that the unfunded mandates and the
demands that we are placing on small businesses.
And so with that said, my question for you would be when
you make your travels and when you hear back from these
organizations--these entrepreneurs--that your agency tries to
help. And you hear, I am sure, of many horror stories about the
problems associated with developing small business, up-start
businesses undercapitalized in a regulatory environment like we
are, do you have direct access to the President's ear? Do you--
I know you have quoted the President as saying he wants to
solve this regulatory burden that we have right now--but do you
have direct access? Do you have his ear on these important
matters?
Ms. Mills. Well, first, I have to say that I appreciate
your comments about the small businesses born in Arkansas. And
I actually have traveled there quite a bit. I have been in
Arkadelphia recently with all the loggers, I have been in Bald
Knob, I have been in Heber Springs, and I have been in Searay,
and really appreciate that we have fabulous small businesses
throughout the State.
Mr. Womack. Well, if the gentlelady would yield, let me
just say, since I mentioned Wal-Mart, let me just throw Tyson
and J.B. Hunt Trucking, there are three major ones in my
district, three big ones that I don't think would have survived
the regulatory environment we are in today.
Ms. Mills. But the answer to your question about the
President is yes, I have had discussions about this with the
President. I know he is committed. The memorandum that he
issued on small business and regulation is a very strong
statement to all agencies on exactly the issue that you
described in support of making sure that they produce more
flexibility for the smaller business who doesn't have the staff
and the time and the money to really deal with those regulatory
burdens. And while preserving the health and safety issues to
make sure small businesses can also operate.
Mr. Womack. Did the Health Care Patient Protection
Affordable Care--I never get that right.
Mrs. Emerson. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Womack. Patient Protection, yes, thank you. Has that
come up in your discussions with small business entrepreneurs?
Ms. Mills. Yes, and I will say we have supported a very
important amendment that I know is under discussion. We are
very much in support of the repeal of the 1099 provision which
does place an undue burden on small business.
Mr. Womack. But stop there?
Ms. Mills. The other aspects actually provide great benefit
to small businesses particularly in the tax credits that are
available as we speak. The 2010 tax credits are available to
potentially 4 million of the 6 million small businesses. And as
I travel, I am seeing small businesses coming to us now for
information because they are getting dollars back in their
pocket and there is nothing a small business likes better than
dollars in their pocket.
Mr. Womack. Thank you for your testimony. Madam Chairwoman,
I yield back.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Yoder.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here. And I, too, have to head to the floor
shortly. So I will ask just a couple brief questions. I
appreciate your service and appreciate your work here today.
And I want to maybe follow up on the questions from my
colleague from Arkansas.
Everyone, including yourself, spent a lot of time talking
to small business owners. Our focus, I think, my focus and many
of my colleagues, is to try to figure out how we get innovators
and entrepreneurs back home, creating jobs and expending and
growing. I mean, that is the key. We know that no matter how
many dollars and trillions of stimulus dollars are spent in
Washington or how many rules and regulations or how many new
bureaucrats we hire, it is not going to help that American
somewhere that has a dream to start a small business if they
can't get off the ground and get moving.
So I hear a lot of same things probably my colleagues do.
And I guess wanted to trail backward.
Mr. Womack was going here, and related to a word I didn't
see, at least in your report, you might kind of discuss your
feelings on this, and that is related to uncertainty. Almost
every meeting I have been in with the small business, they have
brought up the uncertainty in Federal policy uncertainty in tax
policy, uncertainty in rules and regulations, inability to
borrow money. So many things that are related to, what I
believe are poor government policies that the instability and
uncertainty that many of them either can't expand, or feel they
shouldn't expand because of the risks that are involved.
And so I have been heading down the pathway, along with
many others, trying to figure out how we create that stability
and certainty for small business owners. And I note the
discussion about regulations, and I note that your comments
regarding the President's positions of trying to review some of
those, but there is a mountain of rules and regulations heading
to small business owners. I meet with community banks, and I
meet with small business owners; they feel inundated.
And I don't know if this is what you are hearing when you
go out and talk to them, but the third district of Kansas they
feel overwhelmed and inundated with so many new things coming
their way. They are completely overwhelmed by what the health
care bill may mean to their bottom line. I can't tell you the
amount of small business owners I have talked to that have
said, because of that bill, I am not going to hire anybody
until I see what the impact is on our bottom line.
So I see a real bottle neck coming, not from a statement
the President might make that we should go review these rules
and regulations, but from all the rules and regulations coming
from the health care bill, all the rules and regulations coming
from the Dodd-Frank Act, all the rules and regulations that are
still coming from EPA and OSHA and so many different
organizations, that I can't tell you the amount of times I
talked to a small business that feels overwhelmed. And they
don't say, well, if you could give a little bit more money to
the SBA, we would be back at it. They say stop, change the
rules of the game. Stop sending so many rules and regulations
our way. Let us create jobs.
And so I guess I really want to get at what the SBA is
doing or how you are advocating, what is your position on that?
Do you agree or do you think the rules and regulations are
helpful to those innovators and entrepreneurs who are trying to
get their businesses moving?
Ms. Mills. Well, as you know, we do a tremendous amount of
traveling around the country listening to small businesses as
well in these roundtables. And explicitly in the roundtables
that we have just announced, we are going to be asking
entrepreneurs to come and talk about those specific regulations
on which they have concerns. So when they talk about specific
regulations, they mention 1099, which we have come out to ask
for repeal. And when they talk about specific regulations, we
have the ability with our ombudsman to go back to those issuing
agencies and help work with those small business through them.
Overall, when small businesses talk about uncertainty,
which they don't do in a generalized sense, they are referring
to the uncertainty they see in the economic environment. Small
businesses do feel that the recession is not over. They do feel
that they want now to fulfill that next order. They do come to
us for counseling and advice on what is available to them. And
one of the things I would hope that we might be able to do to
help your small businesses is to bring them into our counseling
operations.
We have 900 small business development centers, we have
12,000 SCORE volunteers, and they have access to bring a small
business owner to those things that will benefit them, whether
it is a tax credit. We have 17 tax credits that have been
enacted for small business. Now it is tax time, we need to make
sure that those small businesses know what is possible for
them. And then, I just wanted to mention that those services
are free.
Mr. Yoder. I appreciate you highlighting that. How many
small businesses are there in the United States, do you have an
idea?
Ms. Mills. Yes, just under 30 million small businesses in
the United States, of which 6 million have employees.
Mr. Yoder. And how many small businesses have received
services from the SBA in the last year?
Ms. Mills. We have many, many ways that we deliver
services, but some of the highlights are that we had 50,000
businesses that we gave capital to, and loan guarantees. There
are about $100 billion of contracts that we put into their
hands. I don't have the exact number of small businesses, and
we counseled more than a million.
Mr. Yoder. So 30 million small businesses, and you have
counseled a million. How many do you think you could reasonably
touch? So of all of our districts and all the small businesses
that we have talked to who share with us maybe a little
different perspective that you are sharing today, that the
health care bill is making it difficult for them to feel like
they should risk capital right now until they see how that all
plays out.
The impact of the Dodd-Frank bill and its regulation of the
small community banks and their impact and their ability to
borrow money, that those things from the EPA and other
organizations or other entities in Washington that are
unpredictable that don't go through the democratic process,
that are coming through the executive branch, those things, how
many small businesses can you sit down with to allay those
concerns so that all those things that are coming their way,
and all that uncertainty that they talk to me about, how many
of those folks can the SBA effectively resolve so they don't
have the uncertainty anymore? And what do we do about the other
29 million?
Ms. Mills. Well, we hope more and more of them will be able
to. But I think if you want to help them with some of these
issues, we can. And I would just put in a small plug for our
redesigned Web site, sba.gov. And we have millions and millions
of visitors to that Web site. We are helping everyday provide
access and opportunity to things that small businesses need,
and what we call the 3 Cs, capital, counseling, contracts,
those we help in our disaster operations as well.
Mr. Yoder. And then one small question and I have got to
move here. But regarding trade, what do you do to help a small
business owner in my district that might want to figure out if
there are international partners they could trade with?
Anything the SBA does or where would I direct a business that
brings a question like that to me?
Ms. Mills. I am sorry you have to go, because this could be
a very long answer. We have an intensive program. One of the
most important things we can do now is achieve the mission of
the National Export Initiative, which is to double our exports
over the next 5 years. Small businesses are 30 percent of
exports, but they are the fastest growing element. And there
are only 250,000 of those millions of small businesses that I
described that actually export. And most of them, 60 percent of
them, only export to 1 country.
So we are working on two things: We are working on bringing
more into the funnel, and this is where there are lots of rules
and learning curves on exports. So we have a whole set of how
can you become an exporter tools on our Web site and in our
district offices.
And if you bring them into us, have them registered at
export.gov, and we will send them what the available online and
in-person contact possibilities are, because it is our mission
to help them find a way to connect them to all the resources
that might be available because that is how we are going to
create jobs here at home.
Mr. Yoder. Great. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, Mr. Yoder. Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Madam
Administrator, it is good to see you. By the way, I think of
some those small business that export probably a lot of them
are in south Florida I would imagine. A big chunk of those have
to be in south Florida, because I run into them all the time.
And I also must tell you that I have been involved a couple of
times when people from your outfit have been out there, and you
have got some good people that do a good job explaining some of
the programs.
The questions that I have are a little bit more limited.
And that is that a recent investigation by the GAO identified
14 companies that received, I believe it was $324 million in
set-aside contracts through the 8(a) program for small and
disadvantaged businesses.
The GAO director of Forensic Audit Investigative Services
testified that officials of 13 of those firms, ``Misrepresented
their eligibility for the program to finally acquire or
maintain set-aside status and obtain Federal contracts awarded
with limited or no competition.''
Now, GAO's investigation showed that the SBA staff
allegedly responsible for assessing annually the firm
eligibility allegedly allowed three firms to remain in the 8(a)
program and receive contracts despite evidence--and they say
clear evidence--provided by the company officials during that
review period that show that they were no longer qualified.
Here are the questions, if that is the case, why were those
three firms allowed to remain in the program, first question?
Ms. Mills. So I am glad that you brought up this issue,
because we have a very terrific program. Probably the largest
program for small business across government, is our government
contracting program. And our goal is to make the goal, which is
over $100 billion into the hands of small business. But in
order to do that, the program must have integrity. And
therefore, we went after fraud, waste and abuse in these
programs. This is an issue that the GAO report and other
reports had brought up. I believe the report you were referring
was issued approximately a year ago.
We took this issue face on and we instituted a three-
pronged strategy for getting rid of fraud, waste and abuse in
these programs, making sure they had integrity. The first part
of it is effective certification, making sure that the program
benefits are getting to the intended recipients. And this, I
think, was one of the issues, flagged in that report. We have
done a whole series of things across all programs, not just
8(a), to tighten certifications and to ensure that we are
screening those potential program entrants.
The second is continued surveillance and monitoring, which
is conducting increased exams. And the third is robust and
timely enforcement.
To your question on enforcement, we have now quite a
substantial record on prompt and proactive enforcement. Every
single case that has been in an IG report or a GAO report we
can show you the follow-on activity and documentation.
We will respect due process. There is a due process
activity that happens for each of these small businesses. But
we will go after the bad actors, and we have now a very strong
track record in this front.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Good. Now, let me ask you, obviously you
have got the bad actors who, you know, who did a fraudulent
application. Now, the GAO, I guess claimed that some on staff
knew that there were some bad actors potentially that didn't
qualify. Is there any disciplinary action to those, the people
inside your organization who may have--I am not saying, you
know, obviously willingly, that missed seeing this? I mean, you
know, because disciplinary actions have to not only be for
those that apply, which is a problem, but if there were those
who saw it and either missed it or whatever. I mean, what
action can be taken or has been taken internally about those
individuals?
Ms. Mills. I am not aware of any staff issues to this
regard. In each of those cases, in every GAO report, there were
follow-on activities. In addition, there is a new suspension
and debarment task force throughout our agency, which has made
even more robust activities around the suspensions. We have had
over 100 suspensions, debarments and activities throughout our
programs, and this is a great acceleration. We are serious
about this. All of the staff has come forward and put
tremendous effort into the more intensified certification
activities, the continued surveillance activities and
monitoring and the enforcement.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And I understand that. And I appreciate
that. And I think it is important. And I commend you for,
obviously, your passion on that, which is important, because as
you said, without that integrity, obviously we are in serious
deep trouble.
However, I just want to make sure that my point is clear,
that obviously there is always two sides of this issue. There
are two culprits. There is the one who applied and then there
are those who may have not caught it when maybe they should
have. And I am not saying that is the case. My understanding is
that the GAO--and I may be wrong, talked about staff allowed
three firms to remain in the program and received contract,
despite, I guess, what they claim are clear evidence provided
by company officials during the review that show they were not
eligible. So I just want to make sure that it is--I commend you
for your efforts, I do. And I just want to make sure though
that one of the things that people get frustrated about,
whether it is true or not by the way, is a lot of people claim
or think, well, there are no consequences for those in
government who may have either made the wrong choice or just
didn't do an adequate job and that is really what I am going to
as well, because you clearly answered one very well, but----
Ms. Mills. Well, in this particular circumstance I would
look to, also, the due process activity. And in terms of our
personnel, our performance management standards have been
augmented to be very clear about what is expected.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Good. And if you can keep us informed on
just what those actions are and how you are doing that, because
I understand that, I guess, are you asking for increased
funding for 8(a) program? I believe you were, or you are. And
again, as you were stating before, and I agree with that, we
have got to make sure that that integrity is there,
particularly if you are going to be asking for any more money.
Ms. Mills. Yes, we are asking for 24 more positions,
largely around, 18 of them, around fraud, waste and abuse and
enforcement in our contracting area; 10 for the implementation
of the women's business rule.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. What is that? I am sorry, the last one?
Ms. Mills. The women business rule.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Okay.
Ms. Mills. Which we just brought forth on February 4.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Okay. And lastly, I guess there was a
little bit of conversation about the health care bill a little
while ago, about, I am not going to ask you to--I am not going
to put you on the spot on this. But you must have heard from
some small businesses that have some concerns, right, about the
health care bill and how it affects them. I mean, because you
mentioned that obviously if you hear about specific
regulations, and commend you for your support of the 1099
changes. But have you not heard any concerns about the health
care bill, about particularly, for example, businesses because
I get it all the time from a number of businesses.
I am just wondering if we just live in totally different
worlds. Particularly those that are maybe 46 employees, about
what happens when they reach 50. And have you, do you not get a
lot of concerns about--you explained the positive things. But
do you not get concerns from small businesses about the effect
of the health care bill on their bottom line or on their future
availability to grow, particularly if they are not at 50?
Ms. Mills. Here is what I hear from small businesses. The
number one concern of small business is access to affordable
health care. It has been that in the NFIB survey since 1986,
number one concern. And small businesses want to provide health
care. The first thing that I have heard from them is that they
are benefiting from this tax credit. Probably there are 6
million small businesses that have employees. We estimate that
up to 4 million may potentially be eligible for this tax
credit, which kicked in in the 2010 year.
So that is the first thing that they want to know is, can I
get some, you know, money back on my health care, or might this
make it affordable, because small businesses want to provide
health care. They just can't get a quote. And that is where the
second piece comes in. The second piece they ask about are the
exchanges. Right now when small businesses want to get a rate
quote, they have to call two or three or four brokers before
they can get even someone to bid on their business. Small
businesses pay 18 percent more for health care, just because
they are small and they have a smaller pool. And if somebody
gets sick their rates go up. These exchanges will pool those
risks and they know that. And the next thing they said is when
are they coming? How do I get more access to an affordable
quote?
There is no mandate for small businesses who are over 50 to
provide health care. There is no mandate in this. So they have
not--when they look at the facts of what is in there and what
their concerns would be, they have not expressed concerns about
those because there is no mandate.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. So you are not hearing a lot of concern. I
just want to make sure that I get this right. You are not
hearing--I am sure you are hearing a lot of concerns about a
lot of different things. You are not hearing a lot of concerns
about the health care bill.
Ms. Mills. I am hearing--and this is from, you know, small
businesses that we go out to talk to about other things,
credit. One of them said, you know, when I was able to now
provide health care for my employees, that was the day that I
considered my business a success.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I appreciate that and thank you for being
here. Again, I am just wondering, because I do also meet with
small businesses, maybe not as many as you meet with, but there
seems to be a lot of concern about, as one of my colleagues
said, about the uncertainty, if nothing else about the health
care. But I am just surprised because I hear it all the time,
unsolicited. I recently had meetings with, about, I don't know,
25 manufacturers, Madam Chairman, in my district, by the way,
which I was even surprised existed that many in South Florida.
And one of the issues that always comes up is concerns about
that bill.
So I am just interested that I guess you haven't heard
that. But that is interesting. Maybe it is just that they are
talking to you and they are talking to me and they will say
different things. But I clearly hear it a lot. Thank you so
much for being here. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Emerson. Of course, Mr. Diaz-Balart, she is the lender
and they don't want to tell them too much, I mean, I am
convinced of that because I hear it all the time too. It is
just absolutely nonstop, nonstop.
Let me ask you a question. How does the SBA define a small
business? Because we are always having all these arguments
about what is a small business. And so, define a small business
for me, number of employees.
Ms. Mills. In the numbers that I quote when I say there are
you know, so many small businesses, the general break-off is
500 employees or more. And that is done in the Office of
Advocacy data. We actually have different definitions for every
industry category because a manufacturer who has 100 people may
be small, but an accounting firm that has 100 people might be
big.
Mrs. Emerson. And so, but it is generally employee-driven,
number of employees driven as opposed to profit margin or
anything like that?
Ms. Mills. There are actually a number of complicated
pieces to it. It can be also some things to do with revenues
and net worth as well.
Mrs. Emerson. It just occurs to me that since we are always
fighting among ourselves, whether it is the House, the Senate,
the executive branch, whomever, or even the private sector, and
I used to work in small businesses myself and larger business,
so I have kind of been all the way around. There was never a
definite example. The number, you could pick any number to suit
your purposes. And to me, that is kind of duplicitous.
I wish we could just arrive at a number, you know, whether
it is more specific as you go down through categories or not.
But that way, it is not always gotcha. But that is just a pet
peeve of mine. Just a second on the business loans because we
talked about why are the subsidy costs increasing, should fees
be increased, et cetera. Tell me, what is the process that you
use to monitor risk to make sure that your loans are going to
creditworthy businesses?
Ms. Mills. Well, we have a complicated and robust, you
know, credit process driven largely through our private sector
partners, the banks. And banks use their credit processes, and
then we provide credit guarantee over them. But the first
screen is the banks credit process. There are a number of
factors that occur in that underwriting, and it is different by
loan product. But I do know that we pay quite a bit of
attention to loans and that the loans at issue, as I described
earlier, are really coming from the 2005, 2006, 2007, even 2008
cohort where the market was very hot and banks were making lots
and lots of loans. And now we see that our credit scores on our
new loans since 2009 are actually higher. They are actually
higher.
Mrs. Emerson. Interesting. I am just really curious about
that. But then again, the whole drop in real estate prices just
had a huge impact on everything. All right. Now that I am very,
very concerned about floods, and I live, my whole eastern
border is the Mississippi River, so everything that flows from
North Dakota, Minnesota on down goes right by our area. And I
know that you have asked for $167 million for administrative
costs, which is $90 million more than 2010. But you haven't
requested a subsidy appropriation for fiscal year 2012. So I
know that the administrative increase looks very large, but
this is because--if I understand correctly, it is because the
fiscal year 2010 appropriation was partially offset by carry-
over funds appropriated for prior disasters.
And now there is no more carryover. We are done. So for
fiscal year 2011, most of your disaster administration funds,
or expenses rather, were funded through reprogramming of $126
million in disaster subsidy. So, what assumptions do you all
use to arrive at the requested level of disaster loan
administrative expenses? I mean, how do you determine what
those are going to be?
Ms. Mills. In 2012, our request reflects an $8 million
savings in disaster loan administration, and this is the result
of the re-engineering in our disaster loan centers that I
described. So instead of operating at a steady state level,
remember, our disasters staffing actually goes up and down, up
and down. But on average, the steady state funding that we have
been using is 1,000 people. And we are able to provide, by
2012, the same at this time of readiness with a steady state
staffing of 850 people. And that is, you know, some efforts
that we have done to streamline and re-engineer and improve our
processing operation, that is a continuous process that we feel
is our responsibility to pursue aggressively and to provide
those savings in these tough fiscal times. We believe that we
need to be at that level of readiness. We also have 2,000 ready
reserve on top of that. So if something happens, we do have
those staff that we can bring into the system. But the cost
level that we are asking for is that. For subsidy level, we
have no year money reserves that we are using.
Mrs. Emerson. So what do the ready reserve people do on a
day-to-day basis? Do they work in banks, or are they small
business people, or who are these people?
Ms. Mills. Well, they are all kinds of people actually. And
I have met a number of them. I have been out in our disaster
centers when we had the flooding in Nashville. I met a number
of them. And when we went to the Gulf in the BP oil spill, a
number of them came in. And they are from all walks of life,
from all kinds of operations. And we have a system by which,
you know, we ping them and say, are you ready, are you
available. And they come back. So we try to keep a full
complement available.
Mrs. Emerson. That is interesting, and very nice to have
those people who want to help. So what happens if we have a
large disaster, say, another Nashville or heaven forbid, a
Katrina-like episode? Do you have enough subsidy carryover to
support the program level that you need to be able to respond
to such a thing?
Ms. Mills. We have built a substantial capability in the
post Katrina era, in our physical activity. So as I said
before, we went from 366 seats in the processing center. We
have the people. We need someplace to put them. Now we can seat
1,750. We couldn't put them all on the computer system. We
could only get 800 concurrent users. Now we can put 10,000
concurrent users in so we could even staff up more
aggressively. And we maintain our ready reserve.
We have made an electronic loan application now so that 30
percent of our loans actually come in electronically. We were
able, last year, to operate in over 40 regions concurrently
because we stay for a bit of time so as we're finishing up, you
know, the flooding, we are deploying down in the Gulf. And we
can stay for up to 9 months. So we can service numbers of
locations concurrently and/or a large location.
The other thing that we have done to prepare for a very,
very serious disaster, besides simulating it, is we have
engaged our full-time district staff members who do not operate
on the disaster operations to be linked on the ground in cases
such as Nashville or BP oil spill or any other large-scale
disaster so that we have not only our disaster operating
people, but we have our core SBA district office people coming
to the assistance and lending their support, our SBDCs, our
SCORE people, everybody is on the ground.
Mrs. Emerson. So from the money standpoint, how much in
disaster subsidy do you have in reserve?
Ms. Mills. We can get you an answer to that. But we have a
number of years of disaster subsidy in reserve.
Mrs. Emerson. So presumably then, if, let's just say, you
can get us the numbers and it amounts to 5 years or so, then
could we possibly look to disaster loan subsidy funds to pay
for the 2012 disaster administrative expenses if necessary?
Ms. Mills. Well, the issue there is the level of
preparedness and the level of risk that we want to take on. Our
commitment has been to be prepared for intensive disasters, and
that was the commitment we made after Hurricane Katrina. Nobody
really knows what the future will bring in terms of hurricanes
and earthquakes and other issues. And we have seen around the
world that they do come. So we have a level of preparedness now
that we think we can handle it, and we want to make sure when
we go into the field, that we also have the loan subsidy so
that we can execute the loans.
Mrs. Emerson. I would thank you and appreciate and thank
you in advance for getting us those numbers if you could. One
quick question, then I will turn it over to Mr. Serrano. Our
current continuing resolution is set to expire, I guess, week
after this. What day is today, the 8th? Okay. So 10 days. I
don't think a shut down will occur, in spite of the hype.
I mean, hopefully we will be able to work out our
differences and keep the government running. But do you all
have a plan for operating during any kind of government
shutdown? And if so, then, can you tell us just generally
speaking what kind of activities and which personnel would be
considered essential?
Ms. Mills. Well, everyone is working very hard, I know, on
averting a shutdown. The President has said, and we agree, that
a shutdown would hurt the economy and would hurt small
businesses. Since 1980, every agency has been required to have
a plan that would go into effect in case of a shutdown. We are
on an ongoing basis updating that plan. We are committed, I
know across the bipartisan effort, to work on making sure there
is funding for 2011. The activities that would or would not be
shut down are actually governed by law. There are rules around
it. There is one thing I can tell you, which is that our
disaster operation will not be shut down. That is considered an
essential operation and it would not be part of an
appropriation.
Mrs. Emerson. I appreciate that. I don't know that it is
presumptuous for me to ask, but would it be possible to get a
copy of your plan?
Ms. Mills. Well, we are updating the plans on an ongoing
basis, and at this moment, I know that things are so fluid
that, you know, we are sort of in the continuous update mode.
Mrs. Emerson. So would it be possible to get last week's
plan?
Ms. Mills. Well, we know----
Mrs. Emerson. Just to give us a sense. I mean, it is not to
give to the press. It is really for our own, for our own sense.
All right. We can have further discussion on this. I will pass
it to Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. Boy, you really want that plan,
don't you?
Mrs. Emerson. Yeah. I do.
Mr. Serrano. So do I. Wouldn't it be nice if a government
shutdown meant a real government shutdown like the war ended,
like the troops would have to come home immediately.
Mrs. Emerson. But you would be stuck here in Washington.
Mr. Serrano. No. No. I could go for that. I could be
supportive of a shutdown if all the troops just had to pack up
and leave, the war is over. But something tells me that would
continue. We would find money.
Let me ask you a question. The fiscal year 2012 budget
calls for a reduction in the small business development
centers, $10 million, and proposes to eliminate the prime
technical assistance program. For micro loans, the budget
proposes a cut citing the funding received in the recovery act.
Can you explain your rationale for cutting technical assistance
to small businesses, both through micro loans, the prime
program and the small business development centers, and how do
you intend to serve small disadvantaged businesses without
these resources?
Ms. Mills. Well, as you know----
Mr. Serrano. I mean, I must tell you that, anticipating
what I think you knew, the cuts that would be proposed, why any
agency is on their own cutting is beyond me. I know that sounds
irresponsible, but if you knew what was coming, why would you
propose any cuts?
Ms. Mills. Well, as a part of being part of this fiscally
responsible process, we all are tightening our belts. We are
all streamlining our operations. And that really makes us make
some really difficult choices, as you just pointed out. We have
a program, as you described, prime, which gives technical
assistance in communities that are involved with our micro
loans. What we have done is try to look at places where we can
streamline without losing the value of that technical
assistance. So we have initiated a very strong overall activity
around underserved markets. In it, we have made some changes to
our loan programs and opened our 7(a) program to our micro
lenders and CDFIs, (Community Development Financial
Institutions that meet certain qualifications that will be
responsible to our program). They provide technical assistance
for those loans at their own cost.
What they want from us really is the availability of the
loan subsidy, the loan guarantees. So we are looking at ways we
can do what we do best, open more access and opportunity to the
loan guarantees, and encourage our partners to provide the
technical assistance which they do best. That set of
activities, I think, will give a robust set of help to the
small business because technical assistance is a critical part.
And we are looking forward to working with our partners to
boost their capability to give loans and then also to give that
technical assistance from their capability.
The SBDCs you asked about are also very important partners
to us. I just wanted to point out one piece, which is that half
of the reduction in the SBDC funding does not relate to their
base level. We have been able to reduce prior special purpose
counseling grants, which takes account of about just over half
of the proposed reduction.
Mr. Serrano. Well, let me just, for the record, tell you
that you mentioned the CDFIs. That is part of this
subcommittee, and they are being devastated too, so you may not
have the partner you think. But the part that confuses me, even
after your explanation, is in answer to one of the early
questions, you said that if there were a couple of shortcomings
in the Agency, it was the inability to do more in low income
communities.
So why would you voluntarily cut those programs that affect
those communities? I know that I mix my questioning with an
attempt at humor at times. I really think that Members of
Congress sound too serious. We should be serious, but we don't
have to sound serious all the time. But I am very serious when
I tell you that all agencies should be aware that the plan here
is to cut to the bone. So yes, it is important to be fiscally
responsible, but don't give up the house before half the house
is taken away from you.
Ms. Mills. If I might clarify, I think what I was referring
to is that the gaps in the market are in the area of
underserved communities. The market has not come back to
provide access and opportunity to those underserved
communities. At the SBA we have actually intensified our
efforts around the underserved market. We just actually
announced a council that is going to be led by Cathy Hughes, a
fabulous entrepreneur who founded Radio One. And we are
working, across all of our programs to increase access and
opportunity in the underserved markets because that is a really
important role that we play and that the markets don't. So as
we go forward, we have developed this program called community
advantage. And this is going to bring the CDFIs into our
activity as lenders in our traditional 7(a) product. This is
something that they have been eager to do and asking for for
quite a bit of time, and I think will help us get what we want,
which is more points of access in these underserved communities
with lenders who understand those small businesses.
I don't need to tell you that these are the people who hire
in these communities. Across the board, our government
contracting programs, our 8(a), our Hub Zone and other
programs, our counseling operations also are going to be part
of this underserved council and underserved effort that we
have. Because the role of government, I think, is to provide
access and opportunity. We at the SBA are three to five times
more likely to make a loan to a minority-owned business or a
woman-owned business than a conventional lender. So this is the
place where we see our participation to be critical.
Mr. Serrano. As an extension of that, how are we doing at
meeting the contracting targets for women-owned businesses?
Ms. Mills. Well, as I say to everybody, the goal is to make
the goal. And we had a very good experience in the Recovery Act
where we were able to exceed not only our 23 percent goal, we
were over 30, but we made every single sub goal. In the past,
we have not made our women's contracting goal and we have
fallen short. And every percentage point you fall short in
government contract is $4 billion that is not in the hands of
that constituency. We have been able to implement, this year,
the women's contracting rule. This was a rule that was passed
in the year 2000, but was never implemented until we came on
board and made it a priority.
And finally, through the efforts, fabulous efforts, of a
whole set of committed people across the agency and outside and
across government, that rule went live on February 4. There
are, I can get you the number. It is more than 1,000 small
businesses that have uploaded their data, certification data
into our certification data bank, and we are hopeful and
determined to make sure that this new tool allows us to make
the goal.
Mr. Serrano. Let me ask you something about these regional
clusters. I know you received 173 applications and you funded
10. Can you tell us a little about the winning proposals and
how you see this program evolving in the years ahead,
especially this year?
Ms. Mills. Well, as you said, this was a very highly
competitive process. We had very high demand, huge demand from
the small business community. And we were able to fund some
really extraordinary initiatives. The closest example to where
you are is the Connecticut Hydrogen Fuel Cell Coalition, which
includes New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine and
others. In the Gulf Coast, for instance, a geospatial solutions
innovation cluster. I was just in Northwest Ohio, in Cleveland,
where Nortech won, which does flexible electronics. That is
electronics that you can put on a piece of flexible material,
so it has circuits, but it bends and you can put it anywhere,
on a helmet, on anything.
We have a Carolina nuclear cluster. We have an agricultural
cluster in California for agricultural innovation. We have a
defense cluster. What these clusters do is they allow small
businesses, who don't have the power individually, to access
the resources that big business do. When they cluster together
they can access university research, community college
curriculum and that gives small businesses in these high growth
sectors the ability to transform the region. They are what I
call the link, to leverage and align money on a regional basis
that create new economies, and therefore transform those
economies, create jobs at a pretty good bang for the taxpayer
buck.
Mr. Serrano. I have one last question and then I will
submit a couple for the record. How has the emerging leaders
program been implemented so far? And again, sounding like a big
spender, with $3 million requested, what is it that you do that
would have an impact?
Ms. Mills. Well, this program has an extraordinary impact.
This is specialized training for entrepreneurs, largely in the
inner city and underserved communities. We have expanded it to
the Native American community with great success. And just a
couple of statistics. We track and measure the metrics very
heavily on this. Half of the participating businesses, after
they went through this program, had an increase in revenues.
They secured nearly $10 million in financing. They also secured
nearly 500 Federal state and local contracts, which were over
$100 million. And 60 percent of them have hired new workers.
So we know that this program creates the intended effect,
which is to help entrepreneurs learn how to grow their
businesses. And that we have an expanded list of cities where
we are able to bring this program; it is proven, we have
actually been running it for quite a bit of time. And we know
that in each of these communities we can really build a new
core of successful entrepreneurs.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. And actually, I stand corrected
here. Myself. There is only one question I am submitting for
the record.
Mrs. Emerson. Perfect. So how would I become an emerging
leader if I had a small business? How would I become part of
that program? Just because it is fascinating to me so I would
like to know how.
Ms. Mills. Yes. I believe it is a competitive process. We
run a curriculum-based program, so you come into a class with a
cohort and that cohort is designed to work so there is thought
placed on the different kinds of businesses to have together in
that cohort. And the trainings are pretty intensive. I will say
that we have had some good success also expanding this in the
Native American community where there has been significant
unemployment and we are doing it in Albuquerque. We are doing
it in Phoenix, we are doing it in Portland, Oregon, in
California and Seattle and Oklahoma and Ohio and St. Louis
actually.
Mrs. Emerson. So if you are a small business person, or you
own a small business, then you would actually make application.
Ms. Mills. You would make application in one of the cities.
We put out a call for applications.
Mrs. Emerson. I see. Okay. So would that be advertised in
the newspaper or does it go to local Chambers of Commerce? How
do you put out a call? I mean, I am just curious since I don't
have a small business myself.
Ms. Mills. I will find out for you, but I would imagine it
is all of those, yes.
Mrs. Emerson. I would love to know because I certainly know
a few people who could take advantage of that. But that is why
I want you to come to the district so we can tell people about
these good programs that you have.
So I recently read a rather scary report, and I am sure
that Joe, if you read it too, you would think it was pretty
scary, that the GAO did duplicative government programs. As a
matter of fact, I was anticipating being, at least having
several people yell at me about those sorts of things over the
weekend, which surprisingly they didn't. So I was pleased about
that on the one hand. But I did know that in economic
development, in the economic development category, there are
about 80 different programs at four agencies being
investigated, with y'all included, I guess, to assess the
potential overlap and to the extent to which agencies
collaborate to achieve a common goal. And so since you
mentioned in your testimony about your efforts to streamline
processes and eliminate duplication, tell us how you actually
coordinate the SBA's efforts with other economic development
agencies to make sure that, number one, everybody knows the
opportunities available from the SBA and perhaps other areas or
other programs in the government to do economic development.
And then, after you tell us that, tell me how do you actually
ensure that Federal agencies aren't duplicating one another?
Ms. Mills. As you know, we operate on the ground. And I
will say, I think we have done a really extensive job at
collaborating across agencies. The President said, no silos,
and we have worked, particularly at the SBA, across numerous
agencies to make sure that we are linked, leveraged and aligned
and not duplicating effort. Let me just give you two examples,
and I could actually give you many. But one is the Veterans
Administration.
Early on, we did a collaboration with the Veterans
Administration to make sure that every veteran service
operation was also telling the veterans about our loan
programs. We have special veterans loan programs and counseling
operations and we wanted to make sure that they knew about the
access to our programs. And we, on the other hand, became more
educated as to what was available to veterans through
traditional, avenues or at least how to integrate them back,
and we have worked to make sure our Web sites are linked, that
we have cross links. If you come on our Web site as a veteran
you can get back to other VA programs. A second place that we
have actually formalized an MOU, as well, is with Tom Vilsack
and the Department of Agriculture.
We operate in rural areas and we operate in very close
collaboration at our district office levels with the USDA
operations, so that we can find out which loan program is right
for a particular borrower. And we are always referring back and
forth between our programs and their programs to make sure that
we guide the small business to that which is right for them. We
collaborate extensively across multiple agencies on exports. We
coordinate with the Export Import bank. We have joint programs
with them. We coordinate with Commerce on a daily basis, on all
of these activities. And we coordinate as well in an
interagency effort in clusters.
And as I said, I could go on. We are fortunate to represent
small businesses and to be, I think, a powerful force now in
making sure that those small businesses find their way to the
resources that they need.
Mrs. Emerson. So you had a very successful professional
career in small businesses and sort of bringing innovation and
the like. So taking off your SBA hat just for a second, and
thinking about it from the perspective of an entrepreneur or
someone who is helping entrepreneurs, what recommendation do
you have to us as Members of Congress, how do we sort of figure
out what is duplicative and what is not, and how do we best
streamline it? I mean, obviously, y'all should be doing that at
SBA, or SBA, you are not working there anymore, just
temporarily here, while we're talking about this, so SBA, you
know, has the expertise to do small business, anything with
regard to small business. And you know, I don't know what other
agency, if there are any, who do it. But I do know there are
about, at least eight agencies that do renewable energy,
including the USDA, I might add. How do we take this program
and leverage off each other and streamline it, as opposed to
having eight different sets of rules and regulations and
therefore, we get nothing done.
So what do you recommend, how can you help us do our job
better, having been in the arena yourself?
Ms. Mills. Well, as you know, there are lots of different
kinds of small businesses. And they have different kinds of
needs. So Main Street small businesses, they need capital,
contracting, counseling, but it is a different kind of capital
perhaps than a high impact small business. So I think the first
thing that we have thought about, I think quite effectively
now, across the Federal Government is what are the needs for
the high-growth, high-impact small business. And that is
Startup America, the interagency effort around both removing
barriers and providing the tools that a small business needs.
So I think the best place to see strong examples of
effective elimination of duplication and even more than that,
coordination of all the assets that are available, are in some
of these interagency efforts, and in some of the electronic
information one stops that we have been able to do. If you look
on SBA.gov and business.gov, you will see that we leverage
other agencies' activities in order to make sure that the small
business gets an opportunity to navigate to what is right for
them. And we can continue, we plan to continue to do that to
make those pathways even more easy to find for small
businesses.
Mrs. Emerson. Are there other agencies that horn in on any
of the work that you are doing?
Ms. Mills. Well, we invite them in.
Mrs. Emerson. That is different. That is not what I asked.
I said, are their agencies who somehow try to get in and do
your, do what do you? Because if there is, that is what we need
to know because obviously, y'all have the expertise and perhaps
other agencies, well, rural development may well actually be
one that would horn in, or as you were saying, you should work
actually more collaboratively I would think.
Ms. Mills. We do not find extensive duplication in the
respect that we operate on the ground and we tend to be the
agency that lives on the ground, helping small businesses one
by one by one by one. And I think we are able to bring a
tremendous set of assets in the interagency activity, and our
role is generally that we do a lot of the groundwork. We do the
heavy lift in direct contact with the small business day by
day, one by one. And I really have to just take the moment to
commend our staff that does that on the ground. They have a
real love of small business and that is how we help them.
Mrs. Emerson. And I would attest to that, working, you
know, my staff works extensively with your folks on the ground.
But hopefully the other agencies with whom you collaborate will
jump as fast as you do so that if there is a whole package and
you are only doing part of it, they are doing their piece
simultaneous to yours. And that would be my frustration.
Actually having worked in an administration many, many
years ago, that was my frustration. It was because there was a
lot of interagency work that had to be done and we did our part
and the others didn't. I am not asking you to make a comment.
But that is a very frustrating reality sometimes of unwieldy
government. I have got a bunch of questions that I want to
actually, and I also have one from Mr. Walden of Oregon who has
asked me to submit a question for him, which I am happy to do.
There are things that I want to, questions about 504 loan
refinancing, particularly since you all are not actually asking
for any subsidy costs, but is there something that we ought to
know about in case something happens?
Might there be a cost associated with those 504 loan
refinancings? These are the types of questions that we are
going to submit. And if we could get an answer back. Some of
these are pretty critical. If we could get an answer back
within 10 days I would be very grateful. We will rank them
many. And Joe, you want an answer back quickly too?
Mr. Serrano. Yes, to my one solitary question. I do have a
question for you. Do you think the Senate is a duplication of
the House? Because that would solve a lot of our problems.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, on the one hand it could solve some
problems. On the other hand, sometimes the Senate is able to
act--well, they frustrate me a great deal because it takes so
long to do things. Sometimes they can, perhaps, bring a little
balance.
Mr. Serrano. Madam Chair. I am joking. I expect them to
save us from H.R. 1.
Mrs. Emerson. I guess that is what I was trying to say in a
more diplomatic way, given the fact that this is all on record.
Mr. Serrano. Listen we have been doing stand up here at
times and it is all on TV too.
Mrs. Emerson. All right. We won't keep you any longer.
Thank you. Thanks so very much for all you do.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you for your service.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you for all you do and all that your
staff does. You all really are the front lines and we need to
keep you in the business of doing just that.
Mr. Serrano. And you know my mantra, don't forget the
territories.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791A.058

Thursday, March 31, 2011.

CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION

WITNESSES

INEZ MOORE TENENBAUM, CHAIRMAN, CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
ANNE NORTHUP, COMMISSIONER, CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
Mrs. Emerson. This hearing will come to order. I want to
wish everybody happy opening day of baseball. Go Cards. Joe.
Mr. Serrano. It is opening day because the Yankees are
playing.
Mrs. Emerson. And who are the Yankees playing today?
Mr. Serrano. The Yankees are playing the Tigers. And we are
going for number 28. That is arrogance, is it not? If I was not
a Yankee fan I would be upset that they can buy every player in
the world.
Ms. Emerson. So now we are trying to find out if I have a
Cardinals cap here, and we are going to decorate the dais, do
you have one in your office, Steve? Not yet.
Mr. Womack. All my Cardinals caps are soiled with sweat and
grease.
Mr. Serrano. You realize the Tea Party is outside listening
to all of this, right?
Mrs. Emerson. All right, anyway, I guess we will get
serious. I am hoping that the Yankees and the Cardinals win
today, in fairness. And I want to welcome our witnesses,
Chairman Tenenbaum and Commissioner Northup. Thanks for being
here and testifying on the Consumer Product Safety Commission's
fiscal 2012 budget request. You all at the CPSC have the
daunting task of overseeing tens of thousands of consumer
products. These products are used by all of us daily. It is
important that the CPSC lives up to its mission of protecting
consumers from unsafe products while at the same time not
promulgating rules that are unnecessarily onerous for American
businesses and manufacturers.
Of particular interest to me is the Commission's effective
and efficient use of its resources. As you know very well, the
current spending levels are unsustainable. There has been much
interest, and there has been concern expressed to me by many
people, about your product complaint database, so I am
interested in hearing both of our witnesses' thoughts on that,
and particularly because I tried using it myself yesterday,
just to see how easy it was to work. But then I realized I did
not have a complaint, and I could not submit things that were
not true. I have concerns with its tangible impact on dangerous
products, and perhaps some of the unintended consequences. I do
want to get into that because I did go on it and saw how it
worked, and I looked through and saw some of the complaints
that had been made, most of which seemed quite legitimate to
me.
But on the other hand I do want to explore further problems
that could arise. It just worries me about over-regulating
business in a very fragile economy. Certainly we do not want
higher prices for consumers, but nor do we want American
businesses to close or not even try to grow due to regulations
that make it too hard for them to comply. In addition, I do
have concerns about the amount of taxpayer money that is going
into this database. Hopefully we will discuss this, because as
you remember, during the debate on HR-1, there was an
overwhelming vote to not fund the consumer complaint database.
I suspect that this is not going to be the last we hear about
it from colleagues, and perhaps we can work together on trying
to figure out how to best make people feel comfortable about
it, or changes that need to be made. I want to thank you all so
very much, and look forward to your testimony. I want to
recognize my very good friend and Yankees patron, Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. I wish I was a Yankees patron. I cannot even
afford the tickets now.
Ms. Emerson. How much are the tickets?
Mr. Serrano. Top ticket to Yankees Stadium is $1,250.
Mrs. Emerson. To go to a game? Who would spend that kind of
money?
Mr. Serrano. It was built with Wall Street in mind, but
that is another story. That was before the crash. Do not get me
going. Thank you, Madam Chair, I too would like to welcome Inez
Tenenbaum, the Chairwoman of the Consumer Product Safety
Commission, and Commissioner Anne Northup, a colleague is
always a colleague, to this hearing of the Financial Services
and General Government Subcommittee. This agency has a vital
role to play in all of our lives, as it is responsible for
making sure that the products we use every day are safe. For
fiscal year 2012, the budget request for the Consumer Product
Safety Commission is $122 million. Your agency has important
and ongoing responsibilities in making sure that hazardous
products are recalled, imported products are safe, and that our
children are protected from dangerous toys and other baby
products.
I am particularly interested in learning more about your
ongoing efforts to implement the Consumer Product Safety
Improvement Act of 2008. I am also pleased that you have
launched your new Consumer Products Safety Information
Database, which will give consumers an important tool as they
use or purchase new products. Finally, I look forward to
discussing your efforts to address safety issues with respect
to imported products. We must make sure that we continue to
provide for a strong Consumer Products Safety Commission, and I
am hopeful that today's hearing will give us an opportunity to
learn more about your ongoing programs and the progress that
you are making in some of your newer initiatives.
Again, we welcome you. And we have a delicate balance,
here. And that is that it is obvious that there will be some
serious cuts across the board in this year's budget, and in
future budgets. That is the mood in many places, and that is
certainly the mood in the House. Our challenge is to make sure
that as we apply these cuts, especially in this agency, that
they are done in a way where we do not hurt the effort that we
should be making on behalf of the American people. Our
Chairwoman said we have to be careful that we do not over-
regulate. I agree with that. But my statement is we have to be
careful that we do not under-protect the American consumer. And
there is the balance. Do not over-regulate, do not under-
protect. If we can strike that balance, the American people
will be well-served. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Thanks, Mr. Serrano. Chairman Tenenbaum, we
will recognize you for your opening statement. If you would not
mind keeping it to five minutes, it gives us more time for
questions. Thanks.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Good morning, Chairwoman Emerson, Ranking
Member Serrano, and members of the committee. I am pleased to
be here today to update the subcommittee on the positive
changes we have made at the agency. Since my last appearance
before the subcommittee a year ago, I have focused on three key
objectives. First, I have worked diligently to implement the
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act, the CPSIA, and used
that Act's new authorities in a manner that is both highly
protective of consumers, and fair to industry stakeholders. On
March 11, we officially launched our new publicly available
Consumer Product Safety Information Database. The database, now
available at saferproducts.gov, will empower consumers with
information, allowing them to quickly determine which products
they already own, or are considering purchasing, are associated
with safety hazards or recalls. Second, I have focused on
changing the CPSC's internal processes, so that the agency is
more proactive and more capable of addressing safety challenges
presented by thousands of types of consumer products imported
from around the world.
In the last year, the Commission has unanimously adopted a
five-year strategic plan that establishes a plan to move CPSC
closer to becoming the global leader in consumer products
safety. We have established a new office of education, global
outreach, and small business ombudsman that has already begun
to provide outreach to small businesses and crafters. And we
have embarked on a substantial upgrade of our information-
technology system, which has formed the backbone of our
database, and our new cpsc.gov homepage. Third, I have focused
on proactive prevention of consumer harms, identifying emerging
hazards and keeping those products out of the stream of
commerce. We have taken a number of steps to increase our
surveillance of potentially harmful consumer goods by signing
several information-sharing agreements with customs and border
protection, and increasing our physical presence at the ports-
of-entry. The Commission's Safe Sleep team has also made great
strides to rid the marketplace of dangerous cribs, usher in a
new generation of safer cribs, and educate parents about the
importance of maintaining a safe sleep environment for infants
and toddlers. A key component of this was the mandatory crib
safety standards, which was unanimously adopted by the
Commission. In addition, the Commission's staff has already
worked very hard to address new hazards, such as the potential
use of toxic metals in children's products, and the
Commission's continuing efforts to provide information and
outreach to homeowners impacted by problem-drywall.
Overall, I am extremely proud of the Commission's talented
staff, and the work they do every day to create a safer
consumer product marketplace for all Americans. Our proposed
fiscal year 2012 budget reflects these priorities, and will
give the Commission the staffing and resources it needs to
respond to new hazards and keep consumers safe. In fiscal year
1980, the commission had about 100 full-time employees, and an
inflation-adjusted budget of over 150 million. By 2007, the
commission had fallen to 385 full-time employees and was barely
able to fulfill its core mission. Full-time staff now stands at
approximately 550 employees. As noted earlier, these resources
allow us to staff several ports-of-entry, and leverage
cooperation and information sharing with CBP to keep dangerous
products out of the country, staff our new lab facility,
scheduled to open in May, and test potentially dangerous
products, and allow us to respond more rapidly to emerging
hazards like toxic metals and problem-drywall. I am highly
cognizant of the desire for fiscal restraint that has been
expressed by the administration, the Congress, and the American
people. Yet I believe that CPSC is, dollar-for-dollar, a great
investment to the taxpaying public. There are, however, several
areas of critical need that the Commission must address in
fiscal year 2012 to maintain our forward progress. Accordingly,
the fiscal year 2012 CPSC budget requests $122 million; a
slight increase from the $118.2 million funding level the
Commission is currently operating under the continuing
resolution, and the $118.6 million request for fiscal year
2011.
If enacted, this level would allow the agency to hire an
additional 34 full-time employees to fill areas of critical
need, such as rapid review of incident reports, and increased
defect investigations. These resources will allow us to
continue our rebuilding efforts, improve outreach to consumers,
and most importantly, prevent injuries and save lives. Madam
Chairman, Ranking Member Serrano, Mr. Womack, thank you for
inviting me today to provide testimony before the Subcommittee,
and for your support of the CPSC. And I would like to share
with you a reflection of the statement, a chart that reflects
the CPSC resource history from 1974 to 2012.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.001

As you can see, in the 80s, we were almost to 1,000
employees, and adjusting our budget to inflation, we had about
150 million. And as the cuts were made in the Clinton
Administration and the Reagan Administration, we went down, and
this right here is when the year of the recall occurred, when
Congress directed us to hire 500 people by October 1, 2010.
That was in the CPSIA. And that is when we started climbing,
when we got that direction from Congress in the CPSIA. It said,
The Commission shall increase the number of full-time
professionals employed by the Commission to at least 500 by
October 1, 2010, subject to the availability of appropriations.
So, thank you, Thank you for letting us use the charts.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.013

Mrs. Emerson. Thank you so much, Chairman Tenenbaum. I
would now like to recognize Commissioner Northup. Try to keep
it please to five minutes.
Ms. Northup. Yes, thank you. Is it on? Yes. I am delighted
to be here. Congratulations, Madam Chair, for your position as
Chairman of this committee, and Mr. Serrano, I am delighted to
see you again as you said, Once a colleague, always a
colleague. This is an opportunity to come before you and share
some of the perspectives that I have since being a Commissioner
at the Consumer Products Safety Commission since August of
2009. I appreciate the challenge of this committee to fund
essential services, and the trade-offs that occur even in the
best of years there were trade-offs that always had be made.
And it is with that in mind that I come before you today. As
our Chair said, we have grown from 80 million to 118 million
since 2008. We have gone from 385 employees to 549. And if we
complete our hiring for this year, our targets, and we get the
increase that we are requesting, we will be at 600 by the end
of the 2012 fiscal year.
With that in mind, I wish I could tell you that all of this
money that has been spent has been a good investment.
Certainly, our Chair has done a wonderful job at reaching out
and looking for better ways, and new ways, to accomplish what
the CPSC is required to do. However, the overwhelming amount of
time, energy, and money, is being spent on implementing the
CPSIA. And while the CPSIA had important, new, good safety
requirements that it put in place, some of what we spend our
time on, and much of what businesses have been required to do,
have absolutely nothing to do with risk. There was never an
assessment made that what we were preventing was risky to
children in the first place, nor is a lot of the requirements
in order to comply with the law based on risk.
However, we get weekly, sometimes daily, information from
associations, from individual businesses, from people all
across this country that tell us about the fact that they have
closed their business, or they have left the child products
area of their business. The number of small businesses that we
put out of business has to be in the 100s. It was estimated by
our agency back in 2009 that the cost to businesses is in the
billions of dollars. And when you hear these stories
individually, people that come and talk about businesses that
they have grown, where they have hired people, the ideas they
had, and they are simply unable to comply with this law, and so
they are leaving, many of them, trying to sell to a larger
company because they just simply cannot absorb the cost and the
overhead that it has added. It has really been very sad.
I hope we will have a chance to talk about some of the
challenges that they have, but I can tell you on the market
that besides the loss of jobs, the loss of businesses,
particularly in this country, because small businesses are the
ones that have the biggest problems, the biggest companies that
make toys do not make any of them here in this country. They
make them in China. They make such a large number that they are
at least more able to spread the cost of complying with this
law over many more products. But it is also the cost in the
marketplace, the number of toys and products that are no longer
being sold in this country. We used to have the most vibrant
market. Now there are Websites to which you can go, where they
say, Not sold in the United States. Whole companies, a Swedish
company, a German company that are no longer selling any of
their toys in our market; ones that were very popular with
parents. There are also people that sell to small markets, to
our schools, small number of products that say they simply
cannot abide by all the responsibilities of this Act. If it
were related to risk, of course, I would strongly endorse these
regulations. But in many cases, risk is not even something that
we are allowed to consider.
I am here to ask you to do two things as the Appropriations
Committee where I think you can make a big difference. The
first is simply do not let third party testing and
certification go into effect. To the Chairman's credit, she
endorsed delaying the implementation of that until December.
But businesses tell us that that is a staggering cost to them.
Not only the cost to do third-party testing, but also to
certify and to track every single component of every single
good and the certification number, and label every single
product, so that that cohort of information is available is a
staggering price. And it is unnecessary.
The Chairman, in my opinion, has been so creative in
establishing much better border procedures that ways to
intercept violative products, ways to test in a more efficient
way. We have companies it is not the same world as 2007. The
companies that were violative have all come in and told us
about the new production oversight companies that have
responded to us, have all talked about their ISO labs that are
inside their production facilities all over the world today.
And so, they themselves because of the cost of the penalties
that increase, the chance of a class-action lawsuit, Mattel
settled the class-action lawsuit because of their toys for $14
million, and so the need to avoid those sort of costs, the
ability to intercept violative products here, we do not need
the old-style command and control formula that was in that bill
that is going to stagger the products that fall into under this
regime.
And finally, I know we will talk about this more, I beg you
to stop the funding of our database. It is a database right
now. There are 12 of our top people in our agency. Everybody
from the General Counsel, her top assistant, the person in
charge of compliance, their top people meet every day Tuesday,
Wednesday, and Thursday at 8 a.m. in the morning to incident by
incident go over every single one of these, and it is those
multi-group teams that you will be funding in the additional
request that is just counterproductive, both in terms of
fairness to our businesses, fairness to the public, and giving
accurate information to the public, which is the only reason
Congress stated for the database. So those two things defunding
would, I think, not only create a better agency but also be a
better expenditure for money. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.037

Mrs. Emerson. Thank you so much, Commissioner Northup. I
want to welcome Mr. Diaz-Balart, the Vice-Chair of our
committee today. Chairman Tenenbaum, can you do me a favor and
have somebody pull that chart up again that you just showed us
before.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.038

Ms. Tenenbaum. These are full-time equivalents.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. Do you have budget numbers?
Ms. Tenenbaum. It was 150, but that is what the equivalent
was. I can give you that budget number. We had 978 FTEs. And
then, in 2007, when we had the year of the recall which
prompted the CPSIA, we had 393 workers. And that is why, in the
CPSIA, the language was put in that we had to hire 500 by
October 1, 2010.
Mrs. Emerson. Right. Here is what is interesting to me, and
now that I think about it, how is it that we ever arrived at
having you all having to hire 500 people? How would we have
known how many people have had to hire? Do you recall?
Ms. Tenenbaum. I was not here during that.
Mrs. Emerson. I know you were not.
Ms. Tenenbaum. I think that they looked at the agency, and
the second part of that law said, Ports of entry, overseas
inspections, as part of the 500 full-time employees required by
Paragraph one, the commission shall hire personnel to be
assigned to duty stations at United States ports of entry, or
to inspect overseas manufacturing facilities. They envision
that we go to China, subject to the availability of
appropriations. And one of the things that is so interesting,
and it affirms what Commissioner Northup just said, is here are
our imports.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.039

As you can see, the red line represents China and Hong
Kong. So it starts off in 2000 at roughly just under 100
million. And now before the recession it peaks in 2000.
But look at that, 80 percent of all the toys that are
imported in the United States come out of China, just like she
said, and 42 percent of all consumer products come out of
China. Our second largest importer has flat lined, that is
Mexico. Canada is the green, and then you have Japan and Korea.
We both made visits to China, and we are I am glad to tell you
that we opened up our first overseas office in China, and
Ambassador Huntsman allowed us to be in the building right next
to his residence. In fact, every time I go to China, he has
always met with me personally at the residence, because it is
so important for him to keep up with our issues. And if you
want me to show you these other charts, I can. They have to do
with FTE's.
Mrs. Emerson. All right. Tell me what the impact would be,
because I know you all have had to plan for it, or at least
noodle ideas around, about what a return to Fiscal 2008 finance
levels would mean for the CPSC?
Ms. Tenenbaum. I have that right here. If we go back to
2008, which would put us back at 80 million, and it would be a
32 percent reduction, we would have to furlough staff for 92
days, or four out of the last six months of the year,
effectively shutting down the agency. We would have only
available 340 FTEs versus the 576 that was planned for 2011. A
strict hiring freeze would prevent filling critical vacancies.
We would also have to not do our nanotechnology project. We
would be stopped from implementing the CPSIA in terms of the
durable nursery equipment rules that we are supposed to write.
We would have to close the Beijing office, and we would have to
stop our hotline where consumers can call and tell us about
their experiences. The Virginia Graham Baker Pool and Spa
Safety Act, which is about swimming and drowning prevention,
would be cut. And we would have to slow down our modernization
of our technology overhaul at our agency.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay, thanks. Mrs. Northup. How would you
address those two questions? First, the FTE question, and,
secondly, going back to 2008 budget levels?
Ms. Northup. First of all, Madam Chair, I have to ask for a
clarification. I thought that the law said we were to go to 500
by 2013, not by 2010.
Ms. Tenenbaum. It was 2010.
Ms. Northup. Was it 2010? If somebody could just clarify
that.
Ms. Tenenbaum. It was 2010.
Ms. Northup. In any event, we are of course approaching 600
employees, and I would just say that I think you see what
happens when you have a very complex bill, and you have to
implement it, and it has a lot of regulations. The regulations
are horrendous. Any business, just about any small business,
when we talk about the ombudsman, the ombudsman is primarily
dealing with micro-businesses, with crafters with people that
are one-person businesses. If you are a small business, you are
going to have to hire a lawyer to make sure you comply with all
the new regulations that we have written.
I would just point out that, when we were at the low point,
that is when the recalls happened, and that in a sense you
could make the argument the system worked. They caught the toys
coming in, the agency was able to do a sweep of all toys, and
while it is true that there were somewhere, I think in the area
of 78 toys that were recalled, it means that there were
thousands upon thousands that complied with all the paint
specifications. And so we were able to do that, and to
implement a system. We assessed very serious penalties for
those companies that broke the law, Mattel was the leading one.
They paid about a $1 million, $1.5 million I think, maybe $1.8
million but they also settled the class-action lawsuit for $14
million. And there is no evidence that any child was hurt by
those products. Obviously, lead in paint is dangerous, unlike
lead in handlebars, I might point out, of a bike, or a peddle
or the other things where the law went way beyond what was
risky. But the law worked, and we did catch those toys, and
they were removed from the market. And the companies were
penalized and that is what set into motion these companies
establishing far more oversight over their plants in other
countries, putting in in-plant labs. So, you could make the
argument that the CPS, being out of compliance in 2007 with 380
employees, that the system did work.
Ms. Tenenbaum. I have a correction to make. Commissioner
Northup was right, it was 2013.
Mrs. Emerson. The 500?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Yes, my notes say 2010, but it is 2013.
Ms. Northup. Okay, thank you, so we are already 100 over
that. We are going to be 100 over that if you fully fund us,
and we are still a year out from 2013. So the bureaucracy that
is growing, it is staggering.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay, I am going to turn it over to you Mr.
Serrano, we have lots of questions and I have to let my
colleagues have their shot too, thanks.
Mr. Serrano. So far, Chairman Tenenbaum on the
implementation of the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act,
we are talking about numbers. How are you working to educate
manufacturers about their new responsibilities under the law,
and also with regard to the improvement act, since the
commission has delayed until 2011, its enforcement of testing
and certification requirements for many children's products,
how can consumers be assured that the law is being followed and
that children's products are safe? What are you telling the
business community about this, and what are you doing about the
children's products?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Okay, thank you Mr. Serrano. We have held
workshops for the business community as early as 2008, before I
came to the commission. The staff pulled together all
stakeholders to teach them about the CPSIA and what the
requirements are. We also have made a new Office of Education,
Global Outreach, and Small Business Ombudsmen. For almost 20
years we have had a small business ombudsman at the CPSC, but
it was only part time. And Commissioner Nord and I talked, and
she argued that we really need to go fulltime again to a small
business ombudsman. We have had a wonderful time young attorney
who is working with small businesses, taking the Plain English
Act and writing summaries of our regulations of frequently
asked questions for the business community. We frequently go to
trade shows, we work with the major manufacturers to tour-
businesses.
I think that what we really need to celebrate is the number
of American manufacturers that have extremely high-quality
quality assurance programs, that they are state of the art.
That they are keeping risk away from people. That they have
been testing using third party testing for ten years. Many of
the people, once they have gone into China, determine that
since it was a global market, it was a supply chain they could
not keep control of, they needed to test, even before they left
China, the raw materials that went into the product before it
was sent to the United States. And once it gets to the United
States, the manufacturers retest.
I have been to manufacturers who tell me what they do to
make their product safe, and it is extraordinary. So, many of
the larger manufacturers have been complying with third party
testing and testing for chemicals and lead. Recently, I went to
the toy fair in China and met with the top five Chinese
companies that manufacture probably most of the toys made in
the world. And they have worked with their industry to develop
a chemical database, so that every chemical that you use in a
toy is listed in that database. And you can keep up with every
chemical that is in that toy, so that if you have a recall, the
batch and the lot number, and you can pull that toy even before
it is sent.
In terms of what we have done, we have implemented the
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act. Although we stayed
enforcement for some of the products until December of this
year, we did not stay compliance. So you still had to comply
with the lead limits, the small parts, the phthalates, and
F963. We did not stay compliance. And that is why so many
people have already complied, because you have to comply with
the lead paint limits, 90 parts per million, total lead
content, 300 parts per million, limits on phthalates, small
parts, and ASTM, which is the major toy standard. We only
stayed testing and certification.
Mr. Serrano. Right.
Ms. Tenenbaum. And most people already do that already.
Mr. Serrano. Right. Yes?
Ms. Northup. Third party testing and certification is just
a giant step different from what is currently being done. When
we proposed the rule, we have hundreds of pages of comments
coming in from small and large businesses alike, telling us
that when we actually go, when they actually have to comply
with the paperwork requirements of that, when they have to
comply. Third party testing, some businesses use it, many
businesses have brought in ISO labs inside their companies.
That is my point. They are very eager to make sure that they
comply with all of our regulations.
But the command and control requirements of the law in the
CPSIA, and the tracking of that information, and the way it is
being implemented at the CPSC is a gigantic step in a different
direction than what they are asking for. And if it were true
that they were all doing it, you would not get, universally,
and it is universal, from small and large businesses, saying
this is going to be horrific. It is going to be costly and
impossible in many cases.
Let me also say that I am glad we have a Small Business
Ombudsman. Unfortunately, this office is going now from one
to--now we are requesting two more, which was a reason I did
not support it. Small businesses are not asking us for more
information. They are asking for changes in the law. They are
telling us it is killing them. And they are saying, it is not
more information they are asking for, yes, crafters are, but
small businesses that have 10, and 15, and 20, and 30
employees? They are hiring their own lawyers en mass. And even
people like Mattel told us that they had to hire a huge cohort
of new lawyers, internally and externally, because what they
had was simply not enough for them to comply with the law. They
said in a public statement that was printed, they did not know
how a small business could comply with this law.
Mr. Serrano. Well, when you two speak to us here today, we
see what the problem is. And I am in, it must be because it is
opening day, I am in a, baseball opening day.
Ms. Northup. You are in a good mood.
Mr. Serrano. I am in a, let us find common ground and the
middle ground here. Now, you walk into, and I hate to mention
names. You walk into Toys R Us, staying on the issue of
children. Sure, it is a business. And they want to make money.
But I do not think they are irresponsible people, the people
who own Toys R Us. They know what impact they have on children.
So there has to be testing. There has to be some government
oversight of those products coming into the country.
But at the same time, since I am in this great mood today,
there should not be something that strangulates the economy and
the business community. So what is it, to both of you, that the
business community is willing to comply with? And what is it
that bothers them? Because if you tell me, I mean, let us be
honest. You served with us. You know that there are some
colleagues of ours who want no oversight of anything, no
regulation; they are all good people, and they will take care
of the American people. That is not how it works.
Ms. Northup. No.
Mr. Serrano. Right?
Ms. Northup. And you see that every day when you are at the
Commission.
Mr. Serrano. Exactly. So what is it that is squeezing them
too much, and what are they willing to do on their own? Because
one of our big complaints, besides, China owns all our economy,
or whatever, all our debt, is, all these products come from
China. And we cannot just accept them as they are. So just
briefly, can you tell me, where is the middle ground here?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, last year, we sent a report to
Congress saying that we needed four things changed in the
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act. First of all, we
needed greater flexibility in granting exclusions for the lead
limits. For the lead limit, CPSC only allows three exemptions:
one if it is an inaccessible part, two, if it is certain
electronic parts, and the third thing is, by use and abuse of
the product, any lead is not absorbed into the human body. So
we wanted greater flexibility, because we had ATVs and bicycles
where the child is not going to mouth the handlebars, and we
wanted to be able to give them an exception.
The second thing is we wanted an exclusion for children's
books. In August, the lead limits go to 100 parts per million.
And we also said, Do not make this retroactive like CPSC did
for the 600 parts per million. Only make it prospective, so
people will not have to get rid of their inventory. And we also
wanted relief for small manufacturers and crafters. In fact, we
are working on a rule called Periodic Testing. We are looking
at carving out an exception, that, if you make 10,000 units or
less, you do not have to periodically test. You have to
initially test, but you do not have to periodically test.
We also came up with a component part rule. So if you made
children's dresses, you did not have to test the whole dress,
you could just buy buttons that were already tested, from the
button maker, and you were compliant. We made rules that say,
if you had cotton, untreated wood, if you were a handcrafter
and made things out of untreated wood, you never had to test.
So those are the things we have done to be creative, to exempt
people from testing and certification.
The common ground is that we need flexibility. But to do
away with third party testing really goes against what I have
seen in the marketplace. And I think that it is to whom you
speak. I went to see a major children's clothing manufacturer,
and they told me, just two weeks ago, that when they started
manufacturing in China 10 years ago, they started doing third
party testing because they wanted to make sure they met the
flammability standard and that the fabric did not contain toxic
metals.
Mr. Serrano. Madam Chair, I do not want to go over my time,
but I would like the commissioner to comment because she did
say, she did.
Mrs. Emerson. Yes.
Mr. Serrano. I was pleased to hear that you say you see it
every day at the Commission. So you are not one of those who
says get rid of the Commission.
Ms. Northup. Let me just say that every day we get the
overnight incident reports. And there are children that have
died, there are cases. We see products that catch fire; we see
products that are harmful. There is no question that there is a
very important responsibility at this agency. However, what has
been a tidal wave of focus of this agency has sort of swamped
everything, is the implementation of the CPSIA. I have to tell
you, Mr. Serrano, had I been here, and I was not in 2008, I
feel sure I would have voted for that bill.
And because in reading it, it seems as though it is
logical. But of the three exceptions to the lead limit, the
question of inaccessible electronic components, the third one
is absorbability. The majority of the commissioners have
determined that this is in conflict. But they have interpreted
that to not apply to one single thing: not a button, not a
snap, not a zipper, not a handlebars, not any part of a toy,
not the screw in your crib. None of those things can have 300
parts per million of lead. Now, you could absorb lead in paint.
We know what you can absorb lead in. We know if you can swallow
a charm that has lead in it, that your body will absorb it.
But we also know that if you lick the handlebars all day or
the screw in your crib, that has slightly more than that but
has more strength, it has machineability. I mean, lead also
contributes certain things that you are not going to--there are
just going to be an unregisterable amount in a child's blood
lead level.
Europe has had lead levels for years. They are based on the
absorbability. They call it bioavailability, whether or not
that lead can be extracted out and into a child's body. We
should make that absorbability mean something. And then
finally, the testing, I would just say that I do not believe
that I have heard from one plant that said, I am sure I have
not, that said, Oh, yes. We think third party testing, outside
of our plant, the way it is written in this law, is going to be
good.
Do they use third-party labs? Of course they do, because
they care about it. But they do it for their own check and
recheck, not so that they then have to change the label every
time they have the red paint runs out one day. Now, you have a
new set of red paint. It has a new certification level. Now,
the final certificate has to change the number on that. Now,
the label has to be batch #107 instead of 106. An hour later,
the yellow paint runs out. You have to stop the presses. You
have to change every single thing all the way through. The next
minute, the snaps run out and you have a new batch of snaps.
You have a new lot number, so you have a new certificate
number. All of that has to be reflected in the label.
This is chaotic and Ashley Furniture came in and told us
they had spent $14 million on third-party testing and setting
up a system by which they could track all the layers on a piece
of furniture and everything. Not one single component of this
furniture violated the lead limit. They were in compliance.
They still did not know how, once we applied this, once we put
in testing, third-party testing, and that they were going to be
able to comply. So you got no benefit in safety and 13 or $14
million and cost.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. Thank you, Madame Chair, for
allowing me to go over my time but it has been quite a while
since I have heard this kind of very direct testimony.
Mrs. Emerson. Oh, and it is excellent.
Mr. Serrano. So informative. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. And it is very helpful, very helpful for us.
Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Wow. Where do I begin? I was a mayor for 12
years and I spent a great deal of my time fighting my own
bureaucracy. And it has been my experience that when you hire a
lot more people, those people start trying to justify their
existence. And so, my first question is, when the law was
passed, that pegged 500 as the number of people, where did we
get that number? How did we, all of the sudden, decide 500
employees was the magic number?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, I will show you two things that
probably prompted Congress to do that.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.040

The blue line are the full time equivalents. As you can
see, in 2004 we were a little over 500. And then, in 2005, we
were at 500, and then we dipped. And this right in here was the
year of the recall. If you look here at the number of recalls,
they spiked. They spiked a little around 2007.
So what Congress, in looking at this data, determined, is
that with the less people you have doing port surveillance,
working in China to make sure manufacturers understand our
regulations, the more recalls you are going to have. Recalling
costs money for manufacturers.
Mr. Womack. Do you have a chart that shows the competency
level of those employees?
Ms. Tenenbaum. We hire people who are competent. And we
hire really good people.
Mr. Womack. I will give you that. I am sure you do on
paper. The point I am making is, can we just simply conclude,
based on a numerical chart, that the spike in recalls was
directly related to the fact that we had a fewer number of
people.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Yes, we only had 393 people and we did not
have enough people. We had five people at the ports. Now we
have 19 people at the ports. We are working with Customs, and
have 19 people at 15 ports. We work with Customs and Border
Patrol. We were the first agency to sign a memorandum of
agreement with them and, we get all the pre-arrival manifest
data. We go through all of that data, and we target now
shipments before they are even unloaded. Products like
fireworks and electrical products, we pull them so they do not
get on the store shelves.
Mr. Womack. Well, Madame Chairman, everywhere I go in my
district and look, I have got a major retailer that is in my
backyard. A small five-and-dime named Walmart. And they sell a
lot of toys.
Everywhere I go in my district, I hear people telling me
about pushing jobs overseas, moving jobs overseas. Is it
possible that maybe part of our problems is that we continue,
the reason we have so many imports of toys, is our tax policy
and our government bureaucracy is so big, so reaching, so much
into the private sector that there might be some other
quantifiable data that might yield a different conclusion about
pegging the number at 500. I am just using that as a thought
process because it always bothers me when somebody says, Golly!
We are in trouble. We need more people.
Ms. Tenenbaum. I have been in plants in China. And people
in China make $1.50 an hour. They live in dormitories and they
may or may not get food in those dormitories, and they also do
not have air-conditioning in some of the dormitories. So, if
you look at textiles, my state, South Carolina, was a major
textile state. And now, textiles and toys have moved. And the
chart I showed you, 80 percent of all the toys coming into the
United States come from China. Forty-two percent of all the
consumer products come from China. And they make $1.50 an hour.
Here is another thing that Congress looked at when they
passed the CPSIA. Here are the number of investigations. And
you can see, in 2003, we were over 50,000 investigations. And
we had dropped to below 30,000 by 2009. Here were the number of
projected incidents, and this is before we even implemented the
database--the public database that people have been talking
about.
So, we are able to only investigate about 10 percent of all
the claims of injury that consumers send us. Ten percent. And
one reason that we are asking for 24 more people this year is
because we have so much data and so many reports from emergency
rooms, coroner reports, the newspaper, and we have our public
database, that we cannot even investigate because we do not
have the people. This is where the majority of the new people
were going, is to investigation. And our new employees have
gone into our laboratory as well as in Compliance and
Enforcement.
Mr. Womack. I would like for Ms. Northup to comment.
Ms. Northup. Well, I think your question is, Can we do more
with less? And I think I would like to say, first of all, that
I have been exceedingly impressed by the people that work at
the CPSC. They work hard. They are talented and they are well-
trained. They know what they are doing. But they have been
given a responsibility to implement a law, and all these rules
and regulations are very involved. They are very complicated.
But I would tell you this, all of the new ways of screening
things coming in work with the Border Patrol Customs and Border
Patrol. That is a new way of doing more with less. And so that
is why I have asked, please, do away with the requirement of
third-party testing and tracking and certification, because
both within businesses and the huge investment they have made
and our investments at the port, this is an emerging world
where new technologies are available that were not available or
were not used previously, and we could do a lot more with less.
And finally, I would just like to say that the rules that
we have implemented, the ones that affect businesses the most
have been written and there has been division between the
majority and the minority. Where we could have made it apply to
fewer items, we made it apply to more items. Where we could
have allowed fewer tests, we have interpreted it in the most
severe manner. And now, yes, much of the regulations and
investigations is going to be investigating whether or not
people complied with the certifications, whether they complied
with the third-party testing, as opposed to whether or not the
item is compliant.
And finally, just the very fact that every single lab that
uses a third-party test, we have to certify the lab. We have to
take in that information. These businesses know what third-
party labs they can trust, but you create a bureaucracy that
stretches back. It is not just any third-party lab, it is a
third-party lab that is ISO certified? No, it also has to be
certified by us. And so, even though that seems like it is not
a lot of time, everything is incremental. When every single
child's product, every component of it has to be third-party
tested in a lab that we have certified, you are talking about
an enormous process of just doing that.
Mr. Womack. That raises costs. And I just want to make this
comment for the record, that my question about competency was
not related or not in any means directed at the quality of your
staff. I realize you have a quality staff. What I am simply
asking is, are there other measurable criteria that could point
to other factors that may contribute to the incidents, or the
investigations, or the complaints. And that is merely the line
of direct thinking I had at that stage.
Finally, let me just ask this. Are we sure that we are
doing everything we can to mitigate the impact on small
business? As my colleague from the Bronx said just a moment
ago, we do not want to under regulate, but we really do not
want to over regulate. And I would like to know where that line
is in an ideological sense, as to when this organization is
going too far, trying to do much, and exponentially raising the
price of goods in an attempt to try to remove all risk from the
public.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, thank you, Mr. Womack. And one thing I
want to clarify is we will only have one small business
ombudsman. I created this office of Education, Global Outreach,
and Small Business Ombudsman, and we put three offices in there
together. We put the International office, the Inter-
governmental office, and the Small Business Ombudsman. And so,
the two new positions in that would be to hire an Executive
Director for that office. But let me go back to what we have
done for small businesses. We want the full-time Small Business
Ombudsman because we are working so that people do not have to
hire a lawyer. We are doing seminars, we are going to trade
shows. Our Small Business Ombudsman gives his card out to
people at seminars, and they call him personally. He answers
questions for them. But we also have done other things. When we
were debating tracking labels, we decided that one size did not
fit all, that the small businesses did not have to have the
same compliance as the large companies. We developed component
part testing guidance and that is so that the small business,
we were hopeful, could buy component parts already tested and
would not have to re-test their products.
The third thing we did was determinations, that if you were
a small business and you were making children's clothing or
handmade toys, that there were certain materials that never had
to be tested, like untreated wood, textiles, and gem stones. So
those are the kinds of things we look at. We also have the
Regulatory Flex Act. We look at how it is going to impact small
businesses before we come up with a rule. And so, Reg Flex Act
is something we look at and point out the impact. But we are
very mindful of small businesses. But, under the Consumer
Product Safety Improvement Act, everyone had to test third-
party testing, regardless of the size. That is why we were
hopeful that component parts would be developed so that people
could buy those, could go in a hobby store, or buy them from
the manufacturer already tested, and they would not have to re-
test.
We also hope that this year, that the House and the Senate
will give us more flexibility so we can allow companies, if we
do not think there is a likelihood of mouthing the product, or
swallowing the product, that we can give them flexibility and
they will not have to test.
Mr. Womack. I yield back.
Mrs. Emerson. It seems to me that you are the perfect
agency to make sure that the President's call for cost-benefit
analyses of regulations actually comes to be, because obviously
some things are so onorous. There is no way that you can say
they are not. It appears that if we do not understand the
impact at the end of the day in a very fragile economy, we may
be cutting our nose off to spite our faces, in which case there
is no businesses to have to regulate anyway. I do want to come
back and talk about cost-benefit analysis of regulations. So
far, I have not seen any federal agency in this government who
is capable of doing that.
Mr. Serrano. Would you yield for a second?
Mrs. Emerson. Yes.
Mr. Serrano. I am sorry. I usually do not interrupt. In
listening to our new colleague, Mr. Womack, I think the balance
here is that we are appropriators. We are not authorizers,
although on many occasions we behave as authorizers.
Mrs. Emerson. And we have.
Mr. Serrano. We appropriate. And we have to. We keep them
in check. This is a law that is in place already. The question
is, Do we fund it and to what extent do we fund it? And that is
the balance, because if we get back to 2007, and you see
people, kids actually being hurt because maybe for insufficient
funding, or funded to a point where they function. And that is
not how they authorized it. They passed that law. It is on us.
That is the delicate balance that we have to reach. So we do
not over regulate, but as I said, do not under protect. And
that is the challenge.
Mr. Womack. Which I think feeds it directly into Madame
Chairwoman's request, that a cost-benefit analysis probably
fits this agency as well as any in government.
Mr. Serrano. Absolutely.
Mrs. Emerson. And thank you all. So with that, it is time
for Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Serrano. Of the Florida Marlins.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Who did beat the Yankees, if I recall, a
few years ago in the World Series? My memory is not very good,
but did not that happen recently?
Mr. Serrano. I think that was your moment of glory.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Madam Chairman, you see how he cannot
admit it. It just hurts him to admit it. It hurts him.
Mr. Serrano. All right, it hurts me. It hurts me.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It is good to
see you the both of you. You know, if I may, I have some
questions on Chinese drywall. But Mr. Womack really peaked my
curiosity. So if that is all right, I would like to submit the
ones on Chinese drywall in writing later on, because I do want
to go back to what our colleague was asking.
One of the things that we have to be careful in government
not to do is get stuck with that kind of weird logic of, Since
cheese is round and the moon is round, so therefore the moon
must be made of cheese. And I think sometimes, when you look at
these charts, it is not always the case, but sometimes we get
stuck in that syndrome about, Oh well, if we had a spike and we
only had 300 people. So if we have 500 people, we would not
have a spike. Is it just because of the products that all of a
sudden are manufactured differently, because of technology,
because of whatever. And again we just need to be very careful
about that. If I may, kind of, follow up on my colleague's line
of questioning. By the way, before I do that, when was the
hotline created?
Ms. Tenenbaum. We have had the hotline for years. It is the
publicly searchable database that was mandated that we created
under the CPSIA in 2008. So we just launched it in March.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Madame Chairwoman, when you mention about
the things that you would have to get rid of or cut if we went
back to 2008, you mentioned the hotline. But it was there
before. It was there in 2008. So why, all of a sudden, if you
could do it in 2008, and it was there before 2008, when we had
less money, more money; I am not quite sure.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Because what we are trying to do is increase
the number of investigations and increase our rate of
compliance in investigations that we are able to do. When we
are asked to make cuts, we look at what are some items that are
discrete that we can cut. And so that was one of the things
that would have to be cut. The fact that we had more money also
allowed us to spend the $5 million that we have done on the
drywall investigation, which is the most expensive inquiry and
investigation we have ever done in the history of the
Commission.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Okay. Let me go back to what Mr. Womack
started talking about. We have heard a lot about some of the
issues that may be onerous to business owners. Specifically
what are the things that you are doing that are actually
helping business be more competitive? Because, obviously, with
technology and everything else, there have got to be areas
where you look at ways to be less onerous, less expensive to
business, and you can go to them and say, Hey, look, right now
you are required to do A, B, and C. Let me show you a way that
you can do that and you can reach the same level of safety
without having to go through the expenses. Are there specific
recommendations like that, that you all are going to the
private sector on and saying, Here is where we can help you
streamline, that you do not have to do certain things that you
were doing before because technology has changed. What are some
of the specifics that you are doing in order to help business
be more competitive?
When I looked at that chart of the number of Chinese toys,
and again, now I am going back to the same analysis that really
kind of frightened me, was the fact that there was at one time
in our history when we manufactured a lot of those toys. There
were a lot of reasons why; clearly labor costs is one of them.
But if labor cost was the only issue, we would not be doing
anything in this country because labor costs are a lot less
expensive in a lot of places, and yet we are still competitive
in a number of different areas; obviously, toy manufacturing is
not one of them, unfortunately.
But what are the areas, specifically, that you all are
looking at to be more competitive where you can cut cost for
business? Some specific areas like that that you are bringing
forward?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, education is a service that we can
provide, and businesses tell me that helps them tremendously.
If we educate them on what our requirements are, then they do
not make mistakes. They can build safety into the product. And
that is why when I came here I wanted to create the Office of
Education Global Outreach and Small Business Ombudsman and put
three offices together so that we could have a targeted,
standardized approach. We could work with colleges and
universities, trade associations, other government agencies, so
that we can help people understand what the requirements are,
thereby saving them money so they do not have their products
recalled. Recalls are not the best way; it hurts industry; it
hurts their brand. We want to get ahead of that.
Another thing is counterfeiting. We get complaints on
counterfeiting. The largest problem on counterfeiting in China
that we find is electrical products. And so the good people
want us to catch the counterfeiters. And we are constantly
working with AQSIQ, letting them know when we find
counterfeiters.
Another thing we have is called the 15J Rule, which means
if it is a standard that the industry is complying with, and it
is visible to the eye, we can then stop products that are not
compliant, so that the good people and the compliant people get
to sell their products. We have done this on drawstrings, hair
dryers--the bob on the end of the hair dryer that is the
circuit breaker--if we see one coming in the country that does
not have that, we stop that at the port. So one way that we
help industry is by helping the compliant have their share of
the market and remove the people who do not comply.
And the other day, Diane Sawyer did a piece where she went
into a home and took out all the furniture that was made in
China and replaced it with furniture made in the United States.
And the cost of the furniture was essentially the same. I am
going down next week for two days in North Carolina to go to
the furniture market. A lot of furniture is still an industry
that the United States has a large market share in. Next year
we need to go and create an upholstered fabric standard; the
industry has asked us for it. We worked on the standard for 16
years.
We also work with standards-making bodies, such as the UL,
which are the electrical products bodies, as well as ANSI, and
ASTM. We work with them when we see a product that is not
working. And with the staff working with industry on these
committees, we come up with a standard that improves the
product and reduces everyone else's risk. And those are
voluntary standards.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me see if I can give the Commissioner
a shot at that, too.
Ms. Northup. Well, first of all, let me just say that there
is nobody that wants recalls less than every business. And that
is why they are more efficient and better at putting in
prevention ways: ways to test their own things, internally;
ways to make sure that they are in compliance. For us trying,
without manufacturing experience, being in the plant, and
knowing what is going on, it is impossible that we could ever
provide the sort of expertise that businesses are able to hire
and provide for their own businesses.
In the rule-making, first of all, the rule itself, the law
itself, said that absorbability would be one of the exclusions.
If you could not absorb lead. If that had actually meant
something, and I presume when you passed it in Congress you
meant for it to mean something, much of our problems would not
exist today. But the majority of the commissioners decided that
if you rub the handlebars and a fraction of a fraction of a
fraction of a molecule comes off, of that, and one percent of
it is lead, the fact you could put your hand in your mouth,
that meant that nothing could comply with the absorbability
standard. Even though in the world, and in Europe, it is an
absorbability standard, if you suck on the handlebars and you
cannot get the lead out, it is not what they call bio-
available, they exempt all of those things.
So when the Chair talks about, we exempted materials like
cotton, it is the smallest, it is a list of about eight things
and they are mostly materials.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Is there an issue in Europe with lead?
Ms. Northup. No. And more importantly, let's look at our
own. We have CDC, NIH, EPA, that all talk about lead issues.
First of all, one percent of the children tested in this
country reach what we call the tipping point of lead. They are
about one and a half years old. They are crawling around on the
floor; they are picking up dust that has lead in it; it is
either from chipping paint, or it is tracked in from outside
because lead was in gasoline, it was in the dirt; it gets
tracked in, it gets on the floor.
We do not have to research that; they tell us where
children are impacted by lead, and how they get impacted by it.
And none of them say, Take away your child's toys; take away
their bicycle. None of them say, Change the screws in the
cribs. And yes, there are some groups: the American Academy of
Pediatric wants us to make it 60 parts per million. But when
you look at their website, about what they recommend for
children that start to have an increase in blood lead level,
and maybe are approaching the tipping point, they do not say
one word about it being in their toys, in the furniture. And
why would they? Think about it. We are requiring, much to my
dismay, and something I think the law would have allowed us to
do differently, we are going to say that a lamp in a child's
room that has a child's, say a fairy for a little girl's room,
every single component of that is going to have to be third
party tested: the brass; none of that is going to comply,
because it all has lead in it.
But that child is going to walk around the rest of the
house and turn on the lights. And no one would say, Do not let
your child touch a lamp. There is a ludicrousness in this. And
a lack of reasonableness that we could have not required it in
carpets. We have a requirement on flammability and testing of
rugs and carpets. But we decided that we still had to apply
this third party testing requirement to rugs in a child's room.
If they have a child's rug, say a star in the middle of it,
that would be bought at Pottery Barn, you can go to Pottery
Barn and buy the exact same thing with solid color with a
yellow outline, and do not have to third party test it. If it
has a star in the middle of it, then you have to third party
test it. And so, do you think there will be that right? And
what is the difference? And in the meantime, the child is going
to crawl out of the bedroom, into the living room, into the
mother's bedroom, none of which is tested. It does not make
common sense to me. In places where I think we could have
written the rule so we could have exempted out products where
we already have protocols and they are in general use; we did
not.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes, well, that does not pass this.
Ms. Tenenbaum. First of all, when Congress was considering
the CPSIA, they heard testimony from scientists, from
physicians, who told them there is no safe level of lead. That
is why Congress put it in the statute that you could not let a
product be used, or that we could not get an exemption if any
lead could be absorbed. So it was not the majority that came up
with this ruling, it was the plain language of the statute.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Are you going to come back with
recommendations to change the statute, then?
Ms. Tenenbaum. We did last year.
Ms. Northup. But not that.
Ms. Tenenbaum. And we also wanted more flexibility in
letting out certain products where we knew the exposure was
very low. But in August we will go down to one hundred parts
per million. Canada already set its lead limit for content in
children's articles to 90. So Canada is already below us. We
are seeing remarkable progress where industry is getting the
lead out. You see lead coming out of zippers for children's
clothing, for buttons, for toys, out of vinyl, you see it out
of rhinestones and bling. The market is getting the lead out of
children's products. And we do not want an amendment to this
that will take us back so we have to test every article,
because the CPSC does not have the capability.
You are talking about more staff, Mr. Womack? If we had to
test everything for solubility, when solubility depends on the
child. A child that is deficient in calcium will absorb more
lead. Lead is a powerful neurotoxin. There is no safe level. It
reduces the brain functions and it interferes with the brain
functions and the IQ of children. It is well-documented. So it
is something that Congress did hear plenty of testimony about,
when they said, we want the lead out of children's products.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me just, in the interest of time,
thank you, Madame Chairman, you are being very generous. Allow
me to say that this is, frankly, one of the most informative
hearings that I have been in, in my years here because we are
actually beginning to talk about the issues.
There always seems to be, and the legislation is part of
that, an increase in regulation. Could you tell me what
decreases in regulations you are either doing or you are
proposing, again, because of changes in technology, because the
need is not there, because the cost is too much, or the cost is
too much for the gain? Are there any areas where you are
looking at decreasing regulation, decreasing activism or
activity, in the private sector?
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.042

Ms. Tenenbaum. I want to go back and talk to our laboratory
and our scientists to give you a complete answer. We regularly
meet with standards-making bodies. In fact, the law is plain
that we cannot write a mandatory rule unless the voluntary rule
is shown to be inadequate to protect the consumer. So the great
majority of our rules are voluntary standards. The UL writes
standards for electrical products, for example, and most of the
rules that the industry uses to make products are voluntary. We
only make a rule if it is not adequate. So we will get back to
you.
Going back to the President's executive order. The order
asked all agencies to look at significant rules. Significant is
defined as having a certain financial, I want to say, $100
million; is that correct? $100 million?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I think it is $100 million.
Ms. Tenenbaum. So it has to have the impact of a $100
million. The only rule that we have implemented that rises to
that level, since I have been the Chair, has been our new crib
rule. And we worked together to give the industry time to
manufacture those, and also public accommodations to purchase
those. But I will send you a list of those. But I just want to
clarify, the rule-making, mostly, are voluntary rules that
industry uses.
Ms. Northup. If I could just correct, Canada left many of
their things at 600 parts per million lead. It was the things
that were swallowable that they lowered to 90 parts per
million. And, again, I think that anything that is risky, we
can ban. We have that authority.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, and the AAP really wanted 40 parts per
million, not 60; so the American Academy of Pediatrics wanted
us to set our limits not at 100, but at 40. And the compromise
was 100 when they passed the CPSIA.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you all.
Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. Before I start, I will preface my
comment. You spoke, Madame Chair, about the cost benefit
analysis. And I think it is fine, in some cases, when we talk
about paperwork or regulations. But cost benefit analysis can
never be acceptable in terms of a child's life or safety. And I
think that is where we have to be careful. When we study how
much we are spending, it can never be at the risk of having a
child, or any person, but certainly children, who were the most
affected in 2007, so that is important.
Which brings me to the question of the new product testing
lab that is slated to open very soon, compared to the CPSC's
current laboratory. How will the new one enhance the work, and
how will consumers ultimately benefit?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Thank you, Mr. Serrano. Our lab opens in
May, and we would like for all of you to visit the lab with
your staff, if you so choose. The lab is going from 37,000
square feet to 63,000 square feet, and we can now perform, in
the lab, many more tests than we were able to perform. We have
a new testing laboratory for fireworks, for example; we have
our own chemical laboratory, toy testing laboratory, and it
will be a huge improvement over the laboratory that we have
been operating in for so many years. So we appreciate the
funding that Congress has provided to us. It is a $19 million
project. We purchased a used building that was already built
for a lab, and remodeled it to fit our needs, and we hope that
you will come out and see it. It is in Rockville, Maryland.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. And that will launch when? In May,
you said?
Ms. Tenenbaum. May of this year. And we would love for you
all to come out.
Mrs. Emerson. That would be a good field trip, I think we
should do that.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Yes, please do.
Mr. Serrano. We can bring some Republicans' items, some
Democrats' items, have them tested.
Ms. Tenenbaum. You are right.
Mrs. Emerson. Great idea.
Mr. Serrano. We could bring the Federal Budget, test and
see how much harm the cuts will cost.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Very clever.
Mr. Serrano. I could not help that. Every so often, you see
a perfect example of the differences around here. It seems
there are a significant number of Members of Congress who would
like to get rid of the searchable database. But the public
likes it. What do we need to know about how it is working? What
is, in your opinion, the strength? What is, in your opinion,
the weakness? Only to be fair, I think there are no weaknesses.
But if someone wants to say there is a weakness, we certainly
will hear that. But it seems to me that the ability for someone
to get on a website and know that there are items they should
be looking out for, cannot hurt anyone. We put all our
legislation up on the Internet and people comment on it; and
some love it, and some hate it; and some love us, and some hate
us; and that is fine; that is public information.
First of all, who is complaining about the database, other
than Members of Congress? And what is the strength? And to be
fair, if you want to comment on its weaknesses.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, we had a spirited debate when we were
debating the rule on the public database. But I want you to
know, even though we televise our debates and we have open and
transparent meetings, 86 percent of all of our decisions are
unanimous.
Mr. Serrano. Eighty-six percent?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Eighty-six percent. But this is one where we
had different views, and we argue our views passionately; and I
think that is a good way to be. And once it is over, a lot of
times we go to lunch, and we remain cordial to each other and
friendly. But that was a very tough decision. And it was a
spirited debate.
Let me give you a little background on the database. First
of all, the CPSC has had a website where people report data to
us for a number of years. In fact, we receive over 17,000 a
year. However, that Website is not searchable by the public,
nor do we have a portal so that manufacturers can go on and
side-by-side and give us their comment on what someone said
about their product. In fact, we are the only federal agency
that has a manufacturers' portal. NHTSA does not have one, and
the other agencies like Agriculture, who may have a website, do
not allow manufacturers or people to comment side-by-side.
But let me give you some numbers, too. The database is a
part of a risk-assessment system that Congress mandated that we
create under the CPSIA. We have spent $23 million so far to
create the risk-management system, and $3 million for the
database. All the money that has been given to us has been
spent because we launched the database in March.
We receive each year 458,664 reports from consumers. The
majority of these come from emergency-room data. We purchase
emergency-room data on injuries people sustained from products.
That is 397,000 out of the emergency room. Like I said, the
website yields about 17,000. We collect mortality data. We get
8,000 death certificates, 550 medical examiners reports or
coroner's reports. We look at the newspaper every day.
Commissioner Northup spoke about the daily reports; we find out
through the newspaper who has drowned or who died because of a
product, and that is 6,554 reports.
We also get a little over 163,000 reports on the hotline,
but only 5,531 are actually reports of harm from a product. A
lot of people just call and ask us questions. Retailers such as
Wal-Mart, Target, Sears, Home Depot, Amazon: we get about
23,000 reports from them, because we have got a retailers'
reporting program. If they have a problem, they call us and let
us know immediately.
We also have a substantial product-entry hazard under
Section 15 of our statute. If the manufacturer knows, or the
importer knows, that their product has a defect, they have to
call us. So we get thousands of reports, about 20,000 reports
from them each year. So anyway, to make a long story short, you
add all those up together, we get about a half a million
reports every year on consumer products.
Now let's go to the publicly searchable database. Remember,
I said we get about 17,000 each year from our website anyway,
but it is not searchable and it does not have the
manufacturers' portal. Since we started in March 11, we have
436 reports of harm in the database. Of those, we have notified
306 manufacturers. Of those, we only had 17 reports that the
report was materially inaccurate, and most of the time, 13 of
the 17, the manufacturer has said, We are not the manufacturer.
We are the private labeler. And we keep a database on labels,
so we are working very hard to track down who is the actual
manufacturer.
And one thing that Commissioner Northup said was every
three days a week our attorneys and everyone sit down to go
over this data. The reason they scrub it so hard is they are
making decisions now that will be our policy in terms of will
we allow it on the database or will we not? We have 2,368
manufacturers who have registered: 2,368. Now, 2,115 have been
processed so that we have notified them.
Mrs. Emerson. Let me interrupt you just for a second. All
right, let's just say I am John Q. Smith, and I have a
complaint to make because my baby's zipper on their jacket
caused a rash on the baby's neck; and so that might be
something that I would think that the zipper could have caused.
And so I can go on the database and I can fill all of that in.
I went on there; I know exactly what you can put in, and all
the things that you require because you only have red stars on
certain things that are definitely required.
Anyway, it seemed to me, unless I just felt horribly guilty
about sending a fake report in because I could not do that just
because there was that little signature thing at the end, but
there are people who could do that. If I made my complaint,
does that immediately get popped onto the database? Because
obviously, you could only search the recalls on the database,
as of yesterday. I guess tomorrow is the launch date for all of
the consumer types of reports. So if I put in that complaint
about the zipper causing the rash on my baby's neck, would that
automatically show up, or does it get sifted through by you all
first?
Ms. Tenenbaum. First of all, we would look at that and make
sure you filled out all the data points.
Mrs. Emerson. But it would have kicked it back to me if I
had not filled it out, right?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Right, and we would not put it on the
database if you did not give complete information, and if you
did not check that you verified that the information is
accurate and to the best of your knowledge.
And then have five days after you put that in there to send
that to the manufacturer. And the manufacturer could say, First
of all, it is materially inaccurate because we are not the
manufacturer, and here is who has manufactured it. It might be
a private labeler, but anyway that is confusing it. You could
say that you are not the manufacturer, and then we would not
post the report if you were not the manufacturer. We would find
out who was, and notify the manufacturer. But we would send it
to the manufacturer, and the manufacturer said, You know, the
zipper does not touch a child's neck if you wear it
appropriately, and why do you have the zipper around the
child's neck anyway?
Mrs. Emerson. Well if it comes up and it is one of those
types.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Okay, all right; you are right. Then they
would say, We will take a look at it and see, or they could
say, We tested it before we put it on the market. We tested it
on 2,000 children, and no one had a rash. Maybe your child has
a sensitivity.
Mrs. Emerson. But my point is, or my question really is, if
I make that complaint and I just made it up to cause harm to a
competitor, would that get posted on the website?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, if it is a competitor, then it would
not be a true.
Mrs. Emerson. In other words, is it possible that false
data could be put on the website?
Ms. Tenenbaum. If we find out that it is false data, we
will turn it over to the Justice Department.
Mrs. Emerson. Well I understand that. Is it possible that
false data could be put on? Because I went through the whole
thing; I could have made up anything on there last night and at
least sent it, but that is what worries me. After I pushed the
Send button, does it pop up on the database?
Ms. Tenenbaum. No, we have to send it to the manufacturer
first.
Mrs. Emerson. Right, but it is possible, though?
Mr. Serrano. But the manufacturer would have a right, prior
to posting it to say, This is not true.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Right, they would.
Mr. Serrano. You know, we go through that. We have a
meeting and people get up and say, You did this and you did
that, and we say No we did not.
Ms. Tenenbaum. And anyway, if we find out that it is false,
it is against a federal statute to give false information to an
government agency.
Mrs. Emerson. Well of course I know that, but there are
some people who do not care.
Ms. Northup. Well first of all, of course the manufacturer
can say, We tested it, it did not happen. They would not say
that they tested it on 2,000 people. I mean, you think they
tested a sweatshirt on 2,000 people? So they would probably say
it complies with all the norms, and that comment could go up if
it wanted. But the point is, yes, it would go up on the
database.
The problem with the database is a number of things. First
of all, you do not have to have firsthand information about an
incident in order to put information in. Now let me just say,
as a mother of six children, I can tell you that many, many
products over the course of my children's lives got altered.
You know, somebody bumped into one of the kids bikes, and Oh,
it bent it when we were trying to fix it, the screw broke, so
we got another screw. I mean, you put things back together. So
let's say the bike broke and my child broke their arm. I go to
the hospital and the hospital reports it, and it goes in and it
says the child broke their arm. I mean, I know that the bike
was altered. I would be willing to tell the manufacturer that
the bike was altered. But the incident on the database is not
going to show that.
Mr. Serrano. But are we not, in a way, Commissioner, being
picky, perhaps? I mean, there is always that danger. There is a
contradiction going around this country now. We have got to
return government back to the people. We have got to give
information to the people. The people, the people, the people.
I am all on board with that. But yet in this particular case
where the people have an opportunity to say something is wrong
and then you have an opportunity to see if indeed that is
correct, and yes you run the risk that some information is
incorrect, I would think that this should fall right in line
with this new belief, or this renewed belief to give more power
to the people. I mean, here the people can go online and say, I
was affected by this. Will you check it out?
Ms. Northup. Well, Mr. Serrano, let me just say that as a
matter of fact, I use that information all the time.
Mr. Serrano. And one last point. Since it is one of those
few agencies that allow the manufacturer to say, Not true,
which I think is pretty fair, well, what is really the problem?
Ms. Northup. Well, the problem, first of all, is that it
does not require enough information that comes in. Right now,
American people have all of that at their fingertips. If you go
on Amazon.com and you say you want to order a Graco highchair,
you will get a choice of over a hundred products. They will be
from $55 to $148. And you can also check that you want to see
what consumers say about it, and they will tell you whether it
was hard to put together, whether they sent the wrong item,
whether they thought it was overpriced, and yes, much of it is
safety information. So there is already in the market, without
us spending this enormous amount of money, and we can talk
about the amount of money later, there is all that information
available to the American people. What is important about what
comes into the Consumer Product Safety Commission is that we
are expected to take action about products, and so it is
important that we have accurate information.
Now, if you go on, let's say I buy that highchair, and then
Amazon.com sends me an e-mail and says, Why do you not comment
about this highchair? And if I click on that link, it takes me
right back to the highchair I bought, so we know exactly what
the product is. What comes into us, you say who the
manufacturer is, Graco. You say it is a highchair. You do not
have to say which one of the 120 items it is. Maybe you have
not even thought about that, and you say the leg broke. Well,
how does Graco know which one? Is it the $55 highchair, or is
it the $148 highchair? How do we know which one it is?
The person putting in the incident has to give their name
and address. That is fine. But we already have third-party
groups putting in data. What if it is Consumer Reports? What if
it is a trial lawyer trying to make a class-action suit? This
is what is terrifying the manufacturing community, the fact
that without enough information, how do they comment on it if
they do not even know which highchair? And if it comes in
through a third-party organization that does not know who the
consumer is, they got the report, then we cannot even verify it
ourselves if we want to do safety information. So the first
problem with this is is that it does not require enough
information.
Let's say a highchair broke at my Thanksgiving dinner. Is
it the highchair I lugged up from the basement that is 30 years
old? Or is it the one I bought last year when my first
grandchild was born? Or is it the antique I have sitting next
to the fireplace? None of that has to be given.
Mr. Serrano. I understand. At the beginning, if I recall
correctly, you said, Do not fund the database. Right? Now you
are saying, Make the database better. I mean, I am not putting
words in your mouth.
Ms. Northup. Well, let me just say, I would say do not fund
it until you can make it better. But having been on
appropriations and knowing that you cannot legislate on
appropriations, that is one of the problems. There are other
problems with it too, but I think you can improve it. I
actually wrote a rule that I thought would have made the
database something really good for consumers, and really good
for us.
Ms. Tenenbaum. And we used a lot of the points made in it.
Ms. Northup. Not the big ones.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, here is another thing too. We do not
require the model as a required field, as you saw yesterday.
But we do have it as a field that we want people to provide.
Mr. Serrano. Why did you not require the model?
Ms. Tenenbaum. The product might have burned up, it might
have been destroyed. But 90 percent of the people are putting
the model in, so we do have a lot of information on the model.
It could have been a cause of a fire in a home. I turned on my
microwave the other day and flames shot out. Had I turned it on
and walked outside, it could have caught the kitchen on fire.
Mr. Serrano. This happened to you, you are saying?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Yes, it did.
Mr. Serrano. Sue. No, I am only kidding.
Ms. Tenenbaum. No, I threw it away because I said, This
thing is old, and I did not report it. So I just took it to the
recycle place and did not let anybody use it.
Mr. Serrano. Right, I understand. I was only kidding.
Mrs. Emerson. My husband did it by putting silver foil or
aluminum foil in the thing, and blew up a brand new, never used
microwave. And it was time to get a new one.
Ms. Northup. He did not want to cook, did he? Clever.
Mr. Serrano. On behalf of men all over America.
So what are you hearing from manufacturers that are close
with that? Because I know that there is a concern, but let me
preface my comments by saying that I think this is one of the
better items that we have in the federal government, the
ability of the public, the consumers, to come and state their
case, and the idea of having the manufacturer's side-by-side
comment. Can it be fixed, can it be made better, can it be more
efficient? Absolutely. But I am worried about your initial
statement, Do not fund it. I like your later statement, Do not
fund it until you make it better. I do not like the Do not fund
it at any level, but this is a good thing and if it can be made
better, of course. But this is one power we have given to the
people that we should not take away.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, what I am hearing from manufacturers
is that manufacturers are signing up for the business portal,
2,368, and they are taking this very seriously. Another thing
is we had a workshop for manufacturers and all of our
stakeholders before we even wrote the rule on the database, and
that was extremely helpful. After the databases rule, we had a
separate workshop for the manufacturers. We want manufacturers
to feel confident that we are going to do everything to find
the actual manufacturer, and that we are going to work with
them to ensure that only truthful information is on the
database. And as Commissioner Northup said, we are meeting
every Monday morning for a few hours because the decisions we
make now set precedent.
But if I could say about the entire IT modernization, that
has been so important, because we had five different silos of
data at the Consumer Product Safety Commission. The CPSIA
required us to modernize our whole IT system so that all of the
data can be tracked through the agency so that we can have case
management, so everyone, whether you are in the legal
department or in the laboratory or are in compliance, can look
at the same cases at the same time. This will revolutionize and
allow us to intervene early on emerging hazards. And so I
wanted to please give that information, because our people have
worked so hard to modernize our IT system.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Ms. Northup. If I may, please do not interpret our meetings
with manufacturers as saying that there is not universal angst
over this. And I agree with you, information is powerful, but I
would also tell you that if identifying, for example, let's say
the Graco highchair. If that is given information to consumers
to go buy a different kind of highchair that may be less safe,
because maybe Graco swamps the market, there are five billion
of those out there. If accurate information is helpful,
inaccurate information is not only unhelpful, it could be
dangerous, and the idea that requiring the model number, and
also the approximate date it was purchased so that is it
something still on the market or is it something that was made
30 years ago? These were amendments that were offered by those
of us, is ways to make this a more useful database, and they
were turned down by the majority. So there is great
disagreement about this.
And finally, if today, we get a comment from a manufacturer
saying, We do not see how this could happen, this does not seem
like a leg could have broken off the highchair, whatever they
say, in other words, a question about materially inaccurate.
How much chance of one of the incidents going up tomorrow? They
have no transparency and no confidence that we will be able to
resolve that material inaccuracy before tomorrow. And what this
rule said is if we have not resolved the material inaccuracy,
it goes up. So if I am GE, and somebody puts in something and
we cannot resolve the material inaccuracy, it goes up. That is
wrong. That is wrong.
Mr. Serrano. All right, well my time has come up. Let me
just make one comment. And we are not here knocking the
business community, but I am still waiting for that day when
the business community says, Why do you not regulate us on
this? Why do you not supervise? Why do you not check into us? I
suspect if tomorrow we said, Government will not issue one rule
for the next year. You guys regulate yourselves on every
subject, a year will pass, and probably not one rule will come
out of the business community saying, We should not do this.
And so we did not get to be the great country we are by just
allowing everybody to do as they please. We set in place some
things to protect people, and to protect workers, and to
protect the consumer, and to protect the business community,
and so on and so forth. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Serrano. Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Are fewer recalls good or bad?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, for industry, fewer recalls are good,
because it means that their brand is not called into question.
And that is what we want to get ahead of. We want to make sure
that we can work with industry to be proactive so that they
understand what the requirements are, and they can build safety
into the product so that they will have fewer recalls. For all
products in fiscal year 2008, we had 564 recalls. In 2010
fiscal year, we had 428. For toys, 2008 was 172, and fiscal
year 2010 was 44. So recalls are, we say, are declining. And
most of our recalls are voluntary, the company calls us and
says, We have a problem and we want to work with you to recall
the product. Which we do. There is a fast-track. So, we work
with industry when they have a problem to go ahead and get the
product off the market. But we would like to see fewer recalls
because it costs companies a lot of money.
Mr. Womack. Well, in previous administrations, like during
a Republican administration, fewer recalls might be looked at,
and probably were looked at, as a sign that we were not doing
our jobs. And yet, we are going to ask for more people so we
can push for fewer recalls. So which is it?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, what it is, is that we have put the
new people, a large number of the staff, in import
surveillance. And we are working with CBP so that we look at
that pre-arrival manifest data, and we can target products
before they are unloaded. But now we have an office in Beijing,
and with our Office of Education, Global Outreach, and Small
Business Ombudsman, we will be able to form partnerships and
train more people in China, in Vietnam, and in other areas.
When I went to Vietnam, the government of Vietnam was so
appreciative of us visiting. I think if we could have stayed
longer, they would have extended our visa, because they wanted
to ask all kinds of questions, because they had government-
operated labs. And if I could have had our staff stay there to
make sure that their laboratories were running the tests that
we were requiring that they ran, they would have appreciated
it. So we are looking for ways to educate governments as well
as educate businesses. Every time we go to China and meet with
the Chinese, we put on a seminar. We did one on training on
ATVs, and what the requirements are for ATVs. We had 150 people
attend that seminar. American manufacturers who manufacture
their products in China welcome the idea that we will work with
them to educate manufacturers and their workers. So, where I am
headed, is in prevention. I want to help manufacturers. I want
to help them have fewer recalls.
Mr. Womack. Ms. Northup.
Ms. Northup. Well, measuring whether or not we are
effective by the number of recalls is just spin. I mean, when
we had a lot of recalls--like I said, it happened in 2007; it
happened under the lowest budget, but it happened because when
they thought there was a pattern, the agency sprung into
action, and so did all the businesses spring into action. This
is similar to what our Chair has done with regard to cribs,
with regard to strollers. When we see that a stroller cuts off
a finger, what she has done, and she has really initiated this
as part of the proactive work she has done, she immediately
requires that we look at strollers that have exactly the same
hardware to make sure we are not going to have more fingers
being amputated tomorrow. And they end up being recalled. And
so yes, we would like to decrease the recalls, and companies
want to decrease the recalls, too. They are putting in place
their own safety, and prevention, and tracking, and so forth.
But the agency, here, is good and, I believe, has gotten better
at being proactive about looking at something that is a real
critical issue and immediately stretching out beyond that.
Mr. Womack. One of the concerns I have, as a new member of
Congress and when I talked to people in advance of being
elected, it was the concept of government underwriting risk. At
some point in time, you just cannot eliminate all risk. It is
just fundamental. It is part of life. You cannot write a code
for every circumstance, and you cannot craft a law to prevent
something bad from happening. And when you interject the human
factor into our everyday lives, things happen. We had a case in
northwest Arkansas this year involving a kid. It was a very
unfortunate tragedy. A young man was crushed to death by a
soccer goal that came over and hit him. It was very
unfortunate; one of my constituents. But the answer on the
state level was to change the law and require that all soccer
goals are made by a certain licensed company doing certain
things, when we all know that the issue was not the construct,
it was the anchoring. And so, fortunately, Arkansas got it
right and changed the law to require anchoring.
But the point I am making is we just cannot eliminate all
risk. The balance I am looking for, as a legislator, is: At
what point do we get into diminishing returns in our desire to
want to protect the public? Diminishing returns meaning that we
are going so far into the regulatory process that we are
killing jobs, ruining our economy, but boy, look at the things
that we are doing to protect humankind from some things that
are nothing more than just bad judgment and misapplication, a
poor build out of the product, because they did not go by the
complicated diagram that came with it--and I am the master at
that--so I am philosophically saying that I want us to be very
careful that we do not get into a situation where we are
throwing the baby out with the bathwater. Now, for the record,
I would like for your agency to provide the breakdown of
additional personnel in your ramping up, and where those
personnel are going to be assigned; to which office they are
going to be assigned.
How many of them will go to the Chairman's office? How many
will go to the Office of the Executive Director? How many will
be in Public Affairs? The point here is that I want to see if
the ramping up of personnel is going direct to the operational
functions of the organization, deployed out to the areas where
they actually can make a difference, and not just serve to add
a few more layers of administrative, bureaucratic red tape
within the agency. That is one of my concerns.
[The information follows;]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.043

And then, finally, I want to ask this question: Madam
Chairman, do you actually go to the toy manufacturers? Mattel
has been mentioned already, and it has been a while since I
have bought a lot of toys, but go to the shelf at Toys R Us. Do
you go to those manufacturers as part of your outreach and sit
down with the CEOs and the General Counsel of these
organizations, and actually ask, What can we do better with our
agency as it concerns your capacity to deliver goods to your
consumers? What can we do better? And I am not talking about
the Ombudsman's program. I am just talking about: What have you
done, as the Chairman, what has your Commission done to go out
here and see how we can create jobs in this country, making
these products for the benefit of the people that are
consuming?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Thank you for that question, Mr. Womack. And
yes, I do sit down with CEOs. I recently went to China and met
with the five CEOs of the largest Chinese toy manufacturers.
And they are Chinese. I have met with them twice now since I
have been Chair. And they were telling us, and told me
personally, what their concerns were with certain rules. They
were also very proud that they had created a chemical database
so that they are going to track every chemical that goes into a
child's toy, and they would have software that recorded that. I
have been, personally, up to New York to visit with the CEO and
the leaders of Hasbro. I have worked with Mattel. And in fact,
Kitty Pilarz, who is in senior leadership at Hasbro, Chairs the
Toy Standards Making Committee for ASTM. So we meet with them
and have interaction with them regularly. When we put rules
out, we provide for a period of comment, and we write down
every question, and we provide an answer to every question we
receive, and we have comments on rules. So we work closely with
the industry to develop voluntary standards, as well as
mandatory. And I do make it a part of my job as Chairman to
meet with people.
Mr. Womack. Same for apparel and strollers?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Yes. Last year, when the American Apparel
and Footwear Association had their meeting, they asked me to
come over and speak. And they said, You are coming into the
lion's den. And I said, That is fine. And I not only gave a
speech, I answered questions. I have been to children's apparel
companies in China as well as the United States, to their
distribution centers. I have gone to China and watched the
testing that companies do on strollers and that is what I said
earlier. We ought to be telling the great stories of what our
American companies do to ensure the quality and the safety of
their products. It is extraordinary. When you see that a
stroller gets on a treadmill and for days is run over and over
again through that treadmill so that it is durable and before
its release, it is remarkable what our companies are doing to
ensure the safety of people and that is the good story we ought
to tell.
And they are working hard to get the lead out. We had a
hearing the other day on what would be the impact on industry
when we, in August, go to 100 parts per million. We have asked
that Congress change the law so it is only prospectively
applied. We had one of the largest third-party testing
laboratories testify that they had already tested 90,000 units
of products and have found that over 90 percent, in fact, I
think it was 94 to 95 percent already are of less than 100
parts per million.
And so the industries have complied, they are moving
forward. I am person whose glass is always half full. My
husband and his family were in the steel business for a number
of years, and I know that steel had to meet many requirements,
and I never heard them complain about the requirements that
steel had to have, the standards. But I am also positive when I
see what American companies are doing to ensure the safety and
remove the risk for customers.
Mr. Womack. I just want to make sure when those
conversations are taking place, it is not, I am from the
government and I am the bad guy; or, I am perceived to be the
bad guy, and there is a reason for that because we can be your
worst enemy if you are not doing certain things. I want that to
be a good open line of communication because I think that is
the way back to get regulation out of the business of stopping
this dilemma we have called lack of job creation. Mr. Chairman,
I will give it back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Womack, and again, I
apologize, but we are all kind of going back and forth to other
hearings. I hope that some of these issues that I am going to
bring up, maybe if they have already been addressed, just let
me know. The IT modernization issue, when the private sector
does IT modernization, they usually then are able to shrink the
size of the personnel. How many less people are you going to
need if you do go forward with the IT modernization?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, the IT modernization goes back to the
fact that we had all of this data coming in. I do not know if
you were here when I talked about the amount of data; it is
almost half a million from various sources. And we had them in
separate systems so that when we wanted to look across all
these systems, our people had to manually go through system
after system. And when Congress asked us to modernize our IT
system, it wanted the CPSC to have one system that you would
put all those systems in a data warehouse, and so that you
could see emerging hazards. Everyone in the agency could pull
up the same system and would have the data in there. IT
modernization will go on into governance, case management,
finances; our whole system will be modernized.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. So it will be more efficient?
Ms. Tenenbaum. It will be more efficient.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Right, but if you are going to be more
efficient, and you just mentioned about how right now people
have to do it manually, that hopefully will not be the case.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, we do not want to just investigate 10
percent of all the claims we have. This is our investigation
rate. These were projected even before the database, that these
are the incidences that keep going up, the number of reports,
and we are only able to investigate 10 percent. So we are
asking for 24 new people this year to look at all this data
that is coming in, to look at the incidents reports, and to do
investigations. We are trying to keep people safer. This is a
good return on our investment.
If you look at our little agency, $118 million, 500 people,
and we have 300 ports of entry, we have 19 people at those
ports. We are trying to create as many partnerships as possible
through our Education, Global Outreach, and Small Business
Ombudsman. We are working with other agencies, but it is a huge
investment, $118 million, this little tiny agency, and we have
over 15,000 products. We have 80 percent of the toys coming
from China, and you know that this is a global complex supply
chain. It is a good investment; it is a good return.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I am not denying that, Madam Chairwoman,
but again, just specifically about that issue. Usually when you
get more efficient, you can then, since you are more efficient
and you are investing in technology which costs money, you are
able then be more efficient.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, we were tiny to begin with. Just in
2008, we had 393 people when we used to have almost 1,000.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. So you are not going to then reduce that
with IT technology?
Ms. Tenenbaum. We are trying to be more effective in
spotting dangers early. We are trying to be more effective in
keeping consumers safe.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Okay, let me ask you this, though, now.
Mr. Serrano mentioned something which I think is accurate. He
mentioned that obviously if whoever, right? You could tell
people you regulate yourself. Unless you have a reason to
regulate yourself, whether it is for business reasons,
whatever, you are not going to do it. The flip side of that is
that usually if government were allowed to say, Hey, what
regulations would you get rid of? unless they are forced to,
they do not voluntarily usually. I think on both counts, we
could probably agree that that is the case.
Mr. Serrano. If I may, I do not know if you were here, but
I think I may have coined a new phrase which is, Do not over-
regulate, but do not under-protect.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Sure. And I think that is the balance that
we all try to reach, and there is disagreement on what that
balance always is. But when, for example, CPSIA, the
legislation that we have been talking about, when those
regulations are taking place, is there an estimate as to, when
you speak to the businesses that you are going to deal with
either on the legislation or anything else, as to what those
regulations are going to do as far as actual cost to the
manufacturers, how much it is actually going to cost them
dollars-wise, which then translates to jobs or not?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Yes, well, prior to the CPSIA and before we
implemented our proposed rule, we had to do a cost estimate.
Now, under the CPSIA, Congress decided that we needed to
promulgate rules on durable nursery equipment: toddler beds,
bassinets, slings, baby bouncers, baby bath seats, baby
walkers. And Congress said, Under these rules, you do not have
to do a cost estimate. We are going to put CPSIA rule making
under the Administrative Procedures Act because Congress had
testimony that children were killed in defective cribs, play
yards, and Congress wanted us to work with industry and first
of all, look at the voluntary standard. And most of the rules
for consumer products are voluntary. Very few are mandatory
rules.
So we work with industry on the voluntary standard and look
to see if it is strong enough. And if it was not strong enough,
we are to come back with our own rule. We have passed baby bath
seats, baby walkers, full size and non-full size cribs. And
Congress required us to have two new rules every six months
proposed. Two rules every six months of proposed rules. We will
vote on next week, bed rails, portable bed rails on youth beds.
We just had a briefing yesterday on toddler beds. We will also
do bassinets this year. So we are keeping up with the schedule,
but we do not have to do cost estimates on those. But, for
example, if we do upholstered furniture, which we have been
working on 16 years, we will have to do a cost estimate.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes, Commissioner, do you want to comment?
Ms. Northup. Yes, we do these rules, but I should say the
Regulatory Flexibility Act, just the one on youth beds and
rails, showed that there would be substantial harm to
businesses and that it would cause some of the small
businesses, primarily small businesses, to get out of business.
But that does not stop us from issuing the regulation; we go
ahead and do it anyway.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Right. So, okay, let me just see if I
understood that.
Ms. Northup. We are required, as the chair said, we are
required to take two durable goods every six months and issue a
rule. And so if we look at youth beds and rails, there really
is not a lot of injury on these. The injury data is very, very
low. But we are required to consider how maybe these could be
made so that even and so we issued new rules. And there is
substantial product difference that we are making, that we are
going to require. And so, businesses that have been in this
business for years, that are small, that are not going to be
able to cover these sort of changes, they, and our regulatory
flex analysis said there will be substantial problems for some
of them, some will go out of business. But it does not stop us
from issuing the regulation.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me put it this way. If it does not
stop you, then.
Ms. Northup. Just to require that we do it. I mean, I know,
it is, I mean----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. However, that is not part of the decision
making.
Ms. Northup. It is not part of the decision making.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. In other words, it is the consequences of
the decisions?
Ms. Northup. We are required to do a regulatory analysis.
Not only that, the law does not say. We still have to issue,
what would we do? It is the law there that requires us to
address every single child's durable product on a certain pace,
and to consider how we can make it safer. And every one of them
comes with a regulatory analysis. Some of them, the changes are
because they are a product that is more likely to cause injury,
or there is more. The companies themselves have evolved over
the years. But in some cases, the product, there is a low
incident rate, but we still are required to consider how the
product might be revamped, so that it would be safer, and to
issue those as mandatory standards. We are required to do that.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. That is because of the new law?
Ms. Northup. Yes.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And you do not have flexibility there?
Ms. Northup. No.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. That is amazing, by the way. That is truly
amazing. Particularly in this day and age.
Ms. Northup. Yesterday's regulatory flexibility analysis
was one that certainly caught my eye because of the number of
companies that they thought it would impact negatively. If you
are in multiple products, you will be able to spread your cost
over more products, and so there will not be a problem. But, it
said that, for businesses that only make youth beds, or that
are smaller businesses, that it would have a negative effect,
and may put them out of business.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And the flipside, what would be the
positive effect? Do we know what the positive effect would be,
how many less deaths? How many less, do we know that?
Ms. Northup. You could say how many deaths there were over
the last 20 years. Over the last 20 years, do you know that?
Ms. Tenenbaum. On the toddler beds, there were two.
Ms. Northup. Over the last 20 years?
Ms. Tenenbaum. I do not know if it was 20 years, but there
were two because they got between the railing and the mattress
and were suffocated. But the rule, the reg flex language in the
toddler beds said that if you are a responsible manufacturer,
and you are already following the voluntary standards, you
would be impacted far less than the people who are
manufacturing toddler beds, are not following the voluntary
standard. It did not say that they would go out of business; it
said it would have a substantial impact because then you will
have to follow what was already the standard. But if you are a
responsible manufacturer already following, you will have less
impact. It did not say anyone would go out of business. It just
said it would have a substantial impact.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But, if you are doing it, two is a
tragedy, I mean, one is a tragedy.
Ms. Northup. The problem with youth beds is that the
majority of injuries occur because people, you are not supposed
to use a youth bed for a child under the age of two, and it is
primarily when people put a six-month-old or an eight-month-old
in a youth bed, that they have an injury. But we are required
to consider use and abuse. And so, if it is foreseeable that
people are going to put eight-months-old in there, we have no
flexibility on this with the law, in terms of whether we decide
to issue a mandatory standard. That is what the law requires us
to do. And it has to include use and abuse.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I think that is one of those things that
does not quite pass the logic test. I mean, I do not know what
the stats are. And again, one tragedy is a tragedy for that
family, as a parent we all know that that is an incredible
tragedy. But I do not know if we have stats about how many kids
may die because they fall downstairs. I do not know if there
is, I do not know what those are, but I guess you could put
Nerf stairs so that they bounce. You could, I mean, obviously.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Use a gate, you could use a gate.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Right. But I mean even then. And then are
we going to require a gate that closes by itself with a motion
detector. The bottom line is that we could always go to the
extreme. And we would like that nobody ever dies and nobody
ever gets injured, obviously. As a parent, that is what we
would all like. But it seems to me that if you are dealing with
two tragedies, and they are tragedies, some of those may be
because there is misuse. And then, we can lose jobs for that,
which is a huge tragedy. Because those are probably jobs that,
those people might have children as well. It seems to me that
that does not pass.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, I do not know that anyone will lose
their job.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well we do not know if----
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, the top, on the durable nursery
equipment, what we were seeing was a trend, in that the
materials used were flimsy and the hardware was not as strong
as it needed to be. Particularly cribs. We had over 30 deaths
in drop-side cribs. And that is because the drop-side, if you
looked at the wood, it was not the strong wood that was
required for a crib. We did not require a racking test, which
we are now, that we borrowed from Canada. And the hardware was
plastic.
Now, we had a baby bed in our family that everyone in the
family passed around. But it was a stronger wood, and the
hardware was made out of metal, so it slid up and down and did
not come detached from the sides. So you are seeing a lot of
products that are being made that are not as durable. And that
is why, when Congress heard testimony about infants and
children being killed, and hurt severely, they wanted the best
product.
Look at car seats. Look how strong car seats are now. Look
at the strollers. When I visited the stroller factory, it was
amazing to see all the tests that they put that stroller
through so that a child is not harmed. And so it really is the
safety of the child. It is based on the best science. It is
based on the best engineering that we know. And we have worked
with the Standards Committee. And I want to point out that
there are probably 1,000 standards-making committees around the
world. Think about that. And most of the standards for products
that you use are voluntary.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I understand.
Ms. Tenenbaum. It pales in comparison to mandatory rules.
But Congress heard testimony and they said, We want you to work
with the Standards Committee, look at what the standards are
for toddler beds, and if you think they can be made stronger,
make them stronger. And that is what we are doing for all
durable nursery products.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But you could always make everything
stronger.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, this is based on the best science.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. How many people die in automobile
accidents?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, look at the automobiles.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I know, but we can make them better.
Ms. Tenenbaum. How much they have changed?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But we can make them better. And we can
make them stronger. We can make it so that nobody dies by
literally wrapping people in bubble wrap, and putting in a nerf
car. I mean, we could.
Ms. Tenenbaum. But we do not feel like we are doing that.
We feel like we are really using the best science.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I understand that. I understand that. But
there gets to a point where, then, the cost benefit analysis
shows you that you are going overboard. And I, again, I am not
talking about this specific case, I am just saying that there
is a time when you go overboard, and where are we not reaching
that case, particularly in the case where, again, two
tragedies, horrible tragedies, when you are dealing with two
tragedies, some of those may be misuse. And then you have the
potential of hurting people's businesses who have kids, and
that is a tragedy as well. Are we not potentially going
overboard?
Ms. Tenenbaum. We are very sensitive to that. But we also
are sensitive that our mission is to keep children and families
safe, and we believe that we need to be.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I understand that, but every day we are
losing more and more jobs overseas.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, I think that there are a number of
factors.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. There are.
Ms. Northup. If I could just say, if I had been asked what
sort of changes you might make in the rule, I might make
mandatory standards for durable infant goods where there is a
trend towards injury related to the product and how it is made.
We were not given that, nor have we sent up that, as a
recommendation, but the fact is that when we change something,
when we tell somebody they have to re-engineer their product,
and there has been a low incident rate on dangers to them, but
never mind, we do not care, do it. And they either go out of
business, or lose product, or cannot, or it is prohibitively
expensive to re-engineer this. That is a question that Congress
will have to consider. But it would be a recommendation that I
would make.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And finally, and again, I will submit some
questions on Chinese drywall.
Ms. Tenenbaum. We have a lot to tell you on that. If you
want us to meet with you personally, we certainly will. We will
even come to your district and have a public hearing.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Just lastly, do consumers have
any responsibility to check products for quality and safety, or
really is it kind of government control to do that? In other
words, should government be in a position to make sure that
everything is safe, and so that consumers never have to worry
about checking to see if one product is stronger? Because they
are all going to be as strong, or checking that one product. Is
there any responsibility that we as consumers should have, or
really is it that frankly should government be taking care of
those issues so that consumers should never have to worry about
those things?
Ms. Tenenbaum. Well, philosophically I believe that
everyone has the responsibility to use products responsibly.
But I also feel like the government plays a key role in working
with manufacturers in coming up with the best standard possible
for products. I remember when I read The Jungle, which was
about the meatpacking industry, years ago when I was in high
school and how the meat was contaminated because we had not
regulated the meatpacking industry appropriately. And I
remember that book from years and years ago, and what an
impression that made on me. My first job in state government in
South Carolina was licensing childcare facilities and going in
to old buildings that could barely pass fire safety standards,
and worrying about children dying in those facilities. I have
been a child advocate all my life, and my job is to protect
children who cannot protect themselves.
Every week, we see some product that is pretty incredible
and we all say, Good gracious, why would anybody think that the
use of that would be safe? We looked at one yesterday, and it
is almost unanimously, Oh, that is so unsafe. So we have to
balance that. You cannot over-regulate, but you also have to
look at who your most vulnerable citizens are, and that is
children and elderly people, and people who cannot take care of
themselves.
So I think it is good that we have a rule that says you
have to have a voluntary standard first, and the industry has
to govern itself. And if you find that that standard's not
effective in keeping people safe, then you can write a
mandatory rule. I think that is the way it should be. And the
great majority of rules are voluntary rules that industry makes
themselves. And like I said, there are probably 1,000
standards-making bodies around the world, and they work very
hard to make sure that the standards are the best that they
know. It is our job if we have new scientific information to
work with them to improve these standards. And that is
basically my philosophy.
Ms. Northup. First of all, we do not oversee products
because they are flimsy. I mean, because a product is flimsy,
because it breaks, we do not have any oversight of that. It is
only if it has the potential to injure somebody that we have a
responsibility for it. So, yes, somebody going in. But
remember, there are plenty of families that are of modest
income, and they go in and they look at a crib, and they are
judging, What can I afford? And they have to presume that every
crib there on the floor is going to be safe.
I remember as a mom myself thinking that was not what I was
thinking. I was thinking would it last, sort of thing. And so
if it is unsafe, that is where we have a responsibility. It is
this law that required us to make mandatory standards that what
the chair just said is exactly right. We should have voluntary
standards, and when we see that there is a danger, and the
voluntary standards are not sufficient to protect children,
then we should make a mandatory standard. The law did not allow
us to do that.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Serrano. I believe you Ms.
Northop.
Mr. Serrano. Just a closing statement because I need to
leave, myself. The database does exactly what you mentioned. It
puts responsibility on the consumer to put forth information,
and then it allows the manufacturer to say yes or no and defend
themselves. Secondly, what role does the consumer play and
should government play a role? Well, our colleague, Henry
Waxman, I remember, I am old enough to remember this, asked the
tobacco company over and over and over at public hearings for a
series, for a number of years, How harmful are you? And each
one said, Oh, we are not harmful at all. It is fine. And we now
know differently.
And lastly, one of the attacks these days is on labor
unions. Labor unions have too much power. Well, how did they
gain some power? Because there is an HBO special running around
now, sad special, about 146 women who died at the shirt factory
in New York because there were no rules and no regulations
whatsoever. And so yes, we do not want to over-regulate, but as
I said, we need to protect. And there is the balance.
But this knee-jerk reaction that we hear from some folks in
this country, not necessarily Members of Congress, that
everything is over-regulation, no. The commissioner is right.
You go into the store to buy a crib, and the issue should not
be because I cannot afford the more expensive crib, am I
getting a bad crib unsafe for my child? That person should know
that whether it is a $50 crib or a $500 crib it is safe for
their child. And if their work is to make sure that happens, I
do not think that is over-regulating. That is actually
protecting the consumer. And I thank you for your testimony. It
has been a wonderful hearing. But do not get up until the
chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Serrano. You and I here do
not have a philosophical disagreement. We may have a
disagreement as to how much over-regulation there may be or
not, but I think we have heard it from both of you today that
there are some issues where we may have gone overboard, where
they do not have flexibility.
Mr. Serrano. Well, you are coming from a point that makes
sense to me which is that you know that the big Yankees payroll
was beaten by the Marlins team with a payroll of about $1.50,
and so you say less is better. Well, maybe not.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Serrano, I still detect a little
bitterness there on that one. I do. I just do. And I know you
cannot help it, and it is okay. Let me just thank both of you.
This has been, I think, one of the most really illuminating
hearings that I have had the privilege of being with in a long
time. You both have put issues on the table, you have done so
straightforwardly and have taken our questions and answered our
questions. I just cannot thank you enough. And we hopefully
will continue this conversation, because both of you have just
been wonderful today. Thank you so much.
Ms. Tenenbaum. Thank you so much.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.083

Friday, April 1, 2011.

OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

WITNESS

HON. JOHN BERRY, DIRECTOR, U.S. OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
Mrs. Emerson. The subcommittee will come to order.
Happy April Fool's Day.
I want to welcome Director Berry from the Office of
Personnel Management. I do appreciate your service. You have a
tough job. And I know that while today usually is reserved for
practical jokes and pranks, I think it is only opportune for us
today to consider the serious challenges of OPM's mission to
recruit, retain, and honor our world-class Federal workforce to
serve the American people.
OPM leads Federal agencies on personnel management issues
for the country's 1.9 million Federal civilian employees. It
designs, develops, and oversees compliance with workforce
policies in areas of recruiting, selection, development and
compensation. Also, OPM has the responsibility for managing
tens of billions of dollars in retirement, health and life
insurance trust funds for Federal employees.
For fiscal year 2012, the President's budget requests
annual operating expenses of $258 million for the Office of
Personnel Management, including the Inspector General, to carry
out OPM's mandated responsibilities. This is an $18 million, or
7 percent, increase over fiscal year 2010.
As you know, our current spending levels are unsustainable
and our committee is committed to fiscal responsibility. And
Director Berry, I want to try to work as closely as we can to
fund your highest priorities without adding anything additional
to the Federal debt.
As the Federal Government transforms itself to address the
country's most pressing needs, agencies must have the ability
to recruit and retain talented and highly skilled employees.
Over the next decade, the Federal Government is facing a huge
retirement wave which will result in the loss of leadership and
institutional knowledge across the government. So the Federal
agencies really need your help to meet this challenge.
You have significant responsibilities, Director Berry, and
I look forward to working with you to accomplish your goals and
make sure we have the best workforce to serve the American
public.
With that, I would like to recognize my friend, our
subcommittee ranking member, Mr. Serrano, for any opening
remarks he would like to make.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And I did notice
that Albert Pujols set a record----
Mrs. Emerson. Zero for five.
Mr. Serrano. Zero for five and three double plays in one
opening day. That has never happened in the history of sports.
Mrs. Emerson. So do you suppose that having a 10-year
contract would have solved that?
Mr. Serrano. Yes, he would have relaxed more and paid more
taxes and maybe kept the shutdown from taking place.
Mrs. Emerson. Well, there is that.
Mr. Serrano. I would also like to welcome Mr. John Berry,
who we have a lot of respect for.
OPM has a very challenging and important mission overseeing
the employment and benefits for millions of Federal workers and
millions of Federal retirees. We may disagree up here about the
appropriate size of government, but we all agree that it is
critical to have a personnel system that has the flexibility
and resources to hire and retain a high-quality workforce to
staff an efficient Federal Government.
In addition to the current workforce, you are responsible
for retirees, a number that is expected to increase
substantially in the coming years. Recently, there have been
many failed efforts to modernize the retirement system. Despite
repeated investment, we still have a system that is outdated
and inaccurate, and therefore unable to accomplish its mission.
I understand that you are planning a more incremental
modernization of the retirement process, and I look forward to
hearing about these efforts.
Finally, although we appear to be making progress, there is
still an unfortunate possibility of a government shutdown. OPM
will have an important role in making sure that the necessary
parts of the Federal Government continue to function. I look
forward to hearing how you are preparing agencies for this
eventuality and making sure that Federal workers know their
role in the event of a shutdown. I look forward to addressing
these issues during the time for questions, and I would like to
welcome you again, Director Berry.
Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you.
Now I would like to recognize Director Berry. Please, if
you would keep your remarks to 5 minutes, that way we can get
some extra questions in. And let me also say that I believe we
are going to have votes called somewhere between 10:45 and
11:00. I am hopeful that we are going to just have a couple,
and so we will perhaps have to recess just for a couple
minutes. So thank you, and welcome.

Opening Statement

Mr. Berry. Thank you, Madam Chair. It is an honor to be
with you and Ranking Member Serrano. Thank you so much for
having us today. It is great to be here and to discuss some of
our priorities. I will try to keep it real short so we get to
your questions right away.
Government is increasingly a knowledge-based enterprise
where our people are our most important asset. To have a
government that delivers the best services to the taxpayers in
the most efficient, cost-effective way possible, we can't avoid
investing in our workforce.
Over the past 2 years, as directed by President Obama, we
have led a government-wide initiative to reform hiring by
making the process quicker and easier so that good, qualified
candidates can apply. Our goal: Bring the best and the
brightest into the Federal civilian service by making
government the model employer for the 21st century. And we are
trying to lead by example within the Office of Personnel
Management.
In 2010, under President Obama's Veterans Employment
Initiative, we hired 2,000 more veterans than in 2009, despite
hiring fewer overall people across the government. I am very
proud that at the Office of Personnel Management we hired the
highest percentage of disabled vets in the government, more
than DOD and VA.
We met Congress' 2004 goal to speed up security clearance
investigations, eliminating a backlog that we inherited that
was over a year in length. Now over 90 percent of
investigations are done within 40 days. When we inherited it,
it was 179 days. So you can see the improvement on that. And
the GAO removed us from the high-risk list this year. A lot of
things go on, very little comes off; this one came off. And our
movement of this towards the 40 days was one of the primary
reasons it was able to.
We are supporting agencies as they work to improve employee
engagement and facilitate greater partnership between agencies
and employee groups. We are increasing the strategic use of
telework. Thank you all for passing and adopting the Telework
Enforcement Act of 2010. We are on point in getting that
implemented.
Our budget request for 2012 will build on these
accomplishments. As part of the President's budget, it is a
responsible plan to ensure that we live within our means while
still investing in key areas for our future.
Our general funds request for basic operating expenses
represents an overall decrease of almost $3 million from 2011
from the CR level. For the administration of civil service
retirement and insurance programs, we are requesting a slight
increase of $19 million from the annualized 2011 limitation on
transfers, and it is to deal with some of the numbers that you
all have reflected and talked about.
We are facing an increase in retirement claims. Even in the
first third of this year, there is a 15 percent increase in
retirements. The Postal Service has announced an additional
group of retirements that they are going to pursue, and we also
have retirements coming from the Base Closure Realignment Act,
in addition to our normal rate of about 100,000 retirements a
year. So you can see the demand that is going to put on our
services.
To save money and to counteract some of the increases we
are asking for, OPM has made the difficult decision to
terminate the Retirement Systems Modernization Program.
However, we can better achieve automation by now getting back
to basics. We are conducting a full review, bottom up, of our
systemic process and looking at what pieces make sense to
automate that are the most commonly used and the most easy to
automate. It is going to be almost impossible to automate the
entire process. It is just too complicated and too individual
in basis. And so what we are looking at is automating the key
pieces of it instead. By eliminating that as a formal program,
we don't have to provide the oversight, et cetera, that we
would have to, which will produce a $2 million administrative
cost savings for us by eliminating that program officially.
Also, we are eliminating the second phase of our financial
systems, looking at the earned benefit trust fund, our CBIS
Phase 2 approach. We have run into problems with CBIS Phase 1.
We are working through those problems. We are working with the
Comptroller General of the United States. We think we can work
this out. Our problems aren't unique. Every agency that is
using this system is having similar problems. We are probably
having the fewest problems of anybody across government, so I
think we have the best chance of making this work. But we
certainly don't want to go any farther until we have worked the
kinks out of Phase 1. So that will save $41 million from that
project that would otherwise be spent.
The Affordable Care Act directs OPM to approve and oversee
the multi-state health plans that will be offered to Americans
on state insurance exchanges, a major new responsibility. We
stood up the preexisting condition plan in less than 45 days.
Our overhead is .08 percent, and we now provide primary
coverage for that in over 23 States of the Union.
In addition, ACA opened the Federal Employees Health
Benefits and Life Insurance Program to employees of tribes and
tribal organizations. That is going to add another 1 million
people to our workload. We have consolidated and reorganized
our staff to better efficiently manage these responsibilities
so that our request for increases is less than it would
otherwise be.
Our budget proposal also includes several other long-term
saving initiatives: A wellness program that I believe is going
to have a long-term impact, that we can demonstrate through our
agency that if we take this government-wide, will produce
millions and millions of dollars in savings; a health claims
data warehouse that will allow us to achieve greater savings in
FEHBP and for our retirements. And we can assure you that we
will maintain tight oversight on patient privacy.
Finally, we are seeking authority to streamline pharmacy
benefit contracting within the FEHBP and to leverage enrollees'
purchasing power to reduce cost. We estimate that we can save
$69 million in the first year, and almost $2 billion in the
ongoing years. Our 2012 budget helps ensure our ability to
provide the best value to the American people by continuing to
recruit, retain and honor our world-class workforce.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Berry follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.087

Mrs. Emerson. Thank you very much, Director Berry. I
appreciate very much your testimony.

BUDGET REQUEST

Under the budget request, you list a few things that you
needed extra people for--interspersing it with savings, I might
add, so it was harder to add it all up at the same time.
Anyway, tell me now, your budget request is for 7 percent more,
or $18 million, than the 2010 request. So the initiatives that
OPM plans to spend they have proposed increase on are?
Mr. Berry. The increase is getting ready to handle the
multi-state exchanges under the ACA. That is the bulk; $12
million of the increase is for that to really staff up.
Mrs. Emerson. And how many people is that, do you think?
Mr. Berry. It is approximately 20. Am I correct on that?
Twenty-six people.
Also, the Employee Viewpoint Survey, which we have done
every other year, is proposed in this budget to go to an annual
survey, and then every other year to survey every employee in
the Federal Government. We used to just survey a random sample.
So that has an additional cost of $1 million.
We have stood up a new Office of Diversity and Inclusion.
That is a $1 million increase to allow us to continue forward
progress there. And there is a request that is being made
government-wide by the Office of Management and Budget that we
would play a role in for improving our acquisition of $640,000.
So those are the major increases in that.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. So if you went back to 2008 fiscal year
levels, or let's say a 17 percent decrease, more or less, tell
me how that would impact you all.
Mr. Berry. I think we could make that work, Madam Chair, if
you would work with us on flexibility on the trust fund side of
the house. What we could work with you and your staff on
developing is if we had to go back to the 2008 level, we can't
avoid the additional burden, and I can't pretend that we can
just eat the entire cost of getting ready for these multi-state
exchanges. It is going to be a significant new responsibility
for us. But I believe we could work with you on--as I said, we
managed this with less than 1 percent of overhead cost. And I
think that if you were to give us--we are not talking about a
wild increase here. You are allowed under the law to go up to 2
percent to authorize this. So with a slight increase of taking
us to 1 percent, for example, would allow us potentially to go
back to a 2008 level and still maintain getting ready for these
important new responsibilities.

MULTI-STATE EXCHANGE

Mrs. Emerson. Let me ask you something; when you have to
stand up the multi-state exchange, does that require more
people at the outset, but then once you have it going then
those people could be either shifted elsewhere or they could be
temporary employees? I mean, is that how it works once you have
things on a roll?
Mr. Berry. I think the 26 that we are asking for, Madam
Chair, is I believe going to be sort of a stable baseline. It
is one that we will build into over the course of--if you give
us the authority. I don't see going much beyond that. In other
words, I think that is a good, stable thing to be able to
handle the millions of people that will have to come on in
addition.
Mrs. Emerson. So the FEHBP people wouldn't be able to
perform a dual function?
Mr. Berry. Right. First, let me say what the law requires.
The law requires us to keep these absolutely separate. How I
have done this though, so that we have the efficiency of being
able to share, obviously, good information and training--
because you want both to inform the other--is we have one
Office of Health and Insurance that has two deputies, one for
FEHBP, one for the ACA. That way, their staffs, the statistical
analysis, the data warehouse, the information that we can share
back and forth, that will inform both, but the actual
management and policy direction that is required under the law
we can keep separate. So we will be able to do that.
So clearly the FEHBP is going to continue to be the larger
element of the staff. The numbers are larger and they will
probably remain so. But there will be, we estimate, in the
millions that will be an additional workload that we will have
to manage through those exchanges that would be under the ACA
section.
Mrs. Emerson. I really do have to commend you for being
able to keep your administrative costs to manage the FEHBP at
.08. I mean, it is remarkable. And it certainly sets the bar
for any--in the private sector, we know that they could then
perhaps reduce their administrative costs as well.

FEDERAL HIRING

Let me ask you one other question during this round because
this is a pet peeve of mine. If, for example, I found a job at
the Department of the Interior in which I was interested, I was
qualified, tell me what the process is for me to apply for the
job, who reviews my application, and how that all works, if you
would.
Mr. Berry. Each agency controls their own hiring. So, for
example, we don't hire for the Federal Government, we create
the policies within which they work.
Mrs. Emerson. Right. So I want to talk about the policy
piece just for a second.
Mr. Berry. So in that case, for example, Interior, we try
to share to gain efficiencies in certain portions of the
process, for example, advertising the positions. So all the
agencies have come together with us and we have created
USAJobs. So there is sort of a central, automated entry place
for you to enter your resumes. But those resumes, in that case,
would go to the Interior Department. They would screen and
assess those resumes to create a pool of well-qualified
candidates and then would select--and apply veterans
preference. That is what we have set the policies to do all of
that. The agency in Interior would then interview people from
that well-qualified pool and make their selection to try to
match the best skills with the position that they are hiring.
Mrs. Emerson. So are HR managers within each of those
departments making those decisions, or are the people for whom
the applicants would be working doing the screening?
Mr. Berry. The ultimate decision is made--and what the
President wants to see done in the Executive order on hiring
reform, we want to make sure that responsibility is put with
the hiring manager, the person who is actually going to have to
be managing the job because they know what they need and can
match the chemistry of that job with the right skills set. The
HR people are supposed to make sure that the policies are being
followed so that veterans' rights are being protected, disabled
vets are being protected, et cetera, and creating a legitimate,
well-qualified pool that has open access for competition. They
are making sure that box is checked, but the actual hiring
decision is being made by the hiring manager who is going to be
supervising the work.
Mrs. Emerson. But the hiring manager is only given a select
number of people from the pool, even if all of them are equally
qualified?
Mr. Berry. Now here is where we would love to work with you
on improving this. One of the things the President's Executive
order--that we could do within the law and we are allowing--is,
let's say you were applying for an accountant position and you
didn't get the job for the accountant but you have gone through
a very arduous process, you have competed, you are in the well-
qualified pool. Right now you would have to start all over
again. To alleviate that, what we have done to try to make it
easier is within that department, if they are hiring other
accountants, you don't have to start over. They can interview
and hire from the well-qualified pool of accountants anywhere
in Interior.
Now I asked the obvious question: If Transportation is
hiring accountants, why can't they hire from that pool? The law
prevents us from sharing between departments now. We would
obviously support changing that to allow us to share those
positions government-wide. Any company does this, we should do
it too. Right now we have made it easier within departments; I
would love to make it easier across the government.
Mrs. Emerson. So what in the statute actually prevents it?
What line? What does it say?
Mr. Berry. We will get you the specifics, but it limits our
authority to share those positions within the department, it
says. And so we just essentially need to--we would have to
change a word.
[The information follows:]

Hiring Reform

We do not think there is a sufficient way to broadly interpret
current statute to provide an authority for agencies to share
competitive certificates across agencies with other appointing
authorities. The authority to appoint employees lies with an agency
head or with his or her designee.
During the earlier years of Civil Service, OPM (formerly the Civil
Service Commission) was responsible for competitive examining within
the Executive branch. Based on 5 U.S.C. 3317 and 3318, OPM certified
individuals out to agencies for appointments within those agencies.
That OPM authority has since been delegated to agencies through 5
U.S.C. 1104. Agencies are responsible and accountable for the
appointments they make within their agencies. These appointments must
be made in accordance with the merit system principles, veterans'
preference and the statutory provisions regarding the proper order of
making appointments. Executive Branch agencies have signed agreements
with OPM that authorize them to appoint individuals to positions within
their agencies using the rules, regulations, and processes that OPM
would have used absent a delegation.
In September 2010, OPM transmitted to Congress a legislative
proposal entitled the Federal Hiring Modernization Act of 2010, which,
among other things, would have amended 5 U.S.C. 3317 to expressly
permit agencies to share with each other the names and scores of
candidates who have been assessed and found to be qualified. The other
agencies could make selections from the same certificate for similar
jobs for a period of 240 days, without having to post a new job
announcement. This would reduce some of the time it takes agencies to
fill jobs and would eliminate the need for applicants to submit
multiple applications for the same types of jobs.

Mrs. Emerson. Well, certainly for a position that is an
accountant, an accountant is for the Interior Department or
DOT, or whatever.
Mr. Berry. I couldn't agree more. It would be a great
commonsense advance. It would certainly reduce the frustration
level of applicants because now they would have an opportunity
to be considered across the government for those pools of jobs.
So I think it would be a great step forward in terms of
efficiency.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay. I appreciate that. We may come back to
that. Thanks.
Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you so much.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Director Berry, you inherited several troubled IT systems
when you came to OPM, including the Retirement Systems
Modernization Program and the Consolidated Business Information
System. In the fiscal year 2012 budget you propose to put both
systems on hold to address and remediate issues with each
system. We had a hearing 2 weeks ago about government IT, and
OPM is now playing a bigger role in helping to get some of
these systems back on track.
Are you working with OMB to address the problems in these
systems.
Mr. Berry. Absolutely, Mr. Serrano. It is one of our
highest priorities. We also work very closely with OMB and
Vivek Kundra there, who is the chief CIO, if you will, for the
government. And I believe we are one of his cutting-edge
practitioners in how to do IT acquisition. We have learned from
the private sector here. We have met with CEOs who have advised
us, avoid any RFP that is longer than 9 months; get away from
the multi-year buys; go short; go for instant deliverables that
you can turn on and bring it on in phases, as opposed to trying
to do everything at once. And I think that is very wise
counsel. And so we have been working in that direction, sir.
We are going to be overhauling USAJobs this fall. And we
have been designing it in pieces, we have been testing it in
pieces, and we will be turning it on in pieces. And the
ultimate goal is to deliver success. I don't want to claim
success before it happens, but we are on track, we are on
schedule and on budget with that project. And so it is a good
example of applying the new techniques to an IT acquisition. We
are now taking that into retirement, into our accounting
system, and the other IT acquisitions we will do, but that is
sort of the approach we are taking, sir.
Mr. Serrano. And what are your goals? Do you have a time by
which you want things to run a certain way? And which way would
you want them to go?
Mr. Berry. Well, the first and the most important I think
we can do is, one of the things we are again trying to lead by
example on is setting a very tough performance standard for our
employees and then asking them to step forward to meet it, and
working closely with them in partnership to develop those goals
so that there is good buy-in on the front, everybody
understands what is being expected, but then people know they
have to deliver.

RETIREMENT PROCESSING

So, for example, on the retirement processing, it is a very
complicated, arduous process that is largely pen and paper
right now and is going to be for many years to come. We can
automate pieces of it, and that is what we are looking to do.
So for example, where a calculation needs to be made, we can
automate that calculation. And we are trying to electronically
get all the data now. The good news is we have made some
progress. Every applicant is now fully electronic. So all new
hires, we won't run into this problem. For existing hires, we
have reached about 3 to 4 years back of getting people who are
eligible to retire. Our goal is everyone eligible to retire
within 5 years will have their file fully automated, because if
it is fully automated, it again increases the speed with which
people can review documents, adjudicate them, and make sure
people are getting the right calculation.
Mrs. Emerson. Is it a matter of speed or is a matter of
losing information? Was it that people who were around 20
years, 30 years, all of a sudden we didn't know they were
around?
Mr. Berry. RSM was killed just before I came into the job,
the official acquisition, the contract that we had with a
carrier. The best thing I would describe as why it died was
they tried to take an off-the-shelf system and apply it to the
Federal system, which doesn't have--each case is so unique. Let
me just give you a hypothetical example. If you were a Federal
employee and you worked at Commerce but you had military
service and you were in the reserve and you served in
Afghanistan, for the period of time that Congress will award a
higher rate of pay for retirement, you get credit for those
years that you were in a war zone in Afghanistan, in your case,
but it doesn't necessarily apply to every action.
Mr. Serrano. What do you mean to every action?
Mr. Berry. For example, the treatment and formula that
Congress has passed for Afghanistan is different from Iraq. And
so our people adjudicating this have to go back and say, okay--
and the days are assigned. It gets really sort of into details
that you would be amazed. So they have to go back and verify,
were they in the war zone during those days, and if they are,
then they get a higher credit and a higher calculation. Well,
there was no way the off-the-shelf system could go back in and
say, okay, how do I handle this situation and that situation?
And so how those cases are done now is we pull all that
evidence together and we have a legal specialist who
adjudicates those files and certifies that, yes, this employee
worked at this period of time, they are eligible for this level
of benefit, and then they apply the formula that applies to
that unique person. But it is literally different for every
employee, which is the problem. This is one, where together, if
we could come up with--I know it would be too much to ask to
expect Congress not to award these unique benefits because I
know that that political pressure is going to be there
regardless of party, regardless of year. What I would love to
do would be, wouldn't it be great if we could agree together
on, let's agree on a basket of benefits and give you sort of a
low, medium, high choice. You all could decide, okay, we want
to award the high benefit to this one, or the low, but then we
could get some sense of standardization. What happens is sort
of with each event we end up with new rules, and that makes it
really hard to administer. And so if maybe we could work
together to sort of standardize this, we could have an easier
life going forward.

MILITARY SERVICE CREDIT

Mr. Serrano. Now there is a limit, right, X amount of
years, of how much military time you can purchase, if you will?
Mr. Berry. Yes. And I can get you that, sir, officially for
the record.
[The information follows:]

Military Service Credit

In general, an individual cannot receive credit for any military
service in his or her Civil Service Retirement System/Federal Employees
Retirement System (CSRS/FERS) computation if they are receiving
military retired pay (except if the retired pay is awarded on account
of a service-connected disability or if the retirement is from a
reserve component of the Armed Forces). However, the individual can
elect to waive the military retired pay and make a deposit into the
civil retirement system in order to have the military service added to
his or her civilian service in computing the CSRS/FERS annuity. An
individual may only make payments to capture service credit for
military service after 1957, and deposit must be made prior to
retirement.

Mr. Serrano. Otherwise, Mr. Womack will purchase like 30
years or something, right?
Mr. Womack. Thirty years, 5 months and 19 days.
Mr. Serrano. Which means that immediately he would be in
the Federal Government much longer than I. I understand that.

RETIREMENT PROCESSING

So just finishing up on this issue, I mean, I even know of
some folks who have considered retirement but won't retire
because their paperwork is not in order for them to retire,
they would be missing out on many years. When can this be in
order? Or are there some people that have been lost through the
system and can never be recovered, or their information cannot
be recovered?
Mr. Berry. Well, we definitely don't want to lose anybody;
I mean, that would be a failure of our fiduciary
responsibility. We do encourage employees who are thinking
about retirement, we try to work with employees and agencies
long in advance of their actual retirement date--sometimes even
a year ahead--to say let's make sure we have copies of all of
your file. Work with your HR professional in your agency--see,
the files aren't with us, they are with the agencies. And let's
take your Interior example. If you are at Interior, you would
work with the Interior people to make sure you have gotten all
your paperwork right. If you had military service, you would go
back to DOD and you would get that paperwork in order.
When we have a full file, then we can adjudicate that file
very quickly, where one of our problems, our biggest problems
of delay is, we will receive a file from an agency and it will
be missing the military piece or it will be missing--you had
worked at FAA before you came to Interior and they won't have
the FAA piece of paper. Well then we have to work to get that,
and that obviously takes time as we try to get that.
So we encourage retirees--it is much easier for them, they
know their record, they know where they were--to go back and
get that all pulled together for us. And then the speed with
which their file can be adjudicated is much, much faster. So we
try to educate both employees who are coming into retirement as
well as the agency HR officials to get those records complete
because then we can adjudicate quickly.
Mr. Serrano. Okay. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. I
certainly encourage you to continue to move on this, and
certainly in the area of veterans benefits. We hear a lot about
``support of our troops.'' Well, I am a big believer that the
support is not only when they are in uniform, it is later on as
a national thank you for their service.
Mr. Berry. I couldn't agree more, sir. Our strategic plan,
one of its four goals, is honoring service. And I believe every
day, when we are processing retirements, we are reflecting how
the American taxpayers are thanking people for their service,
both in uniform and in the civil service, for honoring their
country. And so it is up to us to make sure we give them
respectful treatment and fast, efficient treatment as well.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good to see you, sir. You have kind of touched on this, but
I just want to make sure that I got it right. And you talked
about some of the issues. So is it 46,000 Federal retirees who
basically will receive only about 60 percent of their annuity
payments through errors; is that correct?
Mr. Berry. No. I didn't mean to imply that, sir.
What we do, because we know it takes a while to get these
files put together to make the correct adjudication, is if
someone comes in, we pay what is called a partial payment. And
now, because we know, because of the backlog, that we have a
longer period of time to get these things adjudicated, we are
paying 95 percent of what we estimate their payment would be.
So I don't want to give the impression to any of the members of
the committee that you are sitting there not getting paid in
your retirement while we are waiting to adjudicate the file or
waiting to get the paperwork from the FAA. You are getting your
monthly check right from the beginning, and that is what we try
to do, and up to what we estimate to be 95 percent of what you
would get through the paperwork we have.
The only people that are complicated in that are folks who
have court orders. Let's say, for example, a divorce, where a
judge has said 50 percent of your retirement needs to go to
your former spouse. In that case, you might be expecting X
payment. We have to honor the court order and reduce--we can't
pay you 90 percent of your whole payment, we have to factor the
court order in. And oftentimes that leads to tension, as you
can imagine, resolving those cases. Many of them end up on your
desks and we work those out with you. But I do want to explain
that because it is an important distinction.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. All right. Let me ask you then--so I got
that; now how long does it usually take then to finalize the
process so people can actually get their real number as opposed
to the estimated 95 percent? In both cases, in the cases of the
regular folks, and then how long does it usually take to
adjudicate the cases where there are more complicated
circumstances? And I am sure there can't be a one set answer
for that, but roughly.
Mr. Berry. We have 100,000 cases a year. Three to six
months. Here it is. 100,000 cases a year. Right now we have a
45,000 case backlog, which is what we are wrestling with. And
it takes, the average case--here, let me see. It might be
better, if it would be okay for the record, to get you the
details on the specifics of the average case. And we can break
down sort of the entire case so you will be able to see the
numbers of each one.
[The information follows:]

Retirement Processing

Currently, the average case will be processed fully in 117 days. If
the case involves a disability, court order, service credit or survivor
benefit, the longest it will take to fully process the case is 141
days.

But we usually have sort of about a 10,000 to 20,000 case
carryover; that is sort of an average backlog. The 45,000 one
now is sort of a function of increased postal retirements,
getting ready for the Defense Department retirements under base
closure that are coming. And some of what we are seeing is an
increased retirement rate. Just in the first third of the year
we are seeing about a 15 percent increase in retirements. And
so that is what is driving this.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Emerson. Ms. Lee.

DIVERSITY

Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. Good afternoon. Thank you for
being here.
Let me reference your testimony where you indicated that,
as directed by the President, you are spearheading the
government-wide initiative to reform and recruit and hire the
best and the brightest workforce. Of course we all want to see,
as you said, OPM to become a model employer.
In the President's directive, in the memo, ``Improving the
Federal Recruitment and Hiring Process,'' was diversity an
issue? And in terms of diversity, if it was included as one of
the best and the brightest and diverse workforce, how you are
recruiting people of color into the workforce? Do you have a
plan to do that? And if you have the information in terms of
what the demographics look like or the characteristics of your
workforce look like now, I would like to know what it looks
like.
Mr. Berry. We definitely have a plan; it is one of my
highest priorities. My Deputy Director, Christine Griffin, we
recruited away from the EEOC. She is a lawyer, an attorney, one
of the highest ranking people with a disability in the Federal
Government, along with Secretary Shinseki and others. She is a
veteran of the United States and a phenomenal leader on this
issue. She has been leading a working group across the
government and agencies on this specifically. We have a working
group on Hispanic employment, we have a working group on
diversity throughout the government, and also people with
disabilities.
Ms. Lee. How about African American, Latino and Native
American?
Mr. Berry. African American is included, and all of the
groups are a part of this focus.
The good news is--and it is not great news, but it is good
news, at least we are pointing in the right direction, let me
give you some of the numbers. The numbers of minorities in the
Federal workforce increased by 5 percent in 2010, or
essentially 31,000 more employees. The Federal workforce is
17.7 percent black, 8 percent Hispanic, 5.6 percent Asian
Pacific Island, 1.8 percent American Indian, and 66 percent
white. Minorities constituted 33.8 percent, if you will, of the
workforce.
Now we also are following and tracking senior pay in SES
because I think it is important not just to look at overall
hires. The number of minorities at senior pay levels increased
9.4 percent between 2009 and 2010; it went from 3,700 to over
4,000. Women represent 31.2 percent of senior-level positions.
We can do better there. But again, we had an improvement. The
proportion of women and minorities in GS Grades 13 through 15,
the more senior-rank grades just before the SES, increased by
7.9 percent, and the SES by the 9.4. So you can see some good
early starts, but now how do we keep that going? And we are
looking at this from sort of a three-pronged approach. One is,
we have stood up--and we are asking your support to keep
funding to allow us to continue going--an Office of Diversity
and Inclusion at OPM. We believe it ought to be not just
assigned to EEO or HR, we have to merge and marry and break
down those silos so that people see diversity as an asset.
I will give you a good example. I was talking with a FEMA
Administrator in their planning for Katrina, and he said had we
had a more diverse workforce, our plans, quite frankly, for
Katrina would have been better. We had not thought through the
impact of, in an emergency situation, sending all white
officers into African American communities, knocking on the
door saying you must leave your homes. We did not have the
right mix of employees to think that through nor to implement
it effectively in the event of an emergency. And so diversity
is powerful not just in--it needs to pervade everything we do
because it will produce better results at the end of the day.
So we are looking at this from student hiring, and our
Office of Diversity is working with our Office of Student
Outreach and Recruitment through minority institutions. And we
are also looking at this from the SES. We have stood up an SES
office at OPM that had been disbanded. And the three of them
are carefully coordinating and tracking similar data. So this
is one we are going to look at from every angle, recruitment,
retention, training, and advancement.
So my commitment to you is we are not taking our eye off
this ball just because we have had some good early progress in
the first year. We are going to stay at this and hope it
continues to get better.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. I appreciate that response
and what you are doing because I ask this question of all of
the agency heads; and some of the answers are very vague, but
it sounds like you know what you are doing.
Mr. Berry. Trying very hard.
Ms. Lee. And on track. Maybe you need to train some of
these other agencies. Thank you very much.
Mr. Berry. I did just speak this week to HR professionals
and CHCOs and EEO. There was a convention up at the Wardman
Park, and I was a keynote up there about doing that training,
just what you talked about.
Ms. Lee. Good, thank you.
Mr. Serrano. I want you to be aware that you got praise
about what you are doing from Ms. Lee and you got praise from
the chairwoman about the budget. That is pretty rare around
here.
Mrs. Emerson. How did I praise on the budget?
Mr. Serrano. He said he had 1.8 percent in one of the
areas--
Mrs. Emerson. No, how they administered the FEHBP. They did
a fabulous job on administering that.
Mr. Serrano. Take it as praise.
Mrs. Emerson. Praise is praise.
Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I will try to do
my part to contribute to the love affair going on here today.
Mr. Berry, you have an impressive resume. I give you credit
for your longtime service to our country.
As I looked at your resume, or your bio, I noted that
perhaps the most qualifying aspect of your background must have
been when you were Director of the National Zoo because my
experience as a Mayor for 12 years in dealing in the HR arena,
that is precisely what that arena is, it looks a lot like a
zoo. I want to congratulate you for the work that you have done
to streamline your processes to make what appears to be your
organization much more user friendly and for your work and
having come from a military background and knowing the real
difficulty in background investigations and its relevance to
what we do here in Washington. You are to be commended for
that.

WELLNESS

The other thing that I noticed in your testimony was in
regard to wellness programs, and I want to kind of drill down
on that for just a moment because I am a huge believer that in
this debate that we have--and have had now for quite a while--
about health care and health care reform, that we have said
some things and we have done some things, but we haven't done
enough to put some of that emphasis back on the people that
work for us. And look, the private sector is doing this stuff
and they are doing it with great results. And so I want to
congratulate you for your wellness program, and I want to know
a little bit more about it.
Mr. Berry. Well, Mr. Womack, thank you, I couldn't agree
more.
Every CEO I mentioned, when you ask them, what do you think
is the low-hanging fruit where we can save taxpayers money on
this, and every one of them, first on the agenda is what you
just described, wellness. They say it has produced bigger
savings over the long run than they even anticipated. Now the
hard part for an annual budgeting process is people want to see
results in 1 year. And all of them will say you are not going
to see it in year one, you won't see it in year two, but by
four and five it starts to show up in a major way.
We brought on, in our little campus--we sit next to
Interior Department and the General Services Administration, so
we thought, let's work together and we hired a wellness company
that has come in. We offer everything from--we have a Weight
Watchers class that is fully subscribed; we have weight
training, we have exercise classes. All of the screenings are
free.
I do a monthly town hall meeting. And everything is
religiously private and only the employee knows, so I don't get
to see the data. But as a way to encourage the employees I have
shared my data as saying you got to do this because it is free.
And what I was so impressed with was the counselors. I wish my
primary care doctor had spent as much time with me as this
counselor did. They went through my results for 45 minutes. And
I had been ignoring my triglycerides, I was 5 points above the
goal. But the lady who was talking with me found out that my
dad had had heart issues. And she said, because of your genetic
predisposition, do you realize that those 5 points don't sound
like much--my doctor had always just said, oh, it is five
points--it is a 20 percent higher risk rate for a heart attack
in your category; you have to lose 10 more pounds. So I had
taken off 10 pounds already. I said, another 10? And I am going
to do it, I am on my way.
And the interesting thing is this dialogue, what is so
exciting to me, Mr. Womack, is people in the elevator--it is so
invigorating to have people who are saying to me, Mr. Berry, I
lost 14 pounds. Now people are talking about their weight
efforts and commenting what they are carrying on the elevator,
oh, shouldn't be doing those wings, got to get to the salad bar
more. That is the stuff that is going to produce the millions--
and if you can imagine, transferred out, billions of dollars in
savings. This will have a huge impact in early cancer
diagnosis, earlier treatments, healthier employees, and it is
going to translate into direct savings for FEHBP, which is big
dollars, over $11 billion a year. So you can imagine, if we can
produce just 5 to 10 percent, we are talking hundreds of
millions of dollars.
So it is one I am passionate about. I appreciate your
interest and focus and experience on this and look forward to
your counsel as to how we can do better.
Mr. Womack. Well, I won't use too much of my time to brag
on the city where I came from, but we established a wellness
center for our seniors because we recognized we had a growing
senior population and we built a 55,000 square-foot facility
with warm water therapy and light pools and those kinds of
things.
Mr. Berry. Great.
Mr. Womack. We charged a very nominal fee just so we could
know who is there and have a little information on them. The
first year, Madam Chairwoman, we thought we would have 1,000
members in this organization, and we had 1,500 members in the
first week, and now over 14,000 members, and average daily use
of between 1,000 and 1,500 people in this facility in a small
town in northwest Arkansas.
What you said a moment ago is correct about the savings on
the health care side of the house, but here is the lost
information, and this is what I want everybody to be mindful
of, particularly as it concerns our Federal workforce. It is
also a productivity issue.
Mr. Berry. Absolutely.
Mr. Womack. And so when we have a healthier person, they
are not going to be on sick leave as much, they are not going
to be hospitalized, and they are not going to have to be
resorting to all these tests and everything, medical
procedures, and what have you, that come with a bad lifestyle.
So from a control of health care costs standpoint and also from
a productivity standpoint, it has worked where I was and it
will work here.
Are you getting any pushback? In other words, are any of
these programs mandatory, so to speak, or being forced on
people? Are there any requirements? How are you going through
that legal----
Mr. Berry. Totally voluntary now, sir. And what we are
finding very much tracks what we have heard from the private
sector. It is interesting, when I met with the CEOs they said,
well, there are two ways to do this, you can just make it
totally voluntary or you can incentivize. They all encouraged
us, there is enough data to show you you need to incentivize it
because totally voluntary you are going to end up with about 20
to 30 percent participation rate. Well, now we are a year into
this, guess what our participation rate is, without any
incentive, just totally voluntary? It is like 24 percent. So we
are right between where they told us we would be.
Where the private sector is making the big savings is their
percentage rates run 80 to 90 percent participation in these
programs. Well, how do they do it? They do it by incentivizing.
So they will either lower a copayment, or you get a rebate or
things like that. Each company will take an entirely different
approach. I think the future of this--and it will be
interesting to work, especially with your experience on this,
and we would really welcome your ideas--how can we move from
the 30 percent to the 80 percent? And I don't have a specific
proposal for you other than to know we would have a lot more
savings if we had 80 percent participation.
None of them recommended to make it mandatory. They all
said you can reach the 80, 90 percent level if you do the right
incentive structure. So maybe if we could work together, we
could figure out how to do that.
Mr. Womack. I think it is a way forward, and I would
certainly recommend that to the agencies. I do appreciate your
testimony this morning and your leadership in the OPM.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Emerson. Perhaps we should have a Biggest Loser
contest or something.
I am going to shift away from this discussion, given the
fact that my doctor just told me to lose 10 pounds and I just
can't seem to stay away from good food. But it is impressive
what you are doing. And peer pressure is terrific, but
certainly making it easy for someone to participate is even, I
think, more important, and it is wonderful.
As far as what Mr. Womack was doing with the senior center,
I find that sometimes it takes a little bit to get some of our
seniors doing it, but once they do, then everybody wants to do
it.
Mr. Berry. Well, and it is also making it easier. So like
in our cafeteria, for example, I went down yesterday, it is so
easy, they have a Weight Watchers option. And it is already
calorie counted for you--salmon, vegetables--everything is
proportioned and so you don't have to do any of the thinking.
And so you say, okay, give me the Weight Watcher option. What
we have done, our salad bar used to be a pretty lame salad bar,
now we have one of the best salad bars in the city, and it is a
really good one. People are going to it because it is more
interesting. So sometimes just making it more easily available
is part of the solution.
Mrs. Emerson. And Weight Watchers is a good thing; we will
talk to the Mayor of Capitol Hill about that. But in the
meantime, if you can invite our subcommittee down for lunch,
that might be a nice thing to do.

PAY FOR PERFORMANCE

All right. I want to talk a little bit about Pay for
Performance and step increases if we could. In 2009, only 737
out of more than 1.2 million employees were denied a regularly
scheduled step increase and accompanying raise because of poor
performance. That equates to about a, what, .06 denial rate, or
less than half of 1 percent, which, despite being low, is still
the highest rate in recent years. So just a couple of questions
with regard to that.
In your opinion, under the current Federal pay system, are
Federal pay and promotions correlated with performance? What
does OPM do to monitor or give guidance to agencies on awarding
performance pay increases? And do you think managers actually
have the flexibility or the range of carrots and sticks to
improve employee performance? And are there consequences at all
for poor performance, not only for the employee, but for the
manager?
Mr. Berry. Let me begin by saying, we can do a lot better.
I would not sit here and tell any of you that we have nailed
performance management in the Federal Government. We have not.
Our managers are too timid. We do not have regular--a good
performance system would be managers regularly sitting down at
least quarterly and having a very straightforward conversation
with employees about what is being expected and is it
happening? Right now it is done more on an annual basis, and it
is given short shift, it is not given the attention it
deserves. We are going to be working very hard this year to
change that.
We have created a working group of the Chief Human Capital
Officers Council on how we can do a better job on having
managers and employees pay more attention, and use the
authority--you give us broad authority in performance
management, both to incentivize and to discipline. And quite
frankly, the Federal Government has not done a good job in
exercising the authority you have given us. I am going to try
this year--that is one of my highest priorities this year--to
move the needle on that. I am doing it with my own employees by
example, but we are also going to do it across the government.
So this CHCO Council is working on that. We are having it
chaired by two career senior executives so that it is not seen
as a political gotcha game, so that it will be something that
can be professionally applied. We are working with the
Partnership Council, with the unions to get buy-in to this.
Now more specifically to your question on the within
grades. First, I agree we can do a much better job on
performance, and we are going to try it, and I hope to have
some really good results to bring back to you. This time next
year I hope to be able to describe just what we are doing that
is going to hold people more accountable. And quite frankly, if
someone is not doing the job, we ought to fire them. I mean, we
ought to give them a chance to correct--and obviously, if we
are not giving them the right tools or training, then we ought
to do that, but if after all of that they are still not doing
the job, get rid of them. And we can get rid of them in the
Federal Government; it is just that managers have not been
doing that. And we are going to try to work to create a more
rigorous system to apply that principle.

WITHIN GRADE INCREASES

Within grades, now it is kind of interesting. Let's discuss
within grades for a second. Every company, private or public,
has an approach of sort of a career advancement trajectory.
What within grades do is there are 10 steps that take you 18
years to go through. And the principle that sort of both the
private sector and the public sector use in terms of HR
management is, you want to advance people to the midpoint of
their range relatively quickly as a way to keep them because
you are making a huge investment up front in training. And a
lot of times what happens is if you train somebody, now another
of your competitors will come in and steal them away, they save
the money of not having to train them. So if you are not
advancing people up front to sort of a midpoint of their
career, then it is more slowly.
And so how it works in the Federal Government, building on
that model, is for the first third of your career you get a
step increase, which is 3 percent of your pay annually. For the
second third of your career you get it every other year. For
the third, the last percentage of your career you get it every
3 years. And what that does is it creates a natural trajectory
if--and you only can be awarded this if you have acceptable
performance. So you can see where we can--that is broadly
defined. So through the performance management--and I think our
unions are going to work with us on this--there has to be a
natural trajectory.
So if you come in as a GS-12, step 1, it takes 18 years to
get to step 10 just through a normal trajectory of that 1-year,
2-year, 3-year approach, and it is in 3 percent, a step equals
3 percent. We can, I think, through performance management,
better define what acceptable performance is to ensure that if
you are not performing well, a big stick can be we can withhold
your within grade.
So we are going to be looking at that as part of this
equation, but that gives you a little bit of an example.
Within grades aren't designed to really be performance pay,
per se. They are designed to create a career trajectory that
retains the training that you are making in that person over an
18-year period. So there are performance elements--bonuses,
awards and things like that--that are purely performance-based,
but the within grades weren't ever designed in the law to be a
pure performance base. There is a performance element, but it
is really to create a career trajectory.
If that is a long answer, I apologize.

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

Mrs. Emerson. No, I understand. I mean, we all get caught
up. Having worked many years in the private sector myself, in
many cases I saw people who should have been fired be given
promotions just to shovel them out of specific departments and
the like. And I dare say I have seen that, having worked in my
very first job for the Federal Government, but that was more
years ago than I want to say.
Another thing that is frustrating to me is the process by
which one would sever the relationship because I know that
there are people, for example, who are involved with the Bernie
Madoff scandal of the Securities and Exchange Commission who
have not yet been terminated because of adjudication and all
sorts of things.
I mean, we are not talking about some minor screw-up, they
are talking about major lives that were ruined by people not
being able to perform their jobs. And I don't understand why it
takes so long for them to be terminated.
Mr. Berry. As I say, we have the ability in the Federal
Government right now to do something called a performance
improvement plan. So if a manager has an employee like that,
you can as the manager put 30, 60, 90 days and say this is what
you are doing, this is what I want, you have X days to get
there, you don't, you are fired. It can be that
straightforward. And our managers don't exercise that.
Mrs. Emerson. And they are not held accountable either;
correct?
Mr. Berry. It is a historic problem that we are going to
wrestle with. But I believe that if we go after that it will
have a huge productivity increase for the government, as Mr.
Womack was mentioning. And it will serve the taxpayer better.
And quite frankly, our labor unions and our employees will be
grateful, because as a Federal manager I have removed people,
and the people who have come back to thank me when I removed
somebody have been their co-workers because they said thank God
somebody actually had the backbone to deal with the situation.
We have been carrying this deadwood. We have been doing their
job for them. You weren't happy to come to work. Getting them
out, I am happy to come to my job now.
And it is for the credibility of our managers we have got
to be serious about this, and our employees want it. It shows
up in our employee surveys. One of the highest things that
people feel is we do not discipline poor performers. And it is
our workers are telling us that. They feel it is unfair, and
they are right. And we need to fix it. So we are going to go
after it full force.
Mrs. Emerson. And that hurts morale.
Mr. Serrano.

WELLNESS

Mr. Serrano. Before I get to a couple of questions let me
just say I was really very pleased to hear Mr. Womack speak of
wellness. For a while in government it has been seen as a perk.
If you have any exercise facility within a Federal place, that
is a perk, even if people pay to join it.
But if you have a person come in and tell you about weight
or about heart disease or whatever, it is a perk. And yet we
have learned from many countries throughout the world, even
some we don't like very much, that if you put up front wellness
as an issue, if you put up front preventive medicine as an
issue, at the end of the day you don't have the situation we
have in this country. I was so pleased to hear that.
Mr. Womack. If the gentleman would yield on the subject, it
says a lot about the employers. The employer demonstrates a
concern for his or her employees' health. Because there is only
one of those people, and if their health is in jeopardy, I
think it is the employer's responsibility, the leader's
responsibility to help that person look for success. So it is
productivity. It is a sense of compassion for the well-being of
the individual, and of course it is the cost of government. So
it is all relative. And if you have been on our side of the
table from the executive branch, you get that pretty quickly.
The private sector get its completely.
Mr. Serrano. But my praise with your comments was the fact
that you don't hear that often enough, that you usually hear,
that is a perk. Let these people go after work to their own
place. Don't do it at the work site. Don't have any assistance.
That is such a mistake.
So I hope we hear more of this. And I think that there is
something happening in Congress that could help with that area,
is that more and more of the people coming to Congress for some
reason in the last 10 years, I have noticed, are people who are
physically active and exercise. And you will see it in a couple
of weeks when we have our annual race for charity when more and
more and more House teams get together and run and participate.
So that is a good thing.

VETERANS EMPLOYMENT INITIATIVE

Tell me about the Veterans Employment Initiative. You know,
I have always felt there was a contradiction in this country in
some areas, and that is you have people who are very gung-ho
about our involvement in military actions, but are not
supportive when the troops come home. And I have seen these
bumper stickers that say ``support the troops'' and I wish you
could add to that, yes, for the next 20 years, for the next 30
years, for all the time it needs to help them. I am the kind of
guy you see voting against the military action and then voting
for whatever they need when they come home. Whatever they need
when they come home. Of course, it is not the troops that I
have a problem with, it is the people who decided to send them
there or the action itself.
So tell me about the initiative and tell me how closely you
are working with the Veterans Administration.
Mr. Berry. Well, Mr. Serrano, thank you for your leadership
on so many veterans issues. You have been a stalwart over so
many years. The President's Executive order I have to say is
the thing if you were to ask me for my 2-year term what am I
most proud of, it would be having recommended that Executive
order to the President.
My father served in the 1st Division in Guadalcanal, and my
name I earned from my uncle who was killed in the Pacific, my
dad's brother. And so this is a close personal issue for me and
I look at it as a way to honor the memory of my father.
The first thing I tackled was looking at veterans--the
unemployment rate for returning vets right now from Iraq and
Afghanistan is amongst the highest in the country. And knowing
the difficult economic times they were coming back to and the
competition they faced and we looked at it, and DOD and VA do a
great job and so does OPM. Almost 30 percent of our new hires
are vets. So we are in the highest category. But many civilian
agencies I looked at weren't really carrying their weight. They
were not doing a good job. Two to 5 percent of their hires were
vets.
So we went to the President and made him aware of this and
he said we have got to get everybody to row in the same
direction. And he created an Executive order and a council that
is chaired by Secretary Shinseki and Secretary Solis, so we
have both Labor and VA as the heads and then I am the COO of
the council. And we have met four times. What they do is we get
every agency together, it is very high level, and people are
tracked on their performance. For the first year we were just
getting it set up and we just told everybody to do better. The
good news is that every agency but two did better.
This year, not wanting to just count on that, we set up an
accountability model to hold everybody in place. So if you were
in the level of DOD, VA and OPM, above 25 percent in your
hires, stay there. You are doing great, keep it up. If you are
in the middle category, sort of 10 to 20 percent, do an
additional 2 to 3 percent. If you are below 10 percent, that is
kind of like the Weight Watchers thing, you have to lose some
more weight, you have got to run faster, you have got to do 3
to 5 percent. And so for the lower performers we are expecting
them to hire more and to move up faster.
And so every agency now has and knows exactly where they
fall. I sit on the President's management council with Jeff
Zients at OMB; all of the deputy secretaries come in addition
to this council. Monthly. I share the data with every agency,
here is where you are. You are either on track or off. It is
regular, religious attention. And we are not going to take our
eye off of this.
The first year results, like I said, 2,000 more vets hired
across the government. Even though we hired less Federal
employees it was an impressive step to get this out of the box.
The other thing, lastly, is that we are working with the
VSOs, the veteran service organizations, the Legion, the VFW,
the Student Vets are in sync with us and we are developing some
innovative approaches. What we are looking at is jobs in the
military that ought to be easily transferable to the civilian
side.
Med techs. We have a desperate need for nurses. We can't
hire enough. What if we train med techs to become nurses and
guarantee them a job in the Federal Government when they come
back. Now we are moving beyond from just tracking the data to
looking how can we take jobs that are easily transferable and
give them the training to do it.
Mr. Serrano. Well, again, I think that that is a great
initiative and a great approach and you should be proud of that
Executive order because it is a good one.
Let me take you to a couple of places now where we would
probably all like to go right now, to the American Territories.
Mr. Berry. I volunteer, sir.
Mrs. Emerson. Let's all go to Puerto Rico. Sounds awesome
today.

RECRUITMENT IN THE TERRITORIES

Mr. Serrano. So both in the area of hiring diversity, of
hiring minorities, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, Samoa
the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico fit that category well. But
also just in the area that I have always discussed with you and
other agencies that they are members of our country. They live
in Territories. They don't live in States, but they should be
included.
And I call your attention to the fact that sometimes it
works. For example, NASA has quite successfully recruited from
the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, my hometown, for
many years now. In fact proudly we say that whenever a rocket
goes up there are a lot of folks from Mayaguez on the ground
that made it possible. It works for them. It should continue to
work for the rest of the agencies. What are we doing to
recruit?
Mr. Berry. Well, we are doing a lot but we have to stay
with it. It is one of these things it is not going to be a one-
shot effort. I was very pleased and thank you for your support
and helping us get the word out in Puerto Rico. The hiring
event we did in last October there it was very well subscribed.
And we did get a number of jobs, at least 36 that I know of,
but it may end up being more now.
But the more important thing was in doing that event we
also trained people on how to apply for other Federal jobs so
they had a good learning that will I believe will increase
their probability of success in future job searches. We need to
do that regularly. We did that jointly with NASA, DOD and VA.
And we are going to continue to look at how we can continue to
outreach effectively through those. I think there are very
powerful ways to do.
The other thing we have done specifically I think will help
the Territories. We have included them on this specific focus
area. The diversity data I was talking with Ms. Lee about. The
Hispanic community is underrepresented relative to its numbers
in the civilian labor force. It is probably the largest gap, if
you will, of our diversity categories right now, 8 percent
versus about 14 to 15 in the civilian side. And so we are at 8
in the Feds. There might be a lot of reasons for that. So we
have got to make sure that our access points are open and we
are reaching out in the right places and including the
Territories in this.
We have created a Council on Federal Employment there that
is chaired by my Chief of Staff, Liz Montoya and John
Sepulveda, who is the H.R. Director at the VA, who understands
this well, and they have an agency group of 65 people across
the government that are developing student outreach, training,
mentorship, on boarding, the whole 9 yards on this on how to do
better by outreaching to Latinos and Latinas and people from
the Territories. And I think this is going to bear fruit. There
is a lot of great brain power going on this and some very
creative, initiative approaches to this that are going to build
much more than the annual hiring fair. It is going to be an
ongoing more consistent, religious approach that will get this
into practice.
Mr. Serrano. Let me say this, even in that issue there is a
disconnect. We send dollars to the colleges throughout this
country and then we recruit. Well, we send dollars, not equal
shares, to the Territories and then traditionally we don't
recruit in those universities. So even if you just are talking
about, you know--I cannot believe I'm saying this--what the
taxpayer deserves, if you invest, then go recruit some place.
But I thank you for your efforts.
Mr. Berry. Mr. Serrano, if I could, one closing point, and
it circles back to your first question. Our effort to hire vets
is also going to help on each one of these categories. Every
one of those categories in the diversity is well represented in
the military. They know that through the voluntary workforce.
We have already invested billions in training in these
people. They are great leaders. They are great assets. I use
the vet to be ``valued, experienced and trained.'' We would be
darn fools not to take advantage of this and by doing it not
only we will get great skilled people but we will also increase
our diversity numbers.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I don't know if I could read anything into
when Mr. Serrano was talking about people being out of shape.
He was looking in this direction.
Mrs. Emerson. I am the only one out of shape up here.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, Madam Chairman, this is not all
muscle, trust me. Years of working on that.
Actually still talking a little about aerospace----
Mr. Serrano. He is still a great baseball player.

NASA WORKFORCE

Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. There are obviously going to
be a lot of retirements because of NASA and the space shuttle.
I know that you have been looking at that and you have been
very proactive. Can you talk about how it is going and what you
are looking at, please?
Mr. Berry. I am also very excited. I am finally going to
get to see a shuttle launch. I am going to go down with
Secretary LaHood and NASA Administrator Bolden next week to see
the shuttle launch. Hopefully I should say, if the weather and
everything cooperates.
We are committed. Obviously there is going to be a major
transition in this program and just like we did with Base
Closure and Realignment and everything else, these are great
employees. They have served their Nation, they are highly
skilled, many of them engineers.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Literally rocket scientists.
Mr. Berry. Literally. And we need to take full advantage of
them. I am working with Administrator Bolden and Lori Garver,
the Deputy. We have issued guidance and encouraged agencies and
we are going to be working to hire these folks and to provide
them opportunity and to give them every tool in our book that
we can do to help them. And so my commitment to you is that we
look forward to continuing to work on this and provide priority
focus until we have them in good jobs. And to do everything we
can to help. And so I am very open to suggestions or other
ideas of how we can help in that kind of transition. Because
like you say they are the best and the brightest and we need to
keep them.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. Ms. Lee.

NURSING WORKFORCE

Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. You mentioned, Mr. Berry, the
need for nurses, the nurse shortage, yet nurses are telling me
they can't find jobs. We had a hearing last year----
Mr. Berry. Send them to me. I will hire them. Let me tell
you, we are having such a hard time, Mrs. Lee, that I have
issued--we only do this in categories that every one of our
attempts to try to solicit hires have failed so badly and our
need is so great that we do something called direct hire
authority, that I have given that authority to any agency in
the Federal Government, that if they can hire a nurse directly
they don't have to compete the position. So as long as they are
certified, they can do the job, they can be hired immediately.
Ms. Lee. There are several organizations who represent
nurses who have testified and indicated that they cannot find
jobs for nurses in those who have just graduated from nursing
school.
Mr. Berry. It might require people to move obviously. In
other words, in some areas they might not find it in the
location they want, but we have got jobs for them. And they are
well-paying jobs, they are in great places, they can work with
our VA hospitals, our HHS hires. The nursing need is severe
across the government.
The other category in desperate trouble is veterinarians.
We are not competitive in that field. So this is a tough area,
and so like I say, that is another direct hire thing that I
have given out: Find one, hire them.
Ms. Lee. Okay, I am going to go back and have some more
discussions on this. Appreciate that.

HIRING AND THE DIGITAL DIVIDE

Let me just ask you in terms of in the process of
streamlining and modernizing the processes at OPM, have you
taken into account the whole issue of the digital divide and
how when people--I know many of our communities still, people
of color, seniors, don't have access to computers. How do you
apply for a job if you don't have access to a computer or do
you have a variety of ways that you can do it?
Mr. Berry. There definitely are a variety of ways and we do
try to work, you know, not only with sort of traditional
methods, we work with a lot of the retirement groups who help
us get word out and work with that. But also sort of our
libraries and other folks who are great at making computers
available so that people can come in and apply and get on to
USAJobs and other things.
But we also are trying to help in sort of a--good case in
point is I opened at OPM this year an office aimed at veterans,
veterans hiring, that had all the specialized disability
equipment so that sometimes it is not only a question of the
digital divide. Even if they have access to equipment, it does
not accommodate a disability. And so working with DOD, we got
all the specialized equipment. So now vets with disabilities
can come in and use that equipment. We are making that
available to any agency on a space available basis. So we try
to help in every way we can to make it fully accessible, you
know, to as many people as possible.
Ms. Lee. It is not apply only through the web? I mean
through the Internet?
Mr. Berry. That is clearly the primary mechanism now, but
it is not the only way. You can come in other ways.
Ms. Lee. If I wanted to apply for a job and did not have a
computer, no library nearby, which is the case in many
communities----
Mr. Berry. You can use paper.
Ms. Lee. Do it the old-fashioned way still. As long as that
option is there. So many private employers now won't even
accept an application the old-fashioned way, and it is a
barrier right there that excludes so many people. You still
don't have for whatever reason access.
Mr. Berry. My staff informs me that you can still do the
old paper-pencil.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mrs. Emerson. We have such a slog of votes that there is no
way--slog? We will be over on the floor for 2 hours almost. We
will certainly not make you wait for us. And the only other
question I just wanted to ask you briefly was with regard to
the your request to hire an environmental manager. Don't you
have somebody who already does that now?
Mr. Berry. I'm sorry?
Mrs. Emerson. I think there is a request here, let me find
it. $100,000 for an environmental manager who is going to be
responsible for ensuring that OPM is in compliance with all
major environmental laws and regulations. I am assuming you
already have somebody who does that.
Mr. Berry. This is part of the Greening the Government
Initiative that we are looking to make sure we can step up in a
full way so that on everything we do, whether it be paper
purchasing, our fleet management, our energy use, I believe it
is an investment that will produce, just like the Wellness
Initiative, significant savings. Because, for example, just on
electricity alone, that person should hopefully pay for their
job three times over if they help us to design and take
advantage of all of the new technologies and energy monitoring
and management systems that are out there. They have gotten
very sophisticated.
And the reason that this is a specific request is this has
become a specialty profession. It used to be okay, we are going
to buy recycled paper. Now they need to have an engineering
understanding to look at energy flow and water flow and other
things, and that is where this is generated from. I believe it
is a request that will produce the savings that will more than
pay for itself in the years ahead.
Mrs. Emerson. It is with skepticism that I will close the
hearing on that note. It was a wonderful hearing and you did a
great job and your team does as well. And I think it is not
always easy to be a Federal employee because they get
bludgeoned by so many and it is hard work, and I thank you very
much for your contribution.
Mr. Berry. Thank you, Madam Chair, I appreciate you and it
is an honor to be with you today.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791B.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6791P3.001


