- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman

JERRY LEWIS, California            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          ED PASTOR, Arizona
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Rob Blair, Joseph Levin, Angie Giancarlo,
Loraine Heckenberg, and Perry Yates,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 7
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Page
Department of Energy.............................................
Department of Energy--Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, FY 2013 Budget........................................

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman

JERRY LEWIS, California            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          ED PASTOR, Arizona
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Rob Blair, Joseph Levin, Angie Giancarlo,
Loraine Heckenberg, and Perry Yates,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 7

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Page
Department of Energy.............................................
Department of Energy--Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, FY 2013 Budget........................................

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

80-406                     WASHINGTON : 2013

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\          NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\            MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia                PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia                 NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey    JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                       ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama            JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri               JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                     ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho              DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas            MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida                LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana                 SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                  JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana            CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California                STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                     SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio             BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                     ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                    MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida             BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------
/1/ Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------

Tuesday, February 28, 2012.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

WITNESS

STEVEN CHU, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good afternoon, everybody. I would like
to call this hearing to order.
Secretary Chu, I would like to welcome you back once again
to the subcommittee. I understand through the grapevine that
today is your birthday. Is that correct?
Secretary Chu. That is correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And that it is also your wedding
anniversary.
Secretary Chu. That is correct.
Mr. Rogers. What is he doing here?
Secretary Chu. That is a good question.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We appreciate your being here, of
course.
And you are here today to present the administration's
fiscal year 2013 budget request for your department. Your
request totals $27.2 billion--a $1.5 billion, or 5.7 percent,
increase from the fiscal-year-2012-enacted level. Nearly one-
third of that increase comes in one program: Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy.
Your request is painfully thin on its specifics, and we
need to know why this funding is both necessary and a prudent
use of taxpayer dollars. And given that consumers are angered
by higher gas and oil prices and one major energy source,
fossil energy, is substantially cut from last year, how does
your budget relate to the real world outside of Washington,
where energy costs are eating up family budgets?
On top of that, the public's faith has been shaken by
revelations that many programs under your jurisdiction have
wasted taxpayers' dollars and created markets for various
renewables that cannot be sustained without further infusions
of Federal support. Artificial markets plus the reality of
wasted dollars undermine the real economy which exists outside
this city.
We know all too well the problems the loan guarantee
program has faced so far. Solyndra has become its public face.
We don't know what will be the next shoe to fall, but we have
great reason to be concerned. Back home, many people are,
frankly, disgusted that some of these investments have been
wasted. They now seriously question the proper government role
in energy markets and the levels of risk that you and those
subordinate to you have taken over the past 2 years.
The Allison report on the loan guarantee program noted that
the failure rate of the program to date has been less than some
had projected. While I respect the expertise and judgment of
Mr. Allison and the need to do political damage control, all
loan guarantee opportunities, for whatever purpose, will now be
painted with the same brush. The loss of public confidence is
difficult to calculate. Are there lessons you have learned from
this?
Energy projects fail in the marketplace; we know that. But
if political directives were behind any project selection, then
our fears would be justified. You may have seen a report by The
Washington Post on February 14th which alleged that as much as
$3.9 billion of your funds may have been improperly influenced
by appointees. Now the White House must show that the election
year is not dictating this budget's spending plans.
I put Yucca Mountain in the same box. The administration
has tried to kill this project, wasting billions of dollars to
accommodate Senator Reid--mind you, not on any sound scientific
grounds, which you yourself have said, Mr. Secretary. Now your
budget request contains funding for projects to implement some
of the Blue-Ribbon Commission's recommendations--
recommendations which Congress has not blessed either in whole
or in part. As the current law of the land is for waste
disposal at Yucca Mountain, we need to hear from you if the
administration is proposing any legislative changes to
authorize their recommendations.
On a more positive note, you have made some tough decisions
to support the nuclear security programs at the NNSA--decisions
which this country has been demanding for some time. Nuclear
security programs are the most vital mission within your
portfolio.
While I have significant concerns about the
administration's call for reduced military spending, we showed
last year that our national security can be sustained and even
improved with less money. And it will be the administration's
task to show that your fiscal year 2013 request does not
sacrifice our strategic security for budgetary savings.
And together, the administration and Congress have
supported the development of small modular reactors, another
positive development, as was the recent groundbreaking for two
nuclear reactors in Georgia.
Mr. Secretary, last year we wrestled with how to put
together a budget for your department that was fair and
balanced. I am proud of our product. And I want to thank my
ranking member, Mr. Visclosky, once again, as a former chairman
and ranking member for his many contributions, his sound
advice, experience, and that very essential institutional
memory.
Our joint task this budget cycle is no different: funding
the right balance of investments for our most critical needs
with an eye toward those that protect our Nation; and, yes,
create private-sector jobs, sustainable jobs and opportunities,
not jobs which rely on government largesse. I hope you will be
able to explain today how the budget request before us does
just that.
Secretary Chu, please ensure that the hearing record,
questions for the record, and any supporting information
requested by the subcommittee are delivered in final form to us
no later than 4 weeks from the time you receive them.
Members who have additional questions for the record will
have until the close of business tomorrow to provide them to
the subcommittee office.
With that, I turn to my ranking member, Mr. Visclosky, for
any comments he may wish to give.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And I
know my entire statement will be entered into the record.
First of all, I would thank you for your kind words and
reciprocate. I told a group this morning that I am blessed in
life, obviously, for many, many reasons, but one of them is to
serve on this subcommittee, because all of us together want a
strong Nation, a good sound energy policy, as well as the
economic development that can follow from an investment in our
water infrastructure. And you have done a great job in bringing
us together and, again, resolving differences and making sound
judgments. So I appreciate that very much.
Dr. Chu, I also congratulate you on your wedding
anniversary and birthday. Had this not been a leap year, you
would be just 1 day before my son's birthday. So I congratulate
you for that and do welcome you to the subcommittee for your
fourth appearance.
I am pleased that President Obama continues to recognize
the energy challenges facing this Nation. And I appreciate the
budget's strong statement that America will not cede leadership
in clean energy.
Additionally, I certainly believe that we need to be more
conscientious about our energy consumption and further advance
our conservation efforts. We need a strong yet balanced
approach to energy research and development that effectively
nurtures basic sciences, leading to significant technological
demonstration, deployment, and commercialization--these efforts
with a goal in mind toward ensuring production in America of
these findings.
I cannot emphasize my last point strongly enough. I see
very little or no merit to the Department fostering
technological advances or breakthroughs for products that will
not ultimately be manufactured domestically.
The government can drive the policies. However, I am, as I
have said before, very concerned about making sure that the
Department exercises strong leadership and fundamental
management reform. They do need to be forthcoming at the
Department of Energy. If not, it will significantly inhibit the
chance of a successful energy policy.
I know contract and project management seem tedious and
dull. I certainly am tired of bringing it up year after year,
administration after administration, and actually believe you
are now the seventh Secretary of Energy I have questioned on
the topic. I continue to be appalled at the cost overruns and
schedule slips of the Department of Energy's major construction
projects.
In 2009, this subcommittee had a hearing on the
Department's continued appearance on GAO's high-risk list, a
position it has held since 1990. Given the challenges in the
last year on major construction projects, I fear that not much
has changed. And I do hope you can provide assurances today
that you are taking significant, strong actions to get the
Department off the list.
The chairman has noticed some areas of concern,
particularly the Department's decision and actions on Yucca
Mountain. I speak for myself when I indicate that I share his
concerns in that regard.
I would also add my very serious reservations about the
inclusion of a $150 million request for USEC within the
nonproliferation budget request. I hope to hear from you and
others in the Department about why, when coupled with the
transfer authority request for fiscal year 2012, the Department
believes providing USEC with $300 million in taxpayers' money
is a good investment and not a bailout.
Mr. Secretary, I do look forward to hearing from you today
about the fiscal year 2013 budget request that will help
address energy and national security challenges. None of us
will always agree, but certainly, as a member of this
subcommittee of long standing, know that we can work through
our differences in a cooperative and bipartisan fashion.
And, again, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your yielding the
time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Visclosky.
The chairman of the full committee is recognized, Mr.
Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you and your
ranking member for doing great work over here. You are doing
well.
Mr. Secretary, happy birthday, happy anniversary. Welcome.
This week, the national average price for a gallon of gas
is $3.60, a jump of 20 cents over last month, 40 cents more
than this time last year. In the increasingly unstable Middle
East a belligerent Iran threatens to withhold its exports and
shut down the Strait of Hormuz. Meanwhile, China's rapidly
growing economy is driving up oil prices through increased
demand, while its state-owned enterprises are securing
commodity contracts around the world, monopolizing new foreign
sources. Once again, energy security, key to economic
prosperity and national defense, is the focus of public debate.
The Congress has sent a very strong message: that we must
have balance in the expansion of conventional fuels--coal,
natural gas, oil, nuclear--to provide energy today, with
investment into renewable energies to power our future. And
while the President has repeatedly mentioned his support for a
similar all-of-the-above energy policy, this budget proposal
and the recent denial of the Keystone XL pipeline, seem to
insinuate that this administration is not serious about
responsibly diversifying our energy portfolio.
Instead, this budget request for DOE, coupled with the
budgets of Interior and the EPA, seems merely a continuance of
this administration's political posturing and a diversion of
scarce Federal dollars to favored energy sectors at the expense
of the others. In particular, coal--so important to my region
of southern and eastern Kentucky and our country's most
abundant energy resource--has remained squarely in the
administration's cross-hairs for extinction.
Although your budget tries to hide it, your proposal
significantly rolls back investment in carbon capture, carbon
storage, and the advanced energy systems that would allow our
country to more efficiently use the fossil fuels already at our
disposal. Instead, these funds have been shuffled around to
support the President's pet projects, including a proposed $500
million increase for the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
Program, which is already funded at $1.8 billion.
Furthermore, as the EPA rolls out its MACT regulations and
fleshes out a proposed greenhouse gas rule, these fossil R&D
funds are vital to developing the new technologies necessary to
comply with the administration's own control standards.
Essentially, the administration has created a ``catch-22,''
demanding that industry invest heavily into new technology in
order to meet stricter standards while cutting off the funding
for those investments. It is a systematic dismissal of coal,
the outcome of which will be thousands of lost jobs and more
expensive electricity for American citizens while their tax
money is thrown at unviable solutions, like Solyndra's solar
panels.
Combined with underfilling the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
after last year's sale in order to create the appearance of
savings, I fear your budget reduces our energy security in real
terms.
Obviously, my colleagues and I have serious concerns about
the administration's policies as they relate to our energy
security. However, I would like to commend your department for
its efforts through NNSA to maintain our strategic arsenal. I
would welcome you to expand upon how your request, which
includes significant reductions, ensures that our nuclear
capabilities are secure, thoroughly modernized, and continue to
be a sufficient deterrent to our enemies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dicks, the ranking member of the full committee.
Mr. Dicks. I also want to welcome Secretary Chu to the
Energy and Water Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss
the fiscal year 2013 Department of Energy budget request.
And I will bet you could have thought of better things to
do on your birthday and on your anniversary, but we will be
brief.
For fiscal year 2013, the President's budget request for
the Energy Department is a sensible proposal that carries on
our investments in important national programs in defense,
science, and energy efficiency. This proposal represents a
further investment for many programs that are the building
blocks for a more efficient and independent energy future.
This fiscal year 2013 budget request contains a small
increase for naval reactors but healthier increases for other
nuclear weapons activities, such as modernization, as well as
the nonproliferation programs. While the increase for weapon
activities is less than what was outlined in the budget
document of a few years ago, the funding seems adequate for
fiscal year 2013 to maintain our capability. However, I
understand the administration is working on a plan to establish
our requirements beyond this proposed budget.
I applaud the budget request for the healthy increase in
important domestic programs, such as energy efficiency. The
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Program would be
increased by more than $520 million over the fiscal-year-2012-
enacted level. The initiatives funded under this program are
important to establish and maintain our lead in both the
manufacturing and deployment of new energy technologies as well
as making existing technologies more efficient.
The budget request also continues adequate support and
adequate spending for the cleanup of the Hanford nuclear
weapons site in Washington State, which is funded through the
Environmental Management Program. I want to work with the
subcommittee and Energy Department to make sure that the
Hanford cleanup succeeds at a reasonable cost to the taxpayer.
However, I must express my disappointment that this budget
continues to reflect the administration's decision to shut down
the Yucca Mountain project. It is my opinion that the decision
Congress made back in the 1980s to use Yucca as our national
nuclear waste repository is still the law of the land.
Again, I want to welcome Secretary Chu to the committee,
and we look forward to your statement.
Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Dicks.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being with us, and we welcome
your remarks. Your entire statement, of course, will be
included in the record.
Secretary Chu. All right. Thank you.
Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking Member Visclosky, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the Department of Energy's fiscal year 2013 budget
request.
To promote economic growth and strengthen our security,
President Obama has called for an ``all-of-the-above strategy
that develops every source of American energy.'' The President
wants to fuel our economy with domestic energy resources while
increasing our ability to compete in the clean energy race.
The Department's fiscal year 2013 budget request of $27.2
billion is guided by the President's vision, our 2011 strategic
plan, and our inaugural Quadrennial Technology Review. It
supports leadership in clean energy technologies, science and
innovation, and nuclear security environmental cleanup.
Decades ago, Energy Department support helped to develop
the technologies that have allowed us to tap into America's
abundant shale gas resources. Today, our investments can help
advance technologies that will unlock the promise of renewable
energy and energy efficiency.
The budget request invests approximately $4 billion in our
energy programs. It advances progress in areas from solar to
offshore wind, to carbon capture utilization and storage, to
smart grid technologies. And it helps reduce our dependence on
imported oil by developing next-generation biofuels, advanced
batteries, and fuel-efficient vehicle technologies.
The budget request invests $770 million in the nuclear
energy program to help develop the next generation of nuclear-
powered technologies, including small modular reactors. It also
includes funding for the continued nuclear waste R&D, which
aligns with the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission
on America's Nuclear Future.
As we move to a sustainable energy future, America's fossil
energy resources will continue to play an important role in our
energy mix. The budget request includes $12 million as part of
a larger R&D initiative by the Departments of Energy, Interior,
and EPA to understand and minimize the potential environmental,
health, and safety impacts of natural gas development through
hydraulic fracking.
The budget also promotes energy efficiency to help
Americans save money by saving energy. And it sponsors R&D and
industrial materials and processes to help U.S. manufacturers
cut costs. To maximize our energy technology efforts in areas
including batteries, biofuels, and electric grid technologies,
we are coordinating research and development across our basic
and applied research programs and ARPA-E.
To encourage the manufacturing and deployment of clean
energy technologies, the President has called for extending
proven tax incentives, including the production tax credit, the
1603 program, and the advanced energy manufacturing tax credit.
As industry, Congress, and the American people make critical
energy decisions, it is also important that we adequately fund
the Energy Information Administration.
Competing in the new energy economy requires our country to
harness all our resources, including American ingenuity. The
budget includes $5 billion for the Office of Science to support
basic research that could lead to new discoveries and help
solve energy challenges. These funds support progress in
material science, basic energy science, advanced computing, and
more.
The budget request continues to support Energy Frontier
Research Centers, which aim to solve specific scientific
problems to unlock new clean energy development. It also
supports the five existing energy innovation hubs and proposes
a new hub in electricity systems. Through the hubs, we are
bringing together our Nation's top scientists and engineers to
achieve game-changing results.
Additionally, the budget request includes $350 million for
ARPA-E to support research projects that could fundamentally
transform the ways we use and produce energy. ARPA-E invests in
high-risk, high-reward research projects that, if successful,
could create the foundation for entirely new industries.
In addition to strengthening our economy, the budget
request strengthens our security by providing $11.5 billion to
the National Nuclear Security Administration. As the United
States begins the nuclear-arms reduction required by the New
START treaty, the science, technology, and engineering
capabilities within the nuclear security enterprise will become
even more important to sustaining the U.S. nuclear deterrent.
That is why the budget request includes $7.6 billion for
weapons activities. It also includes $1.1 billion for the Naval
Reactors Program. Additionally, it supports NNSA's work to
prevent nuclear terrorism, which is one of President Obama's
top priorities. It includes $2.5 billion to implement key
nuclear security, nonproliferation, and arms-control
activities.
Finally, the budget request includes $5.7 billion to
continue progress in cleaning up the Nation's cold war nuclear
sites.
The budget request makes strategic investments to promote
our prosperity and security. At the same time, we recognize our
country's fiscal challenges and are cutting back where we can.
We are also committed to performing our work efficiently and
effectively.
Countries around the world recognize the energy opportunity
and are moving aggressively to lead. This is a race we can win,
but we must act with fierce urgency.
Thank you. I am now pleased to answer your questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Since I understand we have votes in the
4 o'clock time frame, we will try to stick to the 5-minute
rule. And that is for the Members to be aware of.
Mr. Secretary, our committee has long supported--and this
has been very bipartisan--the Department's efforts to keep the
world's best science and engineering workforce here at home and
to keep our position as the world's top innovator.
We also need to think one step further by making sure we
don't just invent the newest technologies but that we then
manufacture them in the United States. After all, devoting
Federal funding to support a research team of 10 people at home
just so a company can support 1,000 manufacturing jobs overseas
truly misses the mark.
Mr. Secretary, beyond the advanced manufacturing program
your budget proposes, how are you working--and this is very
much in line with the ranking member's comments--to ensure that
federally funded research and development conducted at American
universities, our laboratories, and companies then leads to
manufacturing and jobs here in these United States?
Secretary Chu. Well, Mr. Chairman, first, I couldn't agree
with you more. I think that if we invest in research in
American universities or national labs or companies, that we
would like to not only see that research lead to discoveries,
but that research lead to manufacturing in the United States,
because that is where we will see our future prosperity.
The Department of Energy is working on this in a number of
ways. First, when there are issues having to do with IP
generated by the Department of Energy, we are looking at, if we
support a startup company or research, what means we have at
our disposal to make sure that it doesn't go to the highest
bidder and just----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, what are those means?
Secretary Chu. Well, I will tell you one example. We
supported some research done by a company, BP Solar, which was
based in America, on improving the manufacturability of silicon
to drive the cost down. It was actually a successful program,
but BP Solar decided that, given what was happening in China,
that they were going to get out of this business. And we were
taking steps to make sure that that IP generated by American
taxpayers would have controls, so that it doesn't migrate.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So it did migrate?
Secretary Chu. Well, it--no----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, what is the reference to China?
Secretary Chu. Well----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We know that China is aggressive in this
area, but----
Secretary Chu. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. If we made--and you gave
this example yourself--if we made this substantial investment,
what did we do to protect that intellectual property?
Secretary Chu. Well, what we do is we look at the legal
means we have of making sure. If this intellectual property is,
quote, then ``sold'' to somewhere else, the United States will
look at what means we have. But----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, respectfully, the Department of
Energy has been in business for quite a long time. You have
been the Secretary for a couple of years. This isn't new news
here.
We have the excellence represented by a lot of incredible
talent at all our national laboratories, and they have been
coming up with some pretty ingenious ideas. What is to prevent
that ingenuity and innovation from being sucked out of some of
our labs and finding ourselves confronting challenges based on
the cheap labor and manufacturing base in places like India or
China?
Secretary Chu. Well, Mr. Chairman, what has happened in the
last 10, 15 years is a growing realization that we can't take
the industrial side of what we do for granted, but also an
appreciation of how important it is that we remain a technology
leader, especially in high-tech manufacturing that rests on the
intellectual property that we generate here in the United
States.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You headed up one of those laboratories.
Secretary Chu. Correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And God bless you for doing that. And
the investments we made in the variety of innovators and people
under your area of responsibility, well, what prevented that
information from migrating abroad?
Secretary Chu. Well, first----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And what steps could we legally take if,
indeed, it is possible in a global economy with the Internet--
--
Secretary Chu. When we support the development of an idea,
we can, in principle, look at steps, and we are doing this
increasingly. We have the ideas first. We are greasing the
interaction between the private sector in the United States and
what comes out of the universities and national laboratories.
In addition to that, if you support this research with U.S.
taxpayer money, how do you begin to say, all right, we don't
want to see this then go to the highest bidder? These are
complex things that we are looking at, and it----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, we shouldn't be looking at it. How
about, how are you acting on it? I mean, are the horses already
out of the barn here? Have we come up with a lot of ingenious
ideas and innovations and patents and are they being marketed
by our global competitors?
Secretary Chu. Well, the U.S. Government doesn't have
complete control over certain things. And so when a company,
let's say a startup company, picks up an intellectual property
and develops it, depending on what that company----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We just don't want them setting up shop
outside Beijing, I mean, especially if we, as the taxpayers,
have made these types of investments.
Secretary Chu. Right. So, it is a set of reasons to
encourage American companies to set up manufacturing in the
United States. That set of reasons includes provisions on
whether they can use research supported by the Department of
Energy, but they also include issues having to do with the
climate in the United States, the fiscal policies and the tax
policies.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We know the climate here, and it is not
enuring to our benefit at the moment.
So let me yield to the ranking member, who through his, I
think, opening statement shares very much my concern here. I
mean, he can speak from an industrial base that has been
stripped of a lot of its assets.
Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, I have a couple of questions, and we have 5
minutes, at least on this first round. I would associate myself
with the chairman and am very concerned.
We had the buy-American provision for the stimulus bill in
2009, but it applied only to infrastructure investment. And
when credits were used for energy programs, much of those
facilities and products were imported. I am told we have
already lost tier-one production facilities and possibilities
for solar. I produce more steel--I don't, my workers do--in my
district than any State in the country. And every time I see a
250-ton windmill imported because we don't make it here, I get
furious.
I appreciate that the last time we had a discussion, you
initiated the conversation that there is a focus now at the
Department about making sure that the intellectual firepower
that you have is going to be used with a goal of making sure
goods and products are manufactured. I do appreciate that.
The question I have on manufacturing, just to follow up,
though, is, there is a proposal for a manufacturing
demonstration facility within the 2013 budget. And, again, on
first blush, I think that is a swell idea.
The concern I have is, over about the last 3 to 5 years,
the Department has established the Bioenergy Research Center,
Energy Innovation Hubs, the Energy Frontier Research Centers,
Industrial Assessment Centers, Clean Energy Regional
Application Centers, and manufacturing energy centers. And the
obvious question is, do we need that? Do we have too many
centers? Are we dissipating our efforts?
Secretary Chu. No, I don't think we are dissipating our
efforts.
First, you have named a lot of centers, so let me start
with the bioenergy centers that were started----
Mr. Visclosky. I don't want--I am just saying, why do we
need the manufacturing demonstration?
Secretary Chu. Okay. Fair question.
Mr. Visclosky. Because, again, I have about 3 minutes left
here.
Secretary Chu. Let me focus on that.
Those centers specifically are centers in which you work
with American companies and they are almost like incubator
companies--I have toured one, it was a carbon composite, it was
done in conjunction with Oak Ridge--where you have companies
and you test new manufacturing methods. So these companies say,
``well, we don't really know whether this is going to work or
not.'' So, you have a facility that helps them develop new
manufacturing methods that can enable them to produce carbon
composite materials, which virtually the whole world thinks
will be a material of the future, cost-effectively, so that you
can actually embody them in American products.
These are American companies that use this facility and
say, look, we are going to do some experiments. Maybe these
companies can't afford some of this stuff, but here is a
facility. It is like an incubator house. Come and we will help
you get started.
Those are examples of the manufacturing facilities which I
think are directly applicable to help keep manufacturing in the
United States.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay.
Two last questions. The second one deals with the issue of
management. And I would note that in the 2011 report by the GAO
they did indicate that the Department has made progress toward
many of the recommendations relative to the watchlist, but also
suggested that DOE needs to commit sufficient people and
resources to resolve its contract management problems. You
still have, obviously, NNSA as well as environmental cleanup,
which is about 60 percent of your budget, on the list.
Further, very recently, the National Academy of Sciences
issued a report that talked about how serious management issues
are hampering the work at NNSA, a weapons laboratory, noting
persistent levels of mistrust, calling the relationship
``dysfunctional.''
What additional actions are you taking relative to the
National Academy's report and that just persistent year-in and
year-out appearance of DOE on that watchlist?
Secretary Chu. Well, with regard to the watchlist, as you
noted, the Office of Science is now off the watchlist. And if
you look at their recent record, it is 100 percent on time, on
budget. That is existing proof in the Department of Energy that
one can develop very complex multibillion-dollar budgets and
carry them through in projects. I knew that when I walked in
the door. It was a concerted effort to export those best
practices in the Office of Science to NNSA and to environmental
cleanup.
Let me very, very briefly say that a strong common
denominator, especially in complex projects, for example, what
the NNSA or WTP are doing, is you don't start construction
until a large fraction of the engineering drawings are done. If
you start putting shovels in the ground when you have 10
percent of the design done, you will invariably find out--this
is not only true in government projects; this is true in the
private sector, as well--you invariably find out that, oops,
you should have done more design before you actually started
the construction.
So a lot of the things that you see have been things put in
progress years ago. There is now a concerted effort to make
sure that you progress further along at, first, budget
estimates, but also be very reluctant to start putting shovels
in the ground until you know what you are going to be building.
Mr. Visclosky. All right. In light of that National Academy
report, I would ask that you just really----
Secretary Chu. Right. I would love to tell you about that,
but another day.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky.
The big chairman, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Coal provides roughly 50 percent of the Nation's
electricity today. If we went completely at 100 miles an hour
developing other sources, you are still going to need coal for
the foreseeable future. It is an abundant resource that we
have; we are called the Saudi Arabia of coal. It is
inexpensive, relatively speaking, on the world market for
energy.
And yet it seems this administration is intent on
completely shutting off the use of coal and the mining of coal
for the purpose of generating electricity. The EPA is issuing
regulations almost every day. And with the most recent MATS,
the mercury and air toxics standards rule that they issued,
there is no technology capable of meeting those standards. And
so, consequently, there can be no new coal plants because of
that rule, among others.
And at the same time that EPA is demanding new technologies
for compliance with their regulations, you are cutting the
research that would develop those technologies. That seems to
me to be incomprehensible. We have two agencies of the
government at cross-purposes.
The Fossil Energy Research and Development Program in your
department has played an important role in improving existing
technologies and inventing entirely new ones. Your request for
funding for fossil energy R&D is cut by 21 percent, a $113
million cut. The request cuts advanced energy systems by $45
million; that is almost half. And it cuts cross-cutting
research by $19 million, which is 40 percent.
In essence, on the one hand the EPA is saying, ``You can't
build a new plant because you don't have the technology to burn
coal the way we want it burned,'' and you are saying, ``But I
am not going to give you the money to find those ways to burn
coal the way you would like.''
Help me out here. Am I confused?
Secretary Chu. Well, Mr. Congressman, I have to say that I
am very supportive of developing those technologies that you
speak of to be able to use gas and coal in a clean way. We
believe that it is very important to develop those technologies
not only in the United States but in partnership with the
world. Coal will be around for a long time, and we recognize
that. I think Congressman Womack was at this ARPA-E summit and
he heard me speak about that this morning, how important it is
that we continue that research.
Part of the issue in the budget was that there was a lot of
money rescinded in some of the carbon capture and sequestration
projects that were a partnership between the government and the
private sector. What we are trying to do, our viable path
forward is that there is a beneficial use of carbon dioxide
which will further our research in capturing carbon dioxide to
be used to enhance oil recovery, but also, as we pump the
carbon dioxide in the ground, we will learn a lot about what is
going on.
What we say is, ``All right, we understand. We are still
interested in that.'' And so we are trying to work with
industry and reprogram some of this. We have interest in having
the carbon capture, and the sequestration part is now enhanced
oil recovery, which will tell us a lot, and it will help
sequester in the short term, meaning the 5 or 10 years. We are
going to learn a lot from that.
Mr. Rogers. But you cut the funding. You are proposing to
cut the funding. You are going to cut fossil energy research
and development by 21 percent. You are cutting advanced energy
systems almost half, cross-cutting research by 40 percent.
Secretary Chu. Uh-huh.
Mr. Rogers. All the while, you are increasing funding for
all the other research programs other than for coal. Notably, a
$500 million increase for the renewable program, which is
already funded at $1.8 billion.
How do you explain that? That is completely contrary to the
answer you just gave me, if I understood you correctly.
Secretary Chu. Well, as I said, we do support the research.
There is a----
Mr. Rogers. Then why are you cutting it? Drastically
cutting it. That is a funny way of supporting it. How are you
supporting it other than with money?
Secretary Chu. We are supporting it with money. We are
supporting it with trying to work with the utility companies on
these projects.
Mr. Rogers. Well, there have been lots of applications for
fossil energy R&D. I don't think any of them have been
approved.
Secretary Chu. R&D? Excuse me? No, loan guarantees.
Mr. Rogers. Loan guarantees. I am sorry.
Secretary Chu. Yeah. I think the loan guarantees are ones
we are working through. These are very complex issues. We have
the loan money. We are working through that. And these are
complex issues. And I would like to see that loan money used.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I would like to go to Norm. Is that all
right?
Mr. Rogers. Yeah.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Dicks, the ranking member.
Mr. Dicks. Can you bring us up to date on Yucca Mountain?
Secretary Chu. As far as I know, what is happening is that
this is before the courts and we are awaiting the decision of
the courts.
Mr. Dicks. We understand that if, in fact, the courts
rule--and we believe that this still is the law of the land--
that you have to start forward. How much would you estimate it
would cost to get this project back up, you know, moving
forward?
Secretary Chu. I would have to get back to you on that. But
certainly if the court's order is to proceed, we will proceed.
I can get back to you on the exact details of how much----
Mr. Dicks. We understand it is around $100 million to get
started.
Now, tell us about your blue-ribbon commission. What
recommendations did they have on nuclear waste?
Secretary Chu. Well, what they recommended is, first, they,
as we all do, acknowledge that we have to solve this problem,
and it is very important that we do solve the problem.
They spent about 2 years, many, many meetings, very
thorough job, and I commend them for the excellent job. But one
of the things they noted was that other countries have done it
in a different way, notably Sweden. They think also Finland has
gone a different way. And so what they have found was that----
Mr. Dicks. Can you tell us what those ways are?
Secretary Chu. Yes. Sweden set up a public-private type of
company. It is hard to describe--maybe TVA is the closest thing
to that, but it is not officially in, let's say, the Department
of Energy. With this, they also noted, if you can convince the
people that this can be done in a safe way, there are economic
benefits. What could have been, let's pick you, and you like it
or not, it is going there. It turned out to be three
competitive bids for the right to put the spent fuel in these
sites. So it was a competition that kind of went completely in
reverse. In fact, the losers, the people who did not get the
site picked, actually had some side benefits. But there was a
serious competition to say, we see economic benefit, and if you
do this in a safe way, you can control the downsides.
We actually have an example of that in the United States in
the low radioactive waste in New Mexico called WIPP, in
Carlsbad, where it has been operating for 11, 12 years, roughly
that period of time. Great economic benefit, no accidents. It
is being done in a very safe way, and it has been economic
prosperity for that region.
Mr. Dicks. You know, in my hometown of Bremerton,
Washington, we have a big shipyard, and nuclear-powered
submarines come in. And the waste is taken off the submarines
and sent over to Mr. Simpson's NREL in Idaho, and they are
supposed to send it on to Yucca Mountain. There are agreements
here. This got up to the top level of the Clinton--I guess it
was the Clinton administration. And there is a time, I think it
is in, like, 2025, this has to happen, or Idaho will no longer
be obligated to receive this waste.
So this has implications. The fact that we are just, you
know, letting this thing go on and on and on I think is a big
mistake. And I was here, I voted for this, to do it at Yucca
Mountain. And I think that is the law of the land. It hasn't
been changed.
I can't believe the courts are going to sustain your
position. So you better start looking at these--you had better
start figuring out how you are going to get Yucca Mountain
moving forward.
You just can't declare something at the executive branch
that it is no longer the law. You have to come to Congress and
get the law changed. That hasn't happened.
Secretary Chu. Well, that was another very important
recommendation of the Blue Ribbon Commission, that it is really
is up to Congress, if Congress wants to change the law, and we
would be willing to work with Congress to do that.
We take the legal obligations very seriously. I think it is
2035 you have to get prepared, and by 2037 you have to begin
shipping.
Mr. Simpson. By 2035 it has to be out of State.
Secretary Chu. Okay. So, yes, we know that those are very
serious legal obligations.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Dicks.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. Lewis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Chu, thank you very much for being with us. I can't
help but scratch my head about the fact that we are able to
acquire someone of your background and talent to serve in this
capacity. To say the least, beyond the heat you will be taking
from committees like this, your willingness to serve is very
much appreciated by many of us.
Secretary Chu. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis. Your background is well known, a Nobel Prize
winner in the arena of physics. But beyond that--you are
celebrating your anniversary--is another thing. Your bride, Dr.
Jean Chu, holds a doctorate in philosophy, as I understand it,
in physics from Oxford University. And above and beyond that,
she served as chief of staff for two Stanford University
presidents, as well as dean of admissions. My God, it would be
interesting to hear what you guys talk about at night.
Secretary Chu. All I know for sure is she would not have
admitted me.
Mr. Lewis. I must say, your service is very much
appreciated.
But beyond that, the panel probably doesn't realize this,
but Yucca Mountain has for all these decades essentially been
in my district. And it strikes me that unless we learn from
this most recent history, we are bound to repeat the disaster
that is Yucca Mountain.
I was fooling around with a figure earlier, thinking that
we had spent something in the neighborhood of $9 billion in the
Yucca Mountain catastrophe. It is closer to $14 billion, as
staff tells me.
In connection with that, in the early days of Yucca, all
the politicians, who want to solve this problem purportedly,
were supportive of Yucca Mountain as the location, especially
when it was producing jobs in the local economic community. And
then you move forward, and, lo and behold, there is some
controversy around this subject, and all of the politicians
flee, in spite of the billions of dollars they signed on to
earlier.
The concern that we have to have is that, first of all, we
must solve this difficulty in an environment that is a
political environment. And Lord knows if we are not careful
about learning from the past, we are bound to repeat it. We
will spend billions of dollars again for another location
following Yucca Mountain, and, lo and behold, what will happen?
So one way or another, we have to think through the pure
politics of this if we are going to make serious progress. And
the Congress ought to be trying to help you work their way
through that, and I can't say that we have done that very well
up to this point.
Secretary Chu. Can I respond?
Mr. Lewis. Sure. Please do.
Secretary Chu. First, thank you for your comments.
I agree with you. And one of the recommendations of the
Blue Ribbon Commission is to set up this semi-autonomous arm,
like a TVA, that says, get it out of the political arena, get
it so that you can have very competent people. Take a very
professional attitude: what will be in the best interest of the
United States in solving this problem?
So that was certainly one of the recommendations. But right
now, it is up to Congress to weigh these considerations and to
decide. But that is one of the clear recommendations of the
Blue Ribbon Commission.
Mr. Lewis. Well, in the meantime, we are struggling with
this reality. It was not that long ago that others in the arena
where I serve, where Yucca Mountain is located, we all
supported that this should go forward, it was a logical
location. I mean, lo and behold, the next time you locate a
facility, please don't locate it somewhere near the Speaker's
district, because the problems there will be endless, as well.
So between here and there, I would hope that your policy
people would work very closely with us to try to have us
together, hand-in-hand, have an independent commission or
otherwise not just work effectively but get results at the
other end.
Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, again, to the Secretary.
I wanted to go back to this question of technology transfer
and jobs. I have visited many of the Federal labs including
Fermi Lab and Argonne Lab. I think that the Department has done
an extraordinary job, particularly with regards to the
stewardship and modernization of the nation's nuclear weapons.
And I know that the committee has done a lot to make sure that
we have fully funded those efforts.
This issue about government-funded research is not limited
to the Energy Department. NASA has got 17,000 patents. I mean,
we could go through the list. I know that the White House has
required all of the departments to work on this question of
technology transfer and jobs, and that the Department of Energy
is working hand-in-hand with the Commerce Department and the
National Innovation Marketplace, to get American manufacturers
a first run at many of these opportunities.
This is a serious issue. And as a scientist, you will
appreciate that on the one hand scientists want to have broad
interactions around inventions and new ideas and new approaches
in the scientific community. However at the same time, we are
in economic competition with other countries. Making all this
information public, making it available, leads to our economic
competitors getting opportunities to pick the fruit off of
trees that we planted with American taxpayer dollars.
So I believe the issue here with regards to research that
is taxpayer funded is that we want those jobs--the new widgets
that are going to be made, we want them made here in America.
So I have introduced legislation in this regard, H.R. 2015--it
is called the American Discoveries and American Jobs Act--which
would focus the country on this question.
Because one well-intentioned lab personnel told me
directly, he has four patents, he tried to build these products
here in America, but he got a much better offer somewhere else.
All of the research was paid for by American taxpayer dollars,
but those jobs are some other place.
And there is a lot that we need to work on in this regard,
and I am a big proponent of research. I think our labs are a
tremendous asset. I traveled with the chairman and Mike Simpson
and others, and I was just amazed at the work that is being
done by the thousands and thousands of Ph.D.s on behalf of the
American people. But we want to make sure that the jobs that
are created by this work--stay here. And I believe that there
is a lot of work that we have to do within that context.
Congress has to be involved. If we are going to tax someone
who is working every day in my district or someone else's
district and invest those dollars in some very smart people who
come up with new ideas that they eventually take out to the
commercial market and as a result make a lot of money then we
want to ensure that the jobs that emanate from this at least be
somewhere in the domestic United States, so that the whole
country benefits from this.
So whether it is MRIs or LASIK eye surgery or GPS, all of
this is, at its base was government-funded research. And we
have to figure out a way to make sure that the jobs that
emanate from this research help us reinvigorate our
manufacturing base.
So I would be interested in you taking a look at the
legislation. It is not, obviously, cast in stone. It is
probably not going to pass any time in the near future. But I
do think we have to work together in this regard.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Simpson, whose name was invoked a few minutes ago.
Mr. Simpson. And very well, I must----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Very well.
Mr. Simpson. I am glad to see somebody else brought up
Yucca Mountain first. Actually, I am--well, I don't know that I
am not going to bring it up.
A couple of quick questions. First of all, it is
interesting that when you mention WIPP and the Carlsbad area
and how that has created jobs and economic benefits--if you
will remember back to the beginning of WIPP, Congress had to
force WIPP on Carlsbad. It was not readily accepted by the
people of New Mexico. We were sued several times and everything
else. So sometimes these things have to get done one way or
another, which has been the issue with Yucca Mountain,
obviously.
Has the Department embraced the Blue Ribbon Commission's
recommendations? And if so, will it require legislation to
implement some of those provisions? And if so, will you present
that to Congress or will it be done by administrative fiat,
such as closing Yucca Mountain?
Secretary Chu. No, I think it is very clear that Congress
will have to play a very key role if it wants to amend the
Nuclear Waste Act. And that was very clearly stated in the Blue
Ribbon Commission Report.
Mr. Simpson. It would take an amendment of the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act?
Secretary Chu. It depends on what parts you are talking
about. For example, one of the recommendations was that there
are fees collected from the power generators; and those fees
are a considerable amount of money, three-quarters of a billion
dollars a year.
Mr. Simpson. Right.
Secretary Chu. And they recommended that some fraction of
those fees start to go to this. If a semi-private organization
is set up, that takes it away from yearly appropriations it
puts it on a more professional basis. It can start with a small
fraction, but let that begin, because those moneys were clearly
collected for that reason.
Mr. Simpson. And it is recommended that that occur
promptly, if I remember correctly.
Secretary Chu. Well, but that would require an act of
Congress.
Mr. Simpson. Have you proposed it?
Secretary Chu. We would love to work with Congress in
deciding what Congress would be willing to accept on those
things. That is one example.
Another example is the Blue Ribbon Commission points out
that you would want both the permanent storage sites and you
would want interim sites.
Mr. Simpson. Well, don't let this turn into a Simpson-
Bowles, where we go out and we make all these recommendations
and then nobody pushes it forward. If you are going to push it
forward, then push it forward----
Secretary Chu. Right.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. And come and work with Congress
to get it done.
Secondly, along the lines of what Mr. Rogers was talking
about, 50 percent of our electricity is produced by coal, 20
percent by nuclear power. When I look at your budget, I look at
huge increases in the renewable energy, which is the very small
part of the electrical portfolio, and cuts in the other area
that is producing most of the electricity.
And I am, frankly, disappointed that we are seeing
reductions in small modular reactors. This was the new road we
were going to head down, but we are seeing reductions in that
arena.
So it seems to me like there is an agenda of trying to push
the green technology, when, in fact, nuclear energy I think is
green technology. It doesn't put green house gasses in the air.
And if you are really going to address global climate change,
you had better adopt nuclear energy. And it doesn't seem like
we are doing that in this budget. This is the first time I have
seen a retrenchment in this administration in advancing nuclear
energy. The talk is all there, but the budget doesn't reflect
it.
Secretary Chu. Well, I think you know very well my support
of nuclear energy and my support of clean coal. So we are
trying to push what we can where we can do this. I think in
this century those things will play an important part of our
energy mix.
Mr. Simpson. Yes, they will play an important part.
One other question. You recently testified that you intend
to separate civilian and defense nuclear fuel issues. Do you
believe that you have the legal authority to do that under the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act, to overturn a previous Presidential
determination of how to handle these materials together?
Frankly, I don't want to see defense nuclear waste be an orphan
left at places that it currently is.
Secretary Chu. No, I agree. I mean, we----
Mr. Simpson. How do you plan to handle them differently?
Secretary Chu. Well, they are different, number one. And we
have a responsibility for both of those in the U.S. Government,
writ large, has a responsibility to handle both of those waste
streams.
They are different; if nuclear power is going to be part of
our energy mix in this century, it requires considerably more
attention. But that is not to say that the other is not
important.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today. It may
surprise you, but I think you have actually put forward a
fairly reasonable and responsible budget. I wanted to just
clarify a few things.
You referenced in your written testimony that the R&D that
we do is 5 or 6 percent and that of China is something like 20
percent. China is, of course, a very swiftly emerging economy--
growing and emerging economy. And the other two largest, Japan
and Germany I guess would be the third and fourth largest
economies after China and the U.S. What are the R&D budgets
that they put forward?
Secretary Chu. Well, you know, off the top of my head, I
can't really say exactly how the R&D budgets breakdown, but I
can say that China especially has a very strong commitment to
those industries which China deems will be an important part of
their economic prosperity in the future.
And for that reason, that is why they are investing in
many--they want to diversify from coal. They are heavily
dependent on coal, but they are investing in nuclear reactors.
They are going to be the biggest deployer of wind and solar in
the world in their country, but they also view that as
something for export, as well.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Well, I was just hoping that I could get a
sense whether or not other really mature economies, like
Germany and France, were doing numbers much more similar to us.
Because I think all of the really fast emerging economies would
be doing more R&D than we would be doing. But I will leave
that. We can discuss it at another point.
Some of our R&D major activities have been the Engineering
Frontier Research Centers. I guess we now have 46 of those.
Those have been standing for a couple of years now. Do you have
an ongoing program for oversight or for measuring what the
output of those centers is----
Secretary Chu. Yes.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. At this point, or----
Secretary Chu. Yes.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. Is it far too early?
Secretary Chu. We are starting a very thorough review of
the effectiveness of those EFRCs and have very rigorous
policies on how to evaluate them, based on outside scientific
referees, to see how each one is doing. The ones that are
working very effectively we would like to continue. The ones
that are not, we are going to have some discussions----
Mr. Olver. What is a fair period of time to begin to
account?
Secretary Chu. Well, every year they are reviewed. But I
think this next review is a much more thorough review, and so
then you step back and look over the next couple of years. But
every year----
Mr. Olver. If they were established in 2009, they could not
have been functioning effectively, if at all, until probably
late 2010, in any case.
Secretary Chu. Well, that is right. So we are about 2 years
into this. I think some of the EFRCs started in middle 2008. I
am not actually sure of the exact dates, but let's say 2009,
2010.
Mr. Olver. Are the hubs also standing at about the same
time, or are they more recent?
Secretary Chu. Well, they are more recent, except for the
three hubs which are the energy biocenters--they got started in
the last administration. Those were actually the prototypes of
what we had but expanding beyond----
Mr. Olver. Those were for the energy research centers?
Frontier research centers?
Secretary Chu. I am thinking 2006 or 2007. About the same
time roughly, maybe a little earlier. The bioresearch centers--
again, I can get back to you on the details--may have come a
year or 2 earlier than the EFRCs and the energy hubs.
Mr. Olver. Okay. You are asking for an additional hub.
There are five up and standing, and you are asking for a sixth
one. And in your testimony you said ``electricity systems.''
Can you tell me what you mean by ``electricity systems''?
Secretary Chu. Well, if you look at the electricity system
in the United States, it is a very complex organism, if you
will. And----
Mr. Olver. Is this the delivery system?
Secretary Chu. It is the transmission and distribution
system.
Mr. Olver. The grid?
Secretary Chu. It is the delivery system, it is to control
the flows of electricity. As you work to go to a modern grid
that controls how you flow the electricity, you want to look at
where there are potential vulnerabilities in the grid.
Mr. Olver. Would that hub be responsible for trying to
figure out how to reduce greatly the loss of power over
distance? The delivery of power in a much more efficient
manner?
Secretary Chu. That wouldn't be the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Secretary, if you could maybe
summarize in response to that question. I want to get everybody
in here before we blow the whistle for votes.
Secretary Chu. Okay.
I will give you the details, but that is not the central
focus. It is not over long distances. It is more distribution
and control systems.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Rodney Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, the President's budget includes an
interagency study that says that the Department of Energy, EPA,
and USGS are partnering to study the environmental and health
effects of hydraulic fracturing. Can you tell us a little bit
about what that might lead us to?
Secretary Chu. Well, as you know, the President tasked us
to set up a subcommittee to look at hydraulic fracturing. I
think the conclusions of that subcommittee report were that we
believe that hydraulic fracturing can be done in an
environmentally responsible way so that you can take advantage
of this great resource, and, it creates jobs. We think that gas
is a very important fuel mix and a transition that we will be
needing in this century.
And so, what we fully believe we have in the Department of
Energy--and it is also aligned very closely with the expertise
in USGS--is we have a lot of expertise in how fluids move in
rock and how do you develop the technologies so that we can
help industry know what is happening and develop this resource
in an environmentally responsible way.
Mr. Alexander. Well, how much time are we talking? The
President in his State of the Union Address said that the
government has been investing in shale energy extraction
research for over 30 years. So how much more do we need to
study it to determine----
Secretary Chu. Well, what the President was referring to in
that case was, from 1978 until 1992, the Department of Energy
invested in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing at a
time when industry wasn't really interested in it. And when
industry began to pick it up in a real way, the U.S. Government
got out of it.
Now, since that time it has been a story in which the
development of shale gas and shale oil has been quite
remarkable in the last half-dozen years. But there also are
active environmental concerns. There are reports on fugitive
emissions, things of that nature.
So the research we now want to do in the Department of
Energy and the USGS is, all right, first, what is really
happening? And, secondly, how do you keep on advancing best
practices? Because we improve on virtually everything we do
going forward. And, as I said, how could our research help in
developing and improving the practices that are more focused on
making sure that the water tables aren't contaminated, things
of that nature.
Mr. Alexander. Is the administration looking for a reason
to shut down fracturing?
Secretary Chu. No.
Mr. Alexander. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Womack, thanks for your patience down there.
Mr. Womack. Thank you.
And happy birthday, happy anniversary. And my compliments
to the Secretary for his comments this morning at the ARPA-E
energy summit. I found your comments to be enlightening. And a
well-attended event, by the way. And my compliments to Arun
Mujumdar, who was hosting the event.
I want to stay on the natural gas subject for just a
moment. I am troubled by the fact that, when you look at the
budget numbers, a little over $2 billion in renewable energy
requests, and if I am reading the numbers correctly, we are
looking at just a few million dollars on the subject of natural
gas. And as was indicated in that previous round of
questioning, that money is dedicated, if I heard correctly, to
determining whether or not--you have said it has promise, but
to make sure that we are not doing something environmentally.
So can you help me? I know those numbers--that is a wide
range. And the numbers from the information agencies suggest
that natural gas use by 2035 will be equal to all the
renewables put together. So those numbers just don't seem to
match up to me. Help me out with that.
Secretary Chu. Sure.
Let's bring in all of energy, including our transportation
energy, which is roughly 38 percent or so of our energy, and
how much the United States spends on either oil created
domestically, produced domestically, oil produced and imported,
that is probably, my guess would be, something to the order of
$700 billion, $800 billion a year.
And our energy budget is not commensurate to how much we
spend on oil, because oil is a very mature technology. The
budgets we would spend on oil would be having to do with
helping improve safety and helping improve technologies with
regard to, for example, deepwater drilling.
So one shouldn't really look at the budget in relation to
what we are spending as a country, and this is how we try to
make these decisions. We try to invest in areas which are
younger, earlier technologies. We are investing, for example, a
small amount of money but a very important amount of money in
seeing whether methane hydrates can be developed, again,
because industry hasn't really decided whether this is going to
be something--it is exactly what the Department did in the late
1970s and 1980s.
So what we try to do is invest in things where we think the
taxpayers have the most leverage and can push the technologies
forward in these various areas.
Mr. Womack. All right.
Speaking of leveraging, we have kind of a chicken and an
egg. And I want to go to natural gas as a mobility fuel now.
And I have listened with a lot of interest to Mr. Fred Smith
this morning, from FedEx, on the use of natural gas, in their
fleet.
And in my district, with the Arkoma Basin, the Fayetteville
shale, and with the gas plays that are happening throughout our
country, there seems to be growing demand for compressed
natural gas as a mobility fuel. However, chicken and egg, we
don't have the infrastructure to support it.
So how is DOE involved in helping us get to the level where
that readily available resource can be put to good use?
Secretary Chu. Right. Excellent question.
First, I agree completely with Fred Smith about his
assessment of liquified natural gas and heavy trucking that is
a significant part of our transportation energy use; it is 20
percent. A couple hundred filling stations on major
interstates, you could offset a lot of that. We looked at the
numbers. It looked very promising. Payback periods something on
the order of 3, 4 years for an investment in a more expensive
truck. The private sector is getting behind and investing
hundreds of millions of dollars.
So heavy trucking, very few filling stations. We think this
is a great way to diversify our energy supply. When you go to
delivery vans and when you go to personal vehicles, different.
Because you can't have selected every 200 miles on an
interstate. You need a lot more.
So we think that compressed natural gas is the solution.
However, we need better storage. You either have a very
expensive tank at a very high pressure, a carbon fiber tank, or
you have a very heavy tank, which is really not considered an
option, like a scuba tank.
And so what we have looked at this and it is the best thing
we feel the Department of Energy can do--and we are putting out
this Funding Opportunity Announcement--is to do two types of
research: one, to decrease the tank costs so it is not an
additional one-quarter to one-third extra in the vehicle, so
you can use compressed natural gas, which we have more readily
available infrastructure. And the other is to actually look at
research where you can have the gas absorbed in a material in
the tank, so you have the same storage capacity----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I have to interrupt here. If you could
just finish your sentence, and then we are going to move on to
Mr. Nunnelee.
Secretary Chu. So, again, it is a technological solution.
If we didn't do this, again, we would offload a lot more, and
we would be very thrilled by that.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Secretary.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Womack.
Mr. Nunnelee, thank you for your patience at the end of the
line here.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
Before you were nominated, you were quoted as saying,
quote, ``Somehow we have to figure out how to boost the price
of gasoline to the levels in Europe.'' I can't look at
motivations, I have to look at results. And under this
administration, the price of gasoline has doubled. While we are
bumping $4 a gallon in north Mississippi, today the price of
gasoline in Europe is about $8 a gallon.
And the people of north Mississippi can't be here, so I
have to be here and be their voice for them. And I have to tell
you that $8-a-gallon gasoline makes them afraid. It is a cruel
tax on the people of north Mississippi as they try to go back
and forth to work. It is a cloud hanging over economic
development and job creation.
And it appears to me this administration continues to drag
its feet on oil exploration, on fossil fuel development and
recovery. How do you respond to that?
Secretary Chu. Well, I think absolutely we should be judged
on what we are doing, and I should be judged on my track record
from when I became Secretary of Energy. And when this
administration started, we were in a free-fall in a recession,
and the price had plunged from roughly $140 a barrel down to a
little under about $40 a barrel.
We will do everything in our powers--and we agree that
there is great suffering when the price of gasoline increases
in the United States. We are very concerned about this.
As I have repeatedly said, in the Department of Energy what
we are trying to do is diversify our energy supply of
transportation so that we have cost-effective means. Natural
gas is great, and so we are pushing on natural gas for
transportation.
In electrification, in the battery research that we have
been funding, we have had some pretty spectacular
breakthroughs, one just announced yesterday that looks like it
is going to at least decrease the cost of these batteries
twofold and maybe more.
Biofuels is a very aggressive program, started in the
previous administration but continuing, again, to diversify
that supply of transportation fuel.
So these are the things we are doing. And we are very
focused on that because we understand the economic impacts that
it has on all Americans and our economy.
Mr. Nunnelee. But is the overall goal to get our price----
Secretary Chu. No, the overall goal is to decrease our
dependency on oil--to build and strengthen our economy and to
decrease our dependency on oil.
For the first time, you know, in the last 8 years, through
a lot of policies put in in this administration and in previous
administrations, our oil production has increased for the first
time. It is at its highest level in 8 years. The import
fraction is the highest level in 16 years.
We think that if you consider all these policies, including
energy efficiency, that we can go a long way to becoming less
dependent on oil and diversifying our supply it will help the
American economy and the American consumers.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Nunnelee, thank you for putting a
very human face on what a lot of American families are feeling
at the pump and with their own family budgets.
Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I realize we are at
the end. I just want to highlight three issues that questions
will be submitted for the record, Mr. Chairman, that I have a
particular interest in.
One is the issue of the safety culture at the waste
treatment facility. There was a DOE Office of Health, Safety,
and Security investigation last year and a report. Very
concerned about that systemic problem that continues to
persist, and I have an interest in that question.
Relative to USEC, I realize that there was an agreement
between the Department and USEC of $44 million relative to
tailings as well as, in return, enrichment services. The
question in particular I have is, what happens with the cost to
the government long-term for those tailings? I fear it will far
exceed the $44 million. Do the taxpayers pick that up, or does
USEC pick up that additional liability?
And the last question is, I realize that the administration
is looking for transfer authority for $106 million. The
question I would have is, where will the $106 million be
transferred from, should the authority ever be granted?
And I appreciate the chairman's indulgence.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And let me say I associate my feelings
with Mr. Visclosky. There are a number of outstanding questions
which we will put into the record, not the least of which is
you still have, I think, $550 million unobligated in terms of
the 705 stimulus loan guarantee money. Yes, I believe that is
the amount.
A lot of that money went out in the waning months of the
program's authority, and you personally approved that. Can you
give the committee some assurances that that money and the
programs it went to had better oversight than perhaps some of
the other programs that were initiated?
Secretary Chu. Well, how do you want me to----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How would you like to characterize there
were some lessons learned.
Secretary Chu. Well, there are always lessons learned in
life. And, certainly, as I noted in my Senate testimony, we are
continuing to improve how we administer the loans. But I
wouldn't characterize what happened at the end--we were very
careful in how we assessed. And so I think you are talking
about the conditional loans and that obligation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes, and how are you monitoring.
Secretary Chu. Right. So what we have been doing since I
think 2010, mid-2010, is setting up a different section within
the loan program, but also with outside eyes, within Department
of Energy to look for changes in anything that materially
affect the company and the environment the company is in.
Certainly, if you look at the loan agreements that we have,
there are very careful milestones that the company has to meet
before the next part is meted out.
But in addition to that, as noted in the Solyndra case,
there was a very, very rapid change in the whole ecosystem of
photovoltaics. The price dropped by roughly 80 percent in 3
years, to one-quarter to one-fifth of what the solar modules
are doing. When that happens, the good news is there is very
rapid technology development that was occurring during that
time and will continue to develop. The bad news is that, you
know, not all companies are survivable.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are you laying blame for that disaster
on things that occurred in China? How about oversight of----
Secretary Chu. I am saying that when prices vary that much
in a commodity product, that a lot of companies can be swept up
by that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, that is all the more reason for
government oversight, and----
Secretary Chu. Exactly. I agree with you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. To the point of my
question.
Secretary Chu. I agree completely with you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So we will continue to monitor what was
approved last year.
Secretary Chu. Right. And as the economics and the business
changes, if there is effectively something like that happening,
we have to be very, very conscious of that. And we monitor
these things very, very closely. And so----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, we are counting on you. And,
obviously, I think a lot of the public-confidence issues that I
mentioned in my initial opening statement rest on the type of
assurances you are giving us this afternoon.
This is your lucky day. This is your birthday and your
wedding anniversary. And we have some votes, which means that
we will not reconvene. But we have a lot of questions for the
record, and we hope that we can get responses back in good
order. We look forward to cooperation from your staff in that
regard.
And I may say for the record, if Members have any
additional questions, they have a requisite 24 hours to get
them in to be submitted to the Department of Energy.
[The information follows:]
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, Mr. Secretary, on behalf of Mr.
Visclosky and the committee, we thank you for your time and
that of your staff this afternoon.
Secretary Chu. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We stand adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, March 7, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY--NUCLEAR ENERGY AND NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

WITNESSES

DR. PETER LYONS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY,
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
GREGORY JACZKO, CHAIRMAN, NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The meeting will come to order. Good
morning, everyone. Thank you for coming. I didn't mention it
yesterday, but Mr. Olver substituted for Mr. Visclosky, and,
kindly, Mr. Pastor is substituting today for my ranking member
Pete Visclosky.
Pete Visclosky lost his mother, age 86, yesterday, so he
was rightfully absent to be at her side. He is one of three
surviving sons, and I believe Mr. Visclosky, his father, is
alive and well. And on behalf of the committee, and I am sure
all of those who know and like Pete, who is an incredible
Member of Congress, we extend our public sympathy to him.
Excuse me for doing that before you, but I thought that took
priority. So, thank you very much.
I would like to welcome today Gregory Jaczko, Chairman of
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and Peter Lyons, the
Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy at the Department of
Energy, to present the fiscal year 2012 budget request. I
welcome you both, and we look forward to your testimonies.
When you appeared before the committee last year, the
nation of Japan had just been devastated by a tsunami. It was
in the midst of a nuclear crisis. I am pleased that our Nation,
both on the military and civilian sides, was in a position to
provide technical and humanitarian assistance to the Japanese
people. I would like to thank you both for the work you did to
help the Japanese people, and other parts of our government as
well, in their time of need. And their time of need still
exists, and there are lessons to be learned from that tragedy.
Although a year ago now, this tragic event and the lessons
we are learning from it continue to shape the energy sector
here in the United States and around the world. I hope we will
have a chance to hear today how our nuclear sector is applying
these lessons, and how your programs are helping in this
regard. It is reassuring that the administration and Congress
continue to value the role of nuclear power as a vital source
of energy. Perhaps the strongest sign of this is in the recent
NRC approval of the Vogtle Plants in Georgia, the first such
approval in over three decades.
There is now wide acceptance that nuclear power is a safe,
critical part of our energy mix, and I should note that this
development occurred with strong support of the Congress and
successive administrations over the years. Unfortunately, the
budget request for fiscal year 2013 does not build upon that
cooperative spirit, but instead shows some degree of
divisiveness.
Although the President made a strong pitch in the State of
the Union for an all-of-the-above energy strategy, there is no
sign of such a balanced approach in the documents before us.
Instead of investing in the two most important energy sources
for the economic recovery of our country, nuclear and fossil,
this budget request cuts funding for fossil by 21 percent and
nuclear energy by 12 percent. At the same time, this request
increases funding for energy efficiency and renewable energy by
over $500 million. This is not what I would call an all-of-the-
above energy strategy that is balanced and recognizes what
really underpins the real economy.
At the same time, I regret this request continues the
administration's wasteful and misguided Yucca Mountain policy,
denying us an important and, I would say, long overdue
repository for nuclear waste. Your budget request contains
funding for projects to implement some of the Blue Ribbon
Commission's recommendation, recommendations which Congress has
not blessed either in whole or in part. As the current law of
the land is for waste disposal at Yucca Mountain, we need to
hear from you if the administration is proposing any
legislative changes to authorize their recommendations. This is
a too complex and important mission to be resolved unilaterally
by the executive branch.
I ask the witnesses please assure us that the hearing
record, questions for the record, and any supporting
information requested by the subcommittee are delivered in
final form to us no later than 4 weeks from the time you
receive them. Members who have additional questions for the
record will have until the close of business tomorrow to
provide them to this subcommittee office.
With that, I turn to Mr. Pastor for any comments he may
have.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Chairman Jaczko and Dr. Lyons. Good to see
you again. Good morning, and thank you for being here and
discussing the fiscal year 2013 budgets.
As you know, I have long advocated for a comprehensive
energy policy for our Nation, and believe that our current ad
hoc policy continues to imperil our economy, our national
security, and our environment. I also firmly believe that in
any conceivable and practical scenario, nuclear should be
considered as part of the Nation's energy mix for decades to
come.
I am convinced that the commercial nuclear energy sector in
the United States is safe and effective. That being said, we
must ensure that the lessons learned from last year's tragedy
in Japan, their nuclear facility, be heeded, and we enhance the
safety and emergency protocol at America's nuclear reactors.
The policies of both the NRC and the Office of Nuclear Energy
play a pivotal role in ensuring that our Nation has appropriate
regulatory controls in place, but at the same time pursuing a
research and development program to strengthen the nuclear
industry.
We also should ensure that our domestic manufacturing base
has the fullest opportunity to provide the stability and growth
in our nuclear industry.
As we continue to examine the role of nuclear industry, the
role they should play in our Nation's energy mix, we must find
a solution to the final disposition of nuclear waste. The
administration's termination of Yucca has only caused a higher
level of uncertainty when it comes to this issue.
Dr. Lyons, the Office of Nuclear Energy is tasked with the
executing of the Department's responsibility under the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act and would be charged with furthering any
recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission that we
collectively decide to pursue as a Nation.
To be clear, I see the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon
Commission as a supplement, not an alternative to Yucca.
However, recognizing that there are actions that need to be
taken regardless of the outcome of the debate and ongoing court
cases on Yucca Mountain, I am interested in hearing more about
the Department's plan in this regard.
Mr. Chairman, the NRC has historically been seen as a
technical regulator above the fray of politics. I fear that
this reputation has been tarnished and believe that you have
some work to do to regain the confidence of many on this
subcommittee and in Congress. I look forward to an update of
your activities in this regard, as well as a dialogue of what
you believe we should do in the United States to implement the
lessons learned from the disastrous events in Japan.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I yield back my time.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Also, I would like to thank all Members. We have a pretty
good complement here this morning. There has been a lot of
hearings going on, and there was some fall-off yesterday, but I
am pleased that we have pretty much a full house here this
morning.
Dr. Lyons, Mr. Secretary, the floor is yours. Thank you for
being here.
Dr. Lyons. Thank you very much. Chairman Frelinghuysen and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss the President's fiscal year
2013 budget request for the Office of Nuclear Energy, or NE, at
the Department of Energy.
When I testified before you last year, as you noted, the
events at Fukushima were still unfolding. That situation is now
stable, but with a very long cleanup phase ahead. Many
contributions from the Department were instrumental in
assisting our Japanese colleagues.
In the last year, my office reevaluated its R&D activities
in light of Fukushima. Based on that review, we are
accelerating our development of fuels with enhanced accident
tolerance. We are using modeling and simulation to better
understand operations in off-normal conditions, how nuclear
plants respond to seismic events, and how reactor materials
evolve over time. We are also enlisting the university
community to focus on safety-related R&D projects, including
such issues as the safe storage of used fuel. NE remains
committed to ensuring that our Nation's options for safe
nuclear power remain open.
Domestically this has been an historic year for nuclear
energy. Late last year the Westinghouse AP1000 passively safe
reactor received design certification from the NRC. The NP 2010
program, which was supported strongly by this committee, was
instrumental in achieving this success.
Then on February 9th, the NRC approved the combined
construction and operating license for two AP1000 reactors at
the Vogtle nuclear plant. That vote authorized construction of
the Nation's first new nuclear reactor since 1978. With
construction of two units at Vogtle, the anticipated two units
at Summer, and four units in China, literally tens of thousands
of U.S. workers will be supporting AP1000 construction
projects. As Secretary Chu noted at Vogtle three weeks ago, the
resurgence of nuclear energy starts here in Georgia.
With the support of Congress, the Department has also taken
the first steps to accelerate commercialization of small
modular reactors, or SMRs. In my view, SMRs could enable a new
paradigm for small nuclear power plants. On January 20, NE
released a draft Funding Opportunity Announcement soliciting
input from industry toward establishing cost-shared agreements
to support design certification and licensing. The Department
is currently reviewing the comments on that draft and will
issue the final procurement very soon.
On January 26th, the Blue Ribbon Commission released its
final report providing recommendations for managing the back
end of the nuclear fuel cycle. The administration commends the
Commission for its work over the past 2 years. Secretary Chu
has created an internal task force that I lead to assess the
Commission's recommendations and develop a strategy that builds
off of their work. The administration will work with Congress
to define a responsible and achievable path forward to manage
our Nation's used nuclear fuel and nuclear waste.
And last, November 26th, the Mars Science Lab lifted off
from Cape Canaveral, carrying a Radioisotope Thermal Generator
to power the Curiosity rover. That event marked the 50th
anniversary of the use of nuclear power in space exploration.
As the President emphasized in his State of the Union
Address, this country needs an all-out, all-of-the-above
strategy that develops every available source of American
energy. And as Secretary Chu stated during his recent trip to
Vogtle, nuclear energy is a critical part of President Obama's
all-of-the-above strategy. Nuclear energy currently supplies
over 70 percent of our Nation's carbon-free electricity and
will continue to play an integral role in our Nation's energy
mix. My office will continue to explore the avenues that offer
the highest probability for nuclear power to fulfill this role.
The President's fiscal year 2013 budget requests $770
million for the Office of Nuclear Energy. That is a 10 percent
decrease from the fiscal year 2012 appropriation. Of that
total, $314 million is for research, development and
demonstration. The decrease in those areas is about 17 percent.
This austere budget required extremely careful prioritization
and some very tough decisions on very important programs.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Jaczko.
Mr. Jaczko. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Jaczko. Thank you. And I would like to say on behalf of
the agency to offer my sympathies and the agency's sympathies
to Congressman Visclosky as well.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Pastor, and members of the
subcommittee, I am honored to appear before you today to
discuss the fiscal year 2013 budget request for the U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. As you know, the NRC is an
independent Federal agency established to license and regulate
the Nation's civilian use of byproduct, source, and special
nuclear materials to ensure adequate protection of public
health and safety, promote the common defense and security, and
protect the environment. We have formulated our fiscal year
2013 budget to support the agency's safety and security
strategic goals and outcomes.
The NRC's safety goal is to assure adequate protection of
public health and safety and the environment. Our safety
program outcomes are to prevent the occurrence of any nuclear
reactor accident, inadvertent criticality events, acute
radiation exposures, or significant releases of radioactive
materials. The security goal is to ensure the secure use and
management of radioactive materials with outcomes of preventing
any instances where licensed radioactive materials are used in
a malicious manner, and to thwart attempts to sabotage licensed
facilities and divert special nuclear material.
In fulfilling its responsibilities for the protection of
public health and safety, the NRC develops regulations and
guidance for applicants and licensees; licenses or certifies
applicants to use nuclear materials, operate nuclear
facilities, and decommission facilities. And we inspect and
assess licensee operations and facilities to ensure that they
comply with NRC requirements, taking appropriate follow-up or
enforcement actions when necessary.
I am very, very proud that once again the NRC scored among
the top tier of Federal agencies in the 2011 Best Places to
Work in the Federal Government rankings, and this was in a year
in which we had a number of significant challenges. As many of
you have mentioned, the Fukushima accident was a significant
challenge for the agency, as well as multiple natural disasters
in the United States, including flooding in the Midwest in
June, and the earthquake on the east coast in August, and other
serious natural hazards such as hurricanes and tornados which
had an impact on nuclear facilities. Given those challenges it
was a particularly significant recognition for the agency, and
I am extremely proud of the outstanding job that the NRC staff
has done and continues to do to fulfill our important health
and safety mission.
The agency's focus on improved budget execution strategy
has resulted in a significant decrease in our unobligated
carryover. Between fiscal years 2009 and 2011, the NRC has
reduced total unobligated carryover by 45 percent, from 71
million in fiscal year 2009 to 32 million in fiscal year 2011.
We are down to a level now of approximately 3 percent of the
agency's total annual appropriation.
The NRC's fiscal year 2013 budget request provides the
necessary resources for our Nuclear Reactor Safety and Nuclear
Materials and Waste Safety Programs to carry on our mission on
behalf of the American people. The NRC's proposed budget in
fiscal year 2013 is approximately $1.050 billion, including
nearly 4,000 full-time equivalents. And this is approximately
an increase of $15 million over our fiscal year 2012 enacted
budget and a decrease of 25 full-time equivalents. I am pleased
to say that this reduction in staffing was primarily the result
of the agency's focus on improving our efficiencies in
administrative support areas and enhancing efficiencies and
effectiveness.
Also included in our budget is the Office of Inspector
General's component, which is a proposed budget of $11 million.
This includes resources to carry out the IG's mission to
independently and objectively conduct audits and investigations
to ensure the efficiency and integrity of NRC programs and
operations and to promote cost-effective management.
In accordance with the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of
1990, the NRC's budget request provides for 90 percent fee
recovery in general, less amounts appropriated for waste
incidental reprocessing activities and generic homeland
security activities. So accordingly, $925 million of the fiscal
year 2013 budget will be recovered from fees assessed to NRC
licensees. This results in a net appropriation of $129 million,
which is approximately the same as our fiscal year 2012 enacted
budget. Consistent with OMB's guidance, the NRC's budget
request also includes a 0.5 percent pay raise for our staff.
So, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of the
subcommittee, this concludes my formal testimony, and I look
forward to answering any questions that you may have. Thank
you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Jaczko.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Secretary, you have made, obviously,
some very supportive comments about nuclear energy. The
President has, Secretary Chu has, but there seems to be quite a
gap between rhetorical support and support as reflected in your
budget. You have reduced funding for the nuclear energy
research programs by 12 percent, $95 million. Tell us about
that reduction.
Dr. Lyons. Well, I believe, as I indicated in my remarks,
Mr. Frelinghuysen, the Office of Nuclear Energy was assigned a
very austere target for its budget for fiscal year 2013. We
have made very difficult prioritization decisions to stay
within that budget. I have placed particular emphasis on
maintaining progress towards small modular reactors----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are going to talk about that.
Dr. Lyons [continuing]. Continuing progress in areas of
used fuel disposition, and continuing work on enhanced
accident-tolerant fuels. There are several other areas like the
Hub that we have also worked very hard to keep as well funded
as possible. But it has definitely led to very severe
prioritization decisions and reductions in a number of areas.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So indeed, the rhetoric which is
positive, which I share in support for more nuclear power for
our country, is not being met by your budget submission. And if
we were to provide you with some additional dollars, how would
you use them?
Dr. Lyons. I would be happy to provide for the record a set
of suggestions based on any increment that you might request
that we explore, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Secretary, clearly some of the
programs proposed by your Department in recent years support,
obviously, our American manufacturing in the nuclear sector.
The Small Modular Reactor Program, for example, which you have
mentioned and you and I have discussed, is important for this
and for other reasons as the smaller reactor vessels would
allow much more of the reactor components to be made here at
home.
At the same time, the budget request reduces funding for
the 1-year-old Cross-Cutting Technology Development Research
Program, claiming that the reduction partly, quote, ``reflects
no new investments in the areas of manufacturing methods due to
reprioritization,'' unquote.
Dr. Lyons. Again, that was part of a very difficult budget
decision. We will have work continuing in advanced
manufacturing that will be funded in fiscal year 2012 and will
continue in fiscal year 2013, and some of the university
programs which we typically support in 3-year blocks, those
will be continuing. But you have highlighted some of the very
difficult prioritization decisions that I had to make.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are supportive of the small modular
nuclear reactors. There is a degree of excitement, and you have
been identified with your oversight and your enthusiasm for
that program.
Dr. Lyons. Absolutely, sir, and certainly I did my best to
maintain that as high as I could.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so does the budget submission you
have given to us diminish the ability of moving ahead with that
program? And this is about jobs. There is an incredible amount
of excitement about our retaining our competitive edge here.
Dr. Lyons. I share your enthusiasm for the small modular
reactors, and you and I certainly discussed that. I think they
may be an entirely new paradigm in how we look at nuclear power
and are very, very important.
There has been considerable discussion now, I know it is
referenced in congressional reports, in OMB language, that we
are aiming for a $452 million Federal support for SMRs over 5
years. Yes, I am concerned when the first 2 years are $67- and
$65 million.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. One of the issues that you started with, Dr.
Lyons, is the Hub, and I am trying to recall. Initial funding
was what, about 3 years ago?
Dr. Lyons. The hub has been in operation for about a year
and a half, actually, since it was awarded.
Mr. Pastor. Well, but I think the initial funding was about
3 years ago, wasn't it?
Dr. Lyons. Initially, yes.
Mr. Pastor. And it took about a year and a half to get it
going.
Dr. Lyons. It took about a year to get it going.
Mr. Pastor. A year to get it going. And what is the status
of it right now?
Dr. Lyons. I would be extremely complimentary of the
progress of the Hub. It is, as you know, based at Oak Ridge,
but it involves a number of other institutions that are
supporting: universities, labs, and industry; TVA;
Westinghouse; MIT; Idaho National Lab. There is quite a wide
range of entities working with Oak Ridge National Lab. Their
focus is on developing a so-called virtual reactor; a very
complete simulation, end to end, of an operating reactor, using
the best current codes and the most modern, high-performance
computing. I think it offers the potential to not only
significantly improve safety of operating reactors, but to
provide a better mechanism for evaluating certainly off-normal
operations, but also any possible upgrades. It should play an
important role in looking at some of the questions that will
come in with possible license extensions. I see the Hub as
being on a very solid track doing excellent work in its short
existence.
Mr. Pastor. You probably have some reasons to be very
complimentary. Can you explain some of those reasons? What are
some of the benchmarks that they have reached, and why do you
feel that it has been slow in coming, at least in my belief.
Maybe you can update why you are complimentary and you feel
like we are moving ahead.
Dr. Lyons. They took on a very difficult challenge, sir, in
terms of really trying to introduce modern computational tools
to the existing nuclear power industry. They claim their goal,
which they met, was to have the initial release of their so-
called VERA code, their virtual reactor code, within the first
year, and they met that goal, and they will continue to enhance
that code substantially over the years.
I guess one of the reasons why I would be particularly
complimentary is the extent to which industry is integrated
with the Hub, and helping to define the problems on which they
are focusing. When Secretary Chu visited the Hub, I guess it
was 3 weeks ago, the same day that we went to Vogtle, he and I
were both impressed that TVA and Westinghouse folks from the
industry played a significant role in the presentations and in
discussing how the codes being developed could help them
improve the operation of existing reactors; things like trying
to reduce the already very low probability of failure of a fuel
pin. And I could talk to some of the mechanisms that are being
explored to try to further reduce or further improve the
integrity of fuel pins in modern reactors.
Mr. Pastor. I believe that--and Senator Bennet was a big
proponent of this--in fact, I think that is why this thing got
funded. Senator Bennet has been gone at least 2 years, but I
think one of the requirements at the time in funding these Hubs
was that there would be annual reports.
Dr. Lyons. Oh, there are.
Mr. Pastor. And have they submitted an annual report, or
where are we at on that? You had informal reports, but I think
the legislation required more formal reports so we could keep
at least abreast of how these Hubs were doing, and how they
were achieving their objectives.
One of the reasons that we were funding these Hubs was we
thought that this subcommittee was going to get on a yearly
basis information of how the different benchmarks--well, what
were the benchmarks, and then how they were being met, so then
we could determine future funding or what was appropriate for
the cycle. And I appreciate informal reports, but I think----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If the gentleman will yield, we will
request formal reports through you, Mr. Lyons.
Dr. Lyons. I would be happy to provide that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Would you do that?
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And while you are doing that, would you
also provide for the record your suggestions on how to spend an
additional $50- to $100 million if we were to get more money
into the nuclear energy programs for the record?
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Pastor, I am going to go to Mr.
Simpson, if there is an opportunity.
Mr. Pastor. I am finea with that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just out of curiosity, if you submit answers to a request
that you tell us how you would spend another $50- to $100
million, does that answer have to go through OMB?
Dr. Lyons. It would represent an administration response,
sir, so yes. It would represent the overall administration
response.
Mr. Simpson. I am disappointed in the budget overall, not
necessarily how you allocated the money, but the request, and
as you said, it was a very low allocation request that you had
to work with OMB. Somehow, I would like to know what NE would
do with their priorities; what their priorities are in doing
this, not necessarily filtered through OMB. I know that is an
impossible task to ask you to do, but we need to know that. If
we were able to come up with the additional $50- to $100
million, where would the experts in nuclear energy like to see
that money put? And we will have these discussions as we go
along, I am sure, in developing this budget.
But as I said, I am somewhat disappointed in the overall
budget request, as was mentioned by you and by the chairman. NE
is down, what, 30 percent for the reactor concepts, R&D was
decreased by 36 percent. Much of that was out of NGNP. If you
ignore NGNP, the rest of the reactor concepts funding decreased
by 30 percent. There is a 3 percent decrease in SMR licensing
support, which bothers me in that, as I have said many times,
over the 14 years I have been here, we keep heading down
different paths, and I thought we had decided on SMRs as the
direction we were going to go. Now I am seeing a decrease in
SMR funding. Wouldn't it be better if we had a steady budget
for SMRs?
Dr. Lyons. As I indicated, Mr. Simpson, SMRs are a high
priority, and within the austere budget with which we worked,
we tried to protect it as much as we possibly could.
Mr. Simpson. Would that be one area you would put
additional money into? I am trying to get back to it. I won't
put you on that spot.
Let me ask you another question. Last year we included
report language that recommended that you compete 10 percent of
your budget between industry, universities and labs. I know you
have extensive programs working with industry, universities and
labs. Can you tell me how you approached the decision of where
to spend your money, and how does this impact your mission?
Dr. Lyons. Mr. Simpson, we try for each of our programs to
carefully evaluate which entity, university, lab, or industry,
would be the optimum provider. Frankly, I am quite proud of the
job we have done, and I think it is quite defensible. I have
asked our staff to pull together some numbers. For example, in
fiscal year 2011, out of our total of somewhat over $800
million, $170 million total went to industry, and the majority
of that was directly competed within industry.
If I look at fiscal year 2012, of course we are continuing
our large support for university programs on the order of 20
percent of our budget. We are looking at the SMR licensing
program, $67 million, which will be entirely industry. We just
recently announced a $10 million competition which was among
all three entities for advanced materials and advanced
manufacturing.
Just in general, sir, in each case as we look at a project,
we try to understand the best provider for that service, and in
general we will go directly to that entity and, in some cases,
we will compete among two or three of the different entities.
Mr. Simpson. Along that line, the Integrated University
Program at NE was not in the budget again this year. This is
kind of a recurring theme where you don't request it, yet, we
put it in. What is the status on that? Do you think this is a
valuable program, and was it just the budget numbers that
required that you drop that out?
Dr. Lyons. Mr. Simpson, I have testified in strong support
of this program many times in the past, especially when I was
at the NRC. I think my interest in this program has been well
demonstrated. The statement from the administration is that
they have confidence that the nuclear industry, as it expands,
will create incentives for students to enter nuclear-related
programs, and that was the basis for that being zeroed in the
administration's request.
Mr. Simpson. Last year I supported efforts in Congress to
increase funding for industry cost-shared programs to help
extend the life of the current fleet of reactors. I think we
need to keep the current fleet of reactors going. What are your
thoughts on this, and is that a valuable program?
Dr. Lyons. The Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program,
I believe, is an extremely valuable program in which we are
trying to understand what may be the lifetime limiting
components of the existing reactors, as well as understanding
what can be done in terms of improvements to safety at the same
time that we try to understand any potential lifetime limits.
That is a cost-shared program very closely coordinated with
EPRI. In my view, it is an extremely important program and
provides important information to certainly the industry, but
also the American public as they look towards potential
extensions, decisions that will be made eventually by the NRC--
well, first by utilities, whether they applied to the NRC, and
then by the NRC--as to whether they will enable license
extensions beyond the current 60 years that many plants now
enjoy.
I believe it is a very important program, and that is
another program where, again, in an austere budget, we tried to
keep that as high as possible. It did suffer a small decrease.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I will wait for the next round.
Mr. Womack [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
Let's go to Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much. I don't want to step on
the lead here.
So the first thing is that after 30 years, the country now
has begun the process of adding to our nuclear power plant
inventory through the great work of the Department and this
administration, and I want to commend you for that. I have been
a major proponent of the loan guarantee efforts, and I don't
know how we could say anything other than that after 30 years
of rhetoric, we now have gotten to the point where we are
actually proceeding again. Because as you point out, over 70
percent of the carbon-free energy produced is produced through
nuclear. And so I am very pleased with that.
I was at the Department of Energy Innovation Summit last
week with some 2,500 very excited people, because a lot is
going on. In fact, I think in today's paper there is a major
new development out, a company out of Newark, funded by the
Department, that has come up with a battery that can operate
for a very long time. So there is a lot to talk about.
I want to talk about the budget because there has been from
the majority indications that they want to invest more money,
and I am for that. That is why I think we ought to be doing it
as a country, but the budget as submitted from the
administration, as I understand it, is limited by the agreement
that was embodied in the debt limit increase bill. There was an
agreement about the level of the budget. And in today's Roll
Call, there is a headline that says that the majority actually
wants to go from that number to a lower number, in terms of
moving the GOP budget. So I am trying to figure out how we
invest more if, on the other hand, we are saying that the
budget has got to be less and less.
Moreover I saw that the European Energy Alliance is now,
because of some of the work of the Department of Energy,
getting a little concerned, and they want to invest in some of
these alternative energy technologies, and try to compete with
us. They have set a goal of 2030 to try to compete on a range
of these issues that the Department has been at the forefront.
I am a big supporter of your work, and I see that you have
appropriately budgeted for small modular units, and I think
that we need to continue to explore in that area what we can
do. But we can't spend money unless the Congress appropriates
the money. If the Congress in the debt limit reduction bill set
a limit, and the administration submitted a budget within the
construct of that, and at the same time the Congress is now
saying we want to go lower than that limit, it is hard to
imagine how we can do that and still at the same time argue
that we need to be investing more.
Now, I happen to be of the belief that we should make
significant investments in renewables. The largest wind farm is
in Honduras, I think it should be here in the United States. It
doesn't make sense to me. I also think there is work to be done
in geothermal, but clearly one of the major areas for us to
work on is in the nuclear energy. And I think that we all, as a
committee, are in agreement that we have to do something about
the spent fuel.
In the area of nuclear safety, I know the NRC has been
looking at this question of dry cask versus cooling pools. It
may not be the technical term, but it seems to me that, at
least awaiting whatever the eventual decisions are related to
Yucca Mountain, that maybe we need to be moving to at least
think about a requirement on dry cask.
Thank you for your testimony. I would be very interested in
you talking to us about where we can make some disruptive
investments in nuclear beyond what is on the table now; What
you think we ought to be considering as we think about the
world that we are going to be competing in. I mean, the AP1000
is great, and so is the small modular. But are there things
beyond these technologies that the committee ought to be
thinking about long term?
Mr. Womack. Mr. Fattah, you have been very successful in
taking all of your 5 minutes with that question. But----
Mr. Fattah. I have had some practice at this.
Mr. Womack. Since I gave my colleague to my left an extra
minute-and-a-half or so, I will give you the same.
Dr. Lyons. Well, thank you for your comments, sir. Some of
the areas that I have mentioned in my testimony or in some of
the previous responses would certainly show areas where I think
there is significant opportunity for significant advances. You
have mentioned the SMRs. I could not agree with you more.
I mentioned that one of the areas that I also focused on in
the fiscal year 2013 budget is the program on enhanced accident
tolerance for fuels for the existing fleet of reactors. That
will be quite a challenge, and it remains to be seen exactly
how much can be accomplished.
But there are some very, very good ideas within all three
communities, laboratory, university, and industry, that could,
over a period of time, lead to still further enhancements in
accident tolerance fuels. And I mentioned that we are
continuing very important work, generic, non-site-specific
work, in use field disposition. Those are all areas that are
important. I could certainly list more.
Mr. Fattah. No, if you could just comment on the dry cask
versus the spent.
Dr. Lyons. Well, let me only note there--a lot of that
responsibility falls with the NRC, but one of the areas that we
are trying to assist the country and the NRC is in a research
program to better understand what potential degradation
mechanisms might limit the long-term use of dry casks. This is
of interest to us. It is of interest to the NRC. We have
created a university-led consortium led by Texas A&M with a
number of other universities that have a specific charter in
this area and will be investing more research to try to better
understand what, if anything, limits the long-term use of dry
casks.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Chairman Jaczko, again, thank you to both
gentlemen for your service to our Nation in this area.
Mr. Chairman, on February 9th, the Commission voted to
approve construction of the Vogtle reactor. You voted against
approval of the license, saying that you couldn't support the
license without a binding agreement on the licensee and its
partners. Do you currently have such binding agreements with
other nuclear facilities across the country?
Mr. Jaczko. I am sorry, binding agreements to----
Mr. Womack. Binding agreements that would require the
operation of those reactors with the safety enhancements
recommended by the NRC after Fukushima.
Mr. Jaczko. Well, the Commission is in the process of
determining what specific commitments we would have applied to
any reactors in this country.
Mr. Womack. So the NRC has the authority to impose such
binding agreements on existing reactors?
Mr. Jaczko. Yes, we do.
Mr. Womack. Okay. Then here is where I see somewhat of a
conflict. You would seem to imply that this new reactor is
perhaps not safe enough to operate. Does it also mean that you
think the current fleet of reactors should be shut down until
the NRC's recommendations following Fukushima are implemented?
Mr. Jaczko. I would say that the license that was in front
of us was for a new reactor at the Vogtle site. At the same
time we were dealing with that, the Commission was very near to
making some decisions about the initial recommendations for
complying with the lessons learned from the Japan event.
I think a new licensee is very different from an old, or an
existing licensee, in terms of our expectations. In fact, the
Commission has a long-standing policy statement that for the
new generation of reactors--it is called our Advanced Reactor
Policy Statement--we have expectations that the new reactors
would effectively be inherently safer, look for inherently
safer approaches to dealing with different types of phenomenon.
It is partially one of the reasons for the interest in passive
reactor technology, which the AP1000 embodies.
So I think the AP1000, in my view, to provide some degree
of certainty about how these issues will be dealt with going
forward, needed a license condition essentially to commit them
to whatever comes out of our review of the Fukushima events.
I would say it is going to be very difficult for us in the
next probably year or so as the new reactor licensing work
continues, and at the same time, we have more and more
information coming out about--about what we do on Fukushima. It
is going to be very difficult if at each step with each reactor
we are having to come up with some kind of special--special
approach and special way to deal with it. In fact, right now
there is a potential for having a significant delay in
determinations about one reactor license because now there is
some interest on the part of the staff to actually require them
to address some Fukushima issues before we move forward with
the license.
So I don't think right now we have a consistent way to deal
with it. I think the approach that I laid out would have
actually provided a very consistent approach for dealing with
new reactors. It would have given a clear commitment with the
understanding in that before they operated, they would be in
compliance with the Fukushima lessons learned, but would have
done it in a generic way that would allow us to continue with
the Fukushima work and continue with the licensing work. I am a
little bit worried that as we go forward, that is going to be a
little more complicated without that kind of a condition.
Mr. Womack. All right. So let me ask that question again in
a little plainer English. Was it your opinion that the
operation of the existing fleet of nuclear reactors in the
country should have been shut down pending recommendations
post-Fukushima?
Mr. Jaczko. Right. We did not have sufficient information
that would suggest that reactors should be shut down. I think
the task force that we established made that recommendation.
None of the issues that we saw were of imminent safety concern.
They do continue to be low-probability events. So I would say
there was not sufficient information that would warrant taking
any action like shutting down any reactors.
Mr. Womack. What was your opinion, your personal opinion?
Mr. Jaczko. That was my personal opinion. I mean, it was
the opinion of the Commission, but it is one that I share.
Mr. Womack. How long would you have waited before approving
Vogtle?
Mr. Jaczko. I am sorry, I am not sure I understand the
question.
Mr. Womack. Well, if there is any kind of delay at all in
Vogtle, given the fact that there was construction, permanent
jobs that would have been deferred, things putting completion
at risk, ceding the nuclear industry to overseas companies that
are manufacturing this sort of thing, would you have had any
delay in Vogtle?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, no. Actually what I was proposing was a
license condition so that we didn't have to have any delay. It
was actually to prevent any delay, and to prevent, quite
frankly, I think, any questions about how Vogtle will actually
deal with Fukushima events.
I continue to believe that it was actually the commonsense
way to do this. You know, I think if we had information that,
you know, suggested that, you know, air bags would be a good
thing to have on cars, you know, at the time that people were
talking about that, we would expect new cars that are being
built on the assembly line to start putting air bags in those
cars. We wouldn't necessarily, you know, go forward blindly,
and say, well, we will put those in later. That doesn't mean
that we would take all of the cars that are on the road off the
road because they don't have air bags.
So I think it is much the same analogy, and, as I said, it
is very consistent with the Commission's own policy
expectations that newer reactors will be looking for enhanced
safety features, and, in fact, at least on paper, the new
reactor designs do demonstrate that their risk levels for the
kinds of things we measure are generally lower than what we see
with the current fleet. So I think that has always been the
Commission's expectations that we want to see designs that are
inherently more safe.
Mr. Womack. Okay. And finally, just a general comment, I
have got a couple of nuclear plants in my district, and from
time to time the subject comes up, particularly in the post-
Fukushima era. The question is are our nuclear reactors safe?
And I have, somewhat in a joking way, said--ours sits on Lake
Dardanelle on the Arkansas River, and realizing the gravity of
the tsunami with Fukushima, I have said to people, I am less
concerned about a tsunami on Lake Dardanelle as some
aggravating circumstance on a nuclear problem there. But
generally, if you were me, what do you say to your
constituency?
Mr. Jaczko. Yeah, I mean, I indicate to people that we have
a very robust oversight program. Right now the majority of
operating--well, I would say all of the operating reactors in
this country are deemed to be safe. We have one plant that is
in a more degraded condition, I would say, and as a result, we
have put in place a regulatory practice that we haven't used in
a long time, something we call Manual Chapter 0350. I know we
don't often speak well in English, but that says that we have
some current concerns about that plant restarting. It is
currently a plant that is shut down, so that plant we do have
some concerns with it operating until it makes a number of
improvements and enhancement.
But otherwise, for the other reactors that are out there,
they certainly are safe to operate, and they may have some
degree of issues and things that we need to address, and we are
working to address those with those plants. But with the
exception of that one, I would say yeah.
Mr. Womack. Thank you.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lyons, I think you are quite correct that this is an
austere budget. I think that, under the circumstances, you have
probably done as well as you could have done.
I have a number of questions. I hope that they will be
possible to answer them, if I phrase them correctly. Shortly,
you know, because we have very short periods of time to ask our
questions.
The Vogtle plants, the two units that have been approved,
what is their rated capacity?
Dr. Lyons. About 1,100 watts each--I am sorry, 1,100
megawatts each.
Mr. Olver. Eleven hundred megawatts each.
Mr. Jaczko. That would be expensive.
Dr. Lyons. Greg may know the precise number.
Mr. Olver. Is that the basic upper limit of what we are
doing, the 100 or so--do we have any that are larger than that?
Do we have anything of nuclear power that is as large as 1,500
megawatts, or is that 1,100 roughly the largest?
Dr. Lyons. The operating plants in this country, I am not
positive, sir. I think there are a couple that are somewhat
larger. Certainly, in new plant designs, they go substantially
above 1,100, but they are not passively safe plants.
Mr. Olver. Okay. All right. Did you say in your testimony
that you are expecting approval for another couple of plants of
similar size? Is that in the summer or somewhere later this
year?
Dr. Lyons. Of course, that is an NRC issue. There has been
at least discussion that they are moving ahead on the Summer
plant, but I don't know the exact schedule.
Mr. Olver. So you think that there are a couple that might
come to licensure later in the year of a similar size?
Dr. Lyons. Well, that is my understanding, but that would
be an NRC decision.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Yeah, well, whatever decision they will
make, I don't wish to enter into their procedures there.
What is the rated size of the Westinghouse AP1000?
Dr. Lyons. I am sorry, the AP1000----
Mr. Olver. The Westinghouse AP1000, what is the rated power
of the----
Dr. Lyons. It is right around 1,100 sir, also.
Mr. Olver. It is also----
Dr. Lyons. I thought that is the question you asked before.
The AP1000 is about 1,100.
Mr. Olver. Well, is it an AP1000 that is going to be used
in the Vogtle plants?
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Olver. Oh, it is. Has it been used before, or is this
the first time--that design has been approved?
Dr. Lyons. It is not operating anywhere in the world today;
however, there are in China----
Mr. Olver. It is that design that is going to be used.
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir, four in this country, four in China
that are at least 2 years ahead in construction that should be
operating in 2014 in China.
Mr. Olver. Okay. I was wondering whether this was sort of a
generic design that was variable so that you could do it at 600
megawatts or 1,100 megawatts or something by a simple--a simple
translation.
Dr. Lyons. The original Westinghouse design was the AP600,
and it was about 600. That was a passively safe unit.
Mr. Olver. That was a pure guess. That was straight off the
top of the head.
Dr. Lyons. It was a good guess. The AP1000 is currently
certified.
Mr. Olver. So if they wanted to do a 600, would they have
to have that separately certified?
Dr. Lyons. Oh, yes.
Mr. Olver. Okay. So we now have this design that we can use
for 1,100 megawatts.
Dr. Lyons. Certainly the focus----
Mr. Olver. It is a new design. It has been approved, and it
is about to go into construction in Georgia.
Dr. Lyons. The key point I would make, sir, is that the
AP1000 is a certified design. The AP600 was also certified, I
believe, in the 1990s, but never built.
Mr. Olver. Never built. Okay. It still is certified if they
wanted to build it.
Dr. Lyons. Except that there have been additional
requirements added since it was certified. If someone wanted to
build an AP600, they would certainly have to change that design
in order to meet the current guidelines of the NRC. But I am
really----
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Mr. Jaczko. You are doing a good job.
Mr. Olver. I am asking simple questions that you could
almost answer like yes or no, I think. I am trying to get some
others in here.
You seem to be the father of the SMR program. What is the
range of sizes that you consider to be small SMRs?
Dr. Lyons. We have generally suggested that it be below 300
megawatts, but I think that the most important statement is
that it be suitable for factory construction and available to
transport essentially assembled to a site. The key point is
take advantage of factory, quantity, hopefully high-quality,
construction as opposed to job-built on the site.
Mr. Olver. Could you actually do a 300-megawatt plant in
factory and move it in pieces? How would you move it?
Dr. Lyons. The designs that have been proposed, and there
is quite a number of proposed designs, I believe the largest
one is the Westinghouse. It is slightly over 200 megawatts. The
smallest ones are very small.
Mr. Olver. So we are still in the process of coming up with
the actual designs that will fit into this under 300 megawatts.
Dr. Lyons. Yes.
Mr. Olver. If you had a 300-megawatt plant, what would be
roughly the size of the metropolitan area, or labor market area
or what, where you would be able to provide the power necessary
for its population for residential, commercial, and the
industrial, average kind of usages?
Dr. Lyons. If I am recalling the conversions correctly, it
would be between 200,000, and 300,000 people at 300 megawatts.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Okay.
Dr. Lyons. If that is a vital number, I would like to give
it to you for the record, but I think that is close.
Mr. Olver. Well, no, I am looking for relativities. If I
calculate that, your two plants in Georgia would take care of
almost any 1 of the 50--well, at least those that are roughly a
million population and something, but those are not small
plants. You are talking about really dispersing.
In your goals, is there a specific number of plants? I have
heard numbers like 100 plants to be dispersed in various
places. Do you have a goal for how many of these SMRs you might
want to see in place in a 10-year period?
Dr. Lyons. I view my goal for the moment as getting it
through design certification. I would hope then that there
would be enough interest in industry, perhaps within the
government, to encourage enough construction that utilities
would be interested in ordering enough units that it becomes
cost-effective to use the factory fabrication. You can easily
imagine that for the first unit or two; it makes no sense to
build a factory to build one or two units.
The benefits of the SMRs will come first when they go
through design certification, which is up to the NRC; second,
when they begin to be deployed; and hopefully in enough
quantity that the factory construction benefits can be
demonstrated.
Mr. Olver. Our whole industrial revolution started to grow
when we finally figured out how to make universally replaceable
parts. And so the concept here is to build factories that are
going to build the whole nuclear plant and sort of plop down
wherever you want it, and build a lot of them.
I will come back.
Mr. Womack. All right. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. You can use both microphones, if you want to be
heard in stereo.
Mr. Nunnelee. Mr. Chairman, first of all, I want to commend
the Commission for bringing to completion the Vogtle
application. But I also have interest in my State. I understand
there was a recently submitted application for Grand Gulf.
But I am more interested in the process. It is my
understanding that in the testimony you gave before the Senate
and follow-up press interviews you were quoted as saying that
limited staffing at the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission may delay the agency in renewing licenses for
existing nuclear power plants, and another quote says there are
resource limitations.
So I guess, to start with, does this 2013 budget request
include adequate resources for you to continue to review
license renewals as well as new construction?
Mr. Jaczko. Yes, did you say limited or appropriate?
Mr. Nunnelee. No. Does this allow you the resources to
review the license renewals as well as new construction and
operating licenses?
Mr. Jaczko. Yes.
Mr. Nunnelee. You can get the job done?
Mr. Jaczko. Yes.
Mr. Nunnelee. It is my understanding that your published
milestone goal is 22 to 30 months. But it looks to me like
recent applications, Vermont, Yankee and Pilgrim, are taking
longer than 5 years. So what is the time line?
Mr. Jaczko. In general, the 22 to 37 months--the 22 is for
applications that do not have one of our formal hearings for
license renewal; and in general, for those sites, we do really
meet the 22. Where it has been more difficult is those sites
that have a formal hearings attached to them; and that would be
in particular the Pilgrim site, Vermont Yankee, Indian Point.
We may potentially have some additional ones as well, a site,
Diablo Canyon in California. Those are all in the more formal
hearing process, and we have not done as well meeting our
timelines there. But sometimes that is just the nature of the
process. As issues arise, they need to be vetted appropriately
through the hearing and get resolved.
So for those outside the hearing, we generally meet the
timelines. When they are in the hearing, we are, in some cases,
taking a little bit longer. But, in the end, we have to do what
we need to do to get the right safety answer.
Mr. Nunnelee. So the ones where you have to have a hearing,
what is the expected timeline?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, you know, again, the expected timeline is
about 3 years. So for some of them it is taking longer than
that. But, as I said, in the end, the timeline gets established
by the issues that are introduced that make it through our kind
of acceptability review for the hearing. It depends not on the
need to do additional technical analysis. It is just a variety
of factors that could go into it.
It is a little bit harder in that case to predict, but we
do require the licensing boards that oversee these hearings to
report periodically to the Commission. They have milestones. If
they don't meet those milestones, they report to us. So the
Commission itself can intervene, if necessary, to move a
proceeding along.
Mr. Nunnelee. Now, moving back to previous items of
discussion, the SMRs. Just in general, how many applications do
you anticipate receiving over the next couple of years, Dr.
Lyons?
Dr. Lyons. Well, our focus at the moment is on a licensing
demonstration program. We intend to have the funding
opportunity announcement issued this month. I can't tell you
how many companies will apply for that. We have indicated an
interest in funding up to two and taking this in a cost-shared
way through design certification. But, of course, until the
procurement is out, I can't tell you how many applications
there will be. I would not be the least bit surprised if it is
greater than five, but that is a guess. I don't know.
Mr. Nunnelee. Does your budget request include adequate
resources to allow you to process those two to as many as five?
Dr. Lyons. It certainly provides adequate resources for us
to evaluate the responses to the procurement and to move ahead
with the cost-shared program. But, as I indicated earlier, we
are looking at a nominally 5-year, $450 million program for up
to two units--for up to two designs.
Mr. Nunnelee. I understand you released draft guidelines in
January. When do you expect the final guidelines?
Dr. Lyons. Within this month. The goal is March 26th, sir.
The comments were received on February 17th. We are analyzing
those comments as we speak.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. What is the timeline on the two
applications that you expect to receive?
Dr. Lyons. We will allow 60 days for responses; and, after
that, we will then take as long as it takes. Hopefully, we can
do it in a few months. Our goal is to identify the top one or
two candidates and proceed with awards this fiscal year. That
is our target.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right, let me just kind of wrap up my
time period. Just give me your general view of these small
modular reactors and their role in American energy production.
Dr. Lyons. I think at this time small modular reactors will
offer a new way in which utilities can consider the use of
nuclear power. The very large units, the megawatt class,
requires a large transmission grid and they are very--they are
multibillion dollar investments. That is outside the range of
at least some fraction of our utilities.
We anticipate that there will be interest in the smaller
units from smaller utilities, perhaps utilities that wish to
start small and then add modules as their demand increases. As
one goes in general smaller on a reactor, you can find very
innovative ways of making them very passively safe; and we
anticipate that there will be improvements in the passive
safety, even above existing designs.
So these will be some of the advantages, sir.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Could you explain to me why there has been such
delay? I think it has been at least 2\1/2\ years in the works
where this subcommittee initially funded the small modular
reactors, and I understand maybe this summer you might even do
the grant application?
Dr. Lyons. Well, sir, unfortunately, we have been operating
under Continuing Resolutions for quite a period of time.
Mr. Pastor. Okay.
Dr. Lyons. And the small modular reactors were considered
new start. We are not allowed to initiate a new start unless
there is a special exception made by the Appropriations
Committees. That exception was not granted. So we had to wait
until the fiscal year 2012 appropriation was passed just prior
to Christmas. It was a wonderful Christmas present for me, sir.
Mr. Pastor. Good. Merry Christmas.
Dr. Lyons. That enabled us to start, and we began in
January.
Mr. Pastor. So then you expect that sometime this summer
the request for application will be going out?
Dr. Lyons. I expect sometime this summer that we can
announce up to two winning proposals to move ahead into a 5-
year program, with a goal of design certification through the
NRC. They will not be ready to file instantly with the NRC, but
the exact timing when any one of them will file will be
dependent on that particular company and where they stand in
their design.
Mr. Pastor. As you look to the design phase, what do you
think would be--the ideal time it would take so that we could
start the NRC process? You must anticipate a timeline.
Dr. Lyons. Several of the companies have said they will be
ready--have stated publicly that they will be ready to file
with the NRC in late 2013. At least that is the date several
companies have stated publicly.
Mr. Pastor. So let me ask the chairman, late 2013, what
plans have you made in terms of moving this along, since you
have great support from the subcommittee and I guess overall
great enthusiasm that this is somewhere we want to go?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, I think we have been well-prepared. We
have appreciated the appropriations we have gotten to prepare
for these submittals.
We have had a number of meetings with the potential
applicants, and we believe right now that there are three--
basically, three companies that have expressed interest. I
think that may change depending on what happens with Secretary
Lyons' program.
We are in good position. In fact, in our 2012 budget
submittal we had anticipated receiving applications in fiscal
year 2012. That, obviously, is not going to happen. So we are
preparing. In part of our submittal in fiscal year 2013 we do
have budget resources to review applications or to do pre-
application activities, depending on the stage of the
applications.
So I think we are in pretty good shape. We are identifying
a number of policy issues that may need resolution in order to
help facilitate those design reviews. We are working through
those policy issues. And so I think right now, if anything, we
are waiting on the applicants to be ready. But we are in pretty
good shape.
Mr. Pastor. Going back to the Hub, since the start of the
Hub you have done the virtual nuclear reactor and you have
gotten input from the industry, how have you accommodated
things that have occurred like Japan and probably other nuclear
reactors that have leaks or had problems? What do you do in
taking those examples--or do you--and making sure that this
virtual reactor is progressing forward and the best use for it
is being done?
Dr. Lyons. Well, the Hub does have established goals. As we
get the reports to you, those will certainly spell out the
goals and their progress towards them.
Mr. Pastor. What do you think the timeline will be for the
report?
Dr. Lyons. I believe several reports have already been
written, and we will make sure that you get them, sir. I think
it can be done within a month, because I believe the reports
exist.
Mr. Pastor. Well, good.
Dr. Lyons. But if you ask how the Hub was used for
Fukushima, in general, that was not the focus that we have
pushed.
Mr. Pastor. No, the question is, what happened in Japan,
have you been able to take what has happened to that reactor
and do data in the Hub to say this is how we could improve it
or this is what we need to do as we continue to work on the
Hub?
Dr. Lyons. Not through the Hub, sir, for some specific
reasons. The reactor design in Japan is a different design
substantially than the one being done through the Hub.
However, our program, through an MOU with the NRC, we have
agreed that we are working together to utilize the best
capabilities within the national laboratory for severe accident
modeling to model the accident at Fukushima, first from the
standpoint of understanding if our severe accident management
codes need improvement, but second from the standpoint of
better understanding if there are lessons that in turn apply
back to U.S. plants.
And the appropriate division here--because we need to stay
out of the regulatory area. We can work to improve the codes
and work together with the NRC to ensure that the codes are
well modeling Fukushima. But then how those codes might be used
for a regulatory decision crosses this boundary, and that is
the NRC's job.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. I am shocked, Secretary Lyons, that you would
tell us that operating on a CR has implications for agencies
out there. Something I have been trying to tell my colleagues
for quite some time.
I am very concerned about the proposed budget cuts to the
advanced reactor program and for a number of reasons. One is a
practical reason. The other one is, as you recall, last year,
the Senate marked up a bill that had significantly cut these
programs; and through some hard work of the staff here on this
committee and others we convinced the Senate to come along with
us. I am concerned that if we start at a number that is
suggested in this, it will be much harder to negotiate with the
Senate and get a number that is acceptable.
Could you please share with me the value you see in
completing the NPNG fuel development program?
Dr. Lyons. There are some very important experiments
underway in the NPNG world. The ongoing experiments involve
fuel characterization experiments that are actually resident
within the advanced test reactor in Idaho as we speak as well
as experiments on better understanding the properties of
graphite under irradiation, and those are also in the ATR.
Those are certainly important experiments from the
standpoint of understanding a type of fuel called TRISO fuel,
which is an extremely robust type of fuel that might be of
great interest in gas reactors. However, we are also at least
wanting to explore the possibility that that type of fuel might
have applicability well outside high-temperature, gas-cooled
reactors. We want to look at it for other types of high-
temperature cooling systems. And we anticipate that that type
of fuel will also be at least evaluated for--I mentioned
enhanced-accident-tolerant fuels. We anticipate that the TRISO
type fuel should be at least evaluated for that type of
application. There are several technical reasons why that would
be challenging, but it is not impossible, and the TRISO fuel is
an extremely robust type of fuel, very, very high melting
points.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Chairman Jaczko, it may come as a shock and a surprise, I
am not going to ask about Yucca Mountain.
The V.C. Summer plant license application has been before
the NRC since 2008. Ever going to make a decision? Ever going
to bring it up for a vote?
Mr. Jaczko. We are very close to that, yes.
Mr. Simpson. It is very, very, very similar to the Vogtle
plant design.
Mr. Jaczko. The design itself is, at a generic level, the
same design. It is an AP1000 design. There are some site-
specific issues that are a little bit different, but it is one
that is very close to resolution.
Mr. Simpson. Any idea when? I mean, are we waiting for a
new commissioner or are we actually going to bring it up for a
vote?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, bring up for a vote is probably not an
appropriate--that is not really the way we work. But it is very
close----
Mr. Simpson. I know.
Mr. Jaczko. And, believe me, I would love to change that.
It is very close. Generally, the first public statements,
it would be about a week's formal notice, but I think we are
very close. Beyond that I wouldn't say, but I don't think--it
is certainly not months timeframe.
Mr. Simpson. I have one more comment and maybe a question.
The only thing the NRC has going for it is credibility. Under
your leadership, that credibility has been diminished. What you
are doing to try to address that issue? I noticed you mentioned
that it is one of the 10 best places to work in the Federal
Government, according to some poll or something like that.
Mr. Jaczko. One of the two.
Mr. Simpson. In spite of that, the relationship between you
and the other commissioners has been damaging to the reputation
of the NRC and, therefore, the credibility of the NRC. What are
you going to do to try to address that? Because once you have
lost that credibility, you are done.
Mr. Jaczko. Well, I think as an agency, certainly we still
have very good credibility. You know, I think if there was ever
a time in which that credibility was tested, it has been after
Fukushima; and I think there have been a number of difficult
questions that we as an agency have had to answer.
Mr. Chairman, Congressman Womack, as you asked--how do we
answer the question of people who say our plant is still safe?
I think we have been able to answer those questions, and answer
them to the satisfaction of most people. We are not always
going to make everyone happy.
Mr. Simpson. But the only way that the public is going to
believe that is if you maintain credibility. If they believe it
is just a political organization and becoming more politicized
all the time, then you damage that credibility. And it doesn't
matter what you say, whether they are safe or not, because
nobody is going to believe you.
When I hear reports that you believe you are more concerned
about safety than the other commissioners are concerned about
safety when you vote differently on the Vogtle plant--and I am
not criticizing that vote. I assume you voted the way you felt.
But when we start to challenge commissioners about who is the
most safety conscious, I think that damages the NRC.
Mr. Jaczko. Well, I certainly appreciate those comments;
and I will keep them in mind as I go forward.
And, you know, I certainly have been very candid about my
views on a lot of different issues. I never shied away from
it--I think that is an important part of credibility.
I actually think, to be honest, that the fact that there
were disagreements over Vogtle is a positive sign for the
agency, because it demonstrates to people in the public that we
do talk about these issues. We do think about them. We do
sometimes disagree and, in the end, we move forward.
And I think that is the hallmark of what we are as an
organization. We don't shy away from disagreements. We do not
shy away from disputes. We don't shy away from making those
public. And that, I think, is what people need to see in a
safety regulator, and I think that is what they see at the NRC.
I appreciate your comments, and they are things I will
definitely keep in mind.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go back to the SMRs. I am wondering here a little
bit about whether the two of you are allowed to talk to each
other on these issues because of the regulatory difference. Is
there a heart-to-brain barrier?
Dr. Lyons. No, in fact, sir, there are many joint programs
that are worked very successfully between the two
organizations. And, frankly, since I spent 5 years sitting
there----
Mr. Olver. You are going to come back with a long answer. I
just wanted to make that comment.
You implied that you have a law which says the most
demonstrations for designs under this RFP, you are still in the
comment stage about it, I think--that the most you can do is
two, up to two. You can do one or two, apparently. Is that
correct? You are limited to doing two?
Dr. Lyons. That is what we said in our budget submittal,
sir.
Mr. Olver. Isn't this off of last year's appropriation? The
demonstration? The RFP?
Dr. Lyons. The RFP will use fiscal year 2012 moneys, of
which there is $67 million in fiscal year 2012.
Mr. Olver. Right. Okay. So you already have the money.
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Olver. Okay. So does that limit you to no more than
two? That $67 million?
Dr. Lyons. In our budget discussions, in our so-called CJs,
congressional justifications that come over here on the budget,
we have used the phrase ``up to two,'' and we have also used
the phrase I think it is $452 million over 5 years.
Mr. Olver. That goes far beyond your putting out an RFP to
get some designs so that you can go to a demonstration on SMRs.
My next question was, you had mentioned that someone had
come in earlier with a sort of a proposed design in the 200
megawatt range. That you think that 300 is the upper limit. Do
you have any limit on the wattage that they must fall within to
be eligible under the proposed RFP?
Dr. Lyons. 300 megawatts, sir.
Mr. Olver. Upper limit, but is there a lower limit?
Dr. Lyons. No, sir. But there are many other factors such
as a business plan, such as showing how this will benefit U.S.
manufacturing, the U.S. taxpayer. There are many criteria as
part of this procurement.
Mr. Olver. But there has to be an economy of scale sort of
issue that, if you go even lower, somewhere along there it
becomes ever more costly at the capital level to come up with a
plan--for the amount of power that it is going to be able to
provide.
Dr. Lyons. Absolutely. And that is why their business plan
is a key factor in determining who will eventually rise to the
top of this competition.
Mr. Olver. So they will come up with it, and you will judge
whether their business plan has any capacity to be functional
or not in the process?
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Olver. But you would want them to be somewhere--you
don't want proposals for 5, 10, 20 megawatts, do you?
Dr. Lyons. Well, if it is a simple module that can be
replicated in large quantities, it is not ruled out, sir. The
key will be how the business plan shows that it benefits the
U.S. taxpayer and how executable the business plan is. As you
point out, as you go down in power levels, it will become
increasingly challenging to come up with that business plan.
Mr. Olver. But you are still are trying to stay within--
when you are talking about manufacturing in a single
manufacturing facility--we are talking about the reactor
itself. There is going to be lots of construction at the site
of other sorts, but if you are talking about the reactor and
limiting size on that, that is likely to be--somewhere in the
300-megawatt, you think that is probably the limit of single
factory replication?
Dr. Lyons. Of the designs that have been discussed
publicly, the ones that I am thinking of at the moment, the
smallest is 25 megawatts and the largest is, I believe, the
Westinghouse, and I think it is around 210 or 220 megawatts.
There is a 45. There is a 110. There is a range.
Mr. Olver. Well, if you get 10 of such designs, do you have
the money--if this is a demonstration and you had what you
think are good business plans, wouldn't you want to have
several demonstrations? You get maybe only one chance for this.
Or do you have some money in for continuing demonstration in
fiscal 2013.
Dr. Lyons. Our program is a licensing demonstration to take
it through design certification. It does not construct the
unit.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Such complications.
I get the impression that you are trying to demystify the
nuclear power processes in getting them spread out, rather than
in huge places where you have two, three, four units that end
up obviously being targets for public controversy.
Dr. Lyons. I would say more that we are trying to offer
additional options for utilities that could allow them to use
nuclear power if that fits their overall interests.
Of overriding importance to me is that I think this is an
opportunity to restart a U.S. industry, and to me, one of the
most exciting aspects of the SMRs is that they can be truly
built in America, completely built in America and literally
trucked or by rail to the site. And, hopefully, that will be
sites not only in the U.S. Hopefully, there can be an export
market. But first in the U.S. would be our hope. But I see it
as a new way of enabling leadership in a key area of nuclear
power and enabling a new U.S. industry.
Mr. Olver. Fine. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Womack, I want to thank you for chairing the committee
in my absence. I apologize to the witnesses as well for my
absence.
Mr. Womack. My honor, Mr. Chairman. I feel like the pitcher
that just got the hook, so I am happy with going back to the
bullpen.
I want to go back to TRISO for just a moment. My colleague
from Idaho mentioned the next generation nuclear plant program,
and you started talking about TRISO. I am a little fascinated
with that fuel. So when could this TRISO be deployed in
existing reactors? And what kind of barriers are there to that?
Dr. Lyons. This is not anytime soon. If one were to use
TRISO type fuel, at least our current thinking is you probably
would have to go to higher enrichments that would lead to some
significant regulatory questions. This fuel has not been--to
the best of my knowledge has not been--that is not quite true.
It has been in test reactors. It is certainly is not close to
being in a commercial reactor.
I don't want to overstate the potential for TRISO, sir. I
was only emphasizing that as an exceedingly robust type of fuel
it is and that it is at least one of the types of designs that
we should evaluate for increased accident-tolerant fuels.
Mr. Womack. Does the budget fully support the TRISO fuel
activities?
Dr. Lyons. That is certainly an area where--the whole NGNP
program was an area which was part of our prioritization.
Difficult decisions. As Mr. Simpson noted, that is down to
about $20 million in fiscal year 2013.
Mr. Womack. So I take that as a no.
The Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program has focused
on significant steps in accident tolerant fuel and other post-
Fukushima work. The advanced fuel program similarly plays a key
role in the Department's Accident Tolerant Fuels Initiative.
Can you describe the safety focused activities in these two
programs? Any shifts in those activities in this year's
request?
Dr. Lyons. In the Light Water Reactor Sustainability
Program there has been some effort in accident tolerant fuels.
That is done jointly with our fuel cycle R&D program.
In addition, the modeling and simulation that I mentioned
in which we are testing our severe accident management codes in
cooperation with the NRC, that is also being done through the
Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program. Those would be a
couple of examples.
Mr. Womack. So, given the focus on fuel safety, then why
does the budget request cut both of the programs?
Dr. Lyons. I can only----
Mr. Womack. Advanced fuels by nearly a third.
Dr. Lyons. I can only repeat again that we are dealing with
an austere budget, and we made difficult prioritization
decisions.
Mr. Womack. Are there any other major activities that you
can focus on here in the limited time that I have left that
focus on making these reactors safer?
Dr. Lyons. There are a number of different areas that we
have explored post-Fukushima in addition to the accident
tolerant fuels. There has been a program, also joint, with the
NRC and with EPRI to look at better seismic models. There has
been increased emphasis within the university community on
safety related issues. Those would at least be some of the
examples that we are pursuing in this area.
Mr. Womack. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. When the administration decided to shut down
Yucca Mountain, I believe that this subcommittee, knowing that
there was great expertise and personnel and manpower,
knowledge, that we appropriated money so that hopefully many of
the people involved in that licensing process were kept. And I
don't know, but there was going to be movement from the
civilian radioactive waste management component to various
offices in DOE just to maintain and keep some of that
knowledge.
Now, it is my understanding that sometime this summer, the
D.C. District Court is going to make a decision on the
appropriateness of shutting down Yucca Mountain. If the court
decides that the administration did not have that authority and
the licensing application needs to continue, Dr. Lyons, how
soon would you start the process for the licensing of Yucca
Mountain?
Dr. Lyons. First, let me note that that court decision
doesn't involve the Department of Energy. That involves the
NRC. If the NRC were to restart, then presumably there would be
requests for information coming into the Department of Energy
and we would----
Mr. Pastor. Okay. I will get back to you.
And let me ask you. I know in the past we have had
carryover funds. If the court decides to say that the licensing
procedure should continue because of lack of authority to do
it, how soon are you going to start the licensing procedure?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, I am very reluctant to speculate on any
decision the court might make. Of course, whatever decision the
court issues we would evaluate and take whatever action we
could. We have not received any appropriations in the last few
years for Yucca Mountain.
Mr. Pastor. But you had some carryover money.
Mr. Jaczko. We had some carryover money. So, in any case,
we would take whatever decision, and we would evaluate it. It
is hard for me to speculate right now on what that would mean.
Sometimes this can become a question of skill set and expertise
rather than financial resources. So it is just hard to
speculate right now.
And I think, as I recall, I believe oral arguments are to
take place I believe in May on that court decision. So it is
unclear, of course, when a court might issue a decision. It may
not be until the fall, or beyond that. So, it is just hard to
speculate right now on where we would be at the time that a
decision would come down.
Mr. Pastor. If the circuit court says that you did have the
authority to shut down Yucca Mountain--we have been collecting
fees to fund the Nuclear Waste Fund. I think we have about $28
billion in that fund, somewhere around that, more or less. If
the court says that the administration did have the authority
to shut down Yucca Mountain, how soon will you notify the
people who are putting in this fund that the collection of
these fees will no longer be needed?
Mr. Jaczko. On that one, I would pass back to----
Mr. Pastor. Good, they do talk to each other.
Mr. Jaczko. We don't have the fees. They have the fees.
Dr. Lyons. The Secretary of Energy is responsible for
setting that fee and for reevaluating it on an annual basis.
In the past, we have been asked frequently if the fee
should continue in light of the current situation regarding
Yucca. The very strong answer has been yes, because the
administration and the Department continues its responsibility
for used fuel management. That doesn't go away. And, for that
reason, the view has been that, yes, the fees should continue.
Mr. Pastor. But I thought that the initial fees to be
collected, and were collected, were for Yucca Mountain.
Dr. Lyons. No, sir. They are for management of used fuel.
Mr. Pastor. Would you have some consideration to say that
possibly now, because Yucca Mountain is shuttered and you have
the authority to do it, that you would not collect the fee
anymore? Is that a possibility?
Dr. Lyons. Do we have the authority?
Mr. Pastor. No, would that be a possibility that you would
say, since--because the fees are----
Dr. Lyons. That question has been evaluated many times
within the Department over the last few years and the continued
statement, which I have made testifying here and the Secretary
has made many places, is that it remains necessary to continue
to collect the fee because the Department maintains the
responsibility for the management of used fuel.
Mr. Pastor. How do you think the Department will eventually
decide? I know that you have taken the blue ribbon
recommendations. You now have a committee internally. I don't
know how transparent it is going to be. So when do you propose
or when do you think you are going to have some
recommendations? How you are going to accomplish this
responsibility?
Dr. Lyons. In the fiscal year 2012 appropriations language
we were asked to develop a strategy, and the request was that
we provide it to Congress 6 months after the delivery of the
report. So that at least our target, based on that, would be a
July 26th discussion of a strategy.
Mr. Pastor. Of this year?
Dr. Lyons. Of this year. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Pastor. Sure.
Mr. Simpson. Let me ask you, if the fees are for the
Department taking management of used fuel, and part of that is
finding a permanent repository, et cetera, et cetera, all of
that kind of stuff, and we are currently paying utilities to
store fuel on site; right?
Dr. Lyons. We are indirectly, sir. We are not paying
utilities directly. Utilities file suit against the Department
of Energy. I should say if they win--they certainly have been
winning lately--those funds then come from the judgment fund.
Mr. Simpson. From the judgment fund, not the Nuclear Waste
Fund?
Dr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. So we have collected money for the Department
to take control of spent nuclear fuel, and we are effectively
doing that by not doing it and having the utilities sue us so
that we pay it out of the judgment fund.
And I noticed that--I saw an article the other day about
the amount of money that is being paid out of the judgment fund
for various things. The Department of Energy was far and away
the greatest amount being paid out of the judgment fund.
But are we avoiding our responsibilities by not paying it
out of the waste fund rather than out of the judgment fund? We
are just shifting responsibility. Because we were supposed to
take control of this stuff in '98?
Dr. Lyons. That was the date in the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act, which also very narrowly prescribes the utilization of the
Nuclear Waste Fund. And at least the judgment has been that--
the judgments on these various suits--should be paid from the
judgment fund. I am sorry. So, effectively, I think Congress
would have to change language in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act
in order to address that question.
Mr. Simpson. And then we could have them take it out of the
NRC because they failed to do the licensing.
I am just kidding.
Mr. Jaczko. As long as we receive appropriate
appropriations for that.
Dr. Lyons. This question has certainly been evaluated in
the courts, and the decision was that we could not use the
Nuclear Waste Fund.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You can reclaim your time, Mr. Pastor.
Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Pastor. What is the probability that August 1st of this
year you will have the report that you are required to give to
the Congress?
Dr. Lyons. Again, a congressional request was for July
26th. That is our target, and we are working towards that date.
Mr. Pastor. What is the probability that you are going to
have it?
Dr. Lyons. Sir, this will be a decision involving the
Department and many agencies in the administration. I can't
give you a probability, sir. It is our target. That is the best
I can do. And there are certainly strong activities going on
throughout the administration working towards that date.
Mr. Pastor. I would hope that you go back to the Department
and say that it would be very embarrassing if next year at this
time we were asking the Department for the report that they
committed to do August of 2012. And so I would appreciate that
you encourage them to do it as quickly--well, to do it by the
date, number one. And if they can't get it done, to please do
it before March, 2013.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Nunnelee, thanks for your patience.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Jaczko, at the end of last year, all four of your
fellow commissioners contacted the chief of staff of the
President of the United States and said they believe your
actions and behavior have caused serious damage to the
institution and created a chilled work environment and that has
compromised the Nuclear Regulatory's mission to protect the
health and safety of the American people.
When your job performance rises to the level that somebody
contacts the President of the United States, that is pretty
serious. I want to know what has changed since New Years in the
internal workings of your organization to address this concern?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, I have had a number of meetings with my
colleagues and talked to them about these concerns. I have had
a number of meetings with the staff to talk to them about
anything that I may have done that somebody viewed as
inappropriate or as creating a challenge. And so I have worked
to address any misperceptions or miscommunications that have
been made.
I would note, though, that I think if you look at the
performance of the agency, the performance of the agency
continues to be at a very high level. It has been at a very
high level since the time that I became chairman, and I think
it continues to be at a very high level.
And so I think there will always be disagreements among
commissioners, and I think certainly I have heard some things
from my colleagues areas that they had of concern, and so I
have worked to improve communication in a way that addresses
those.
But I think, bottom line, the agency continues to be
focused on its mission. The surveys we have conducted
demonstrate that. As I talk to people in the hallways the sense
I get from people is they are committed and dedicated to doing
what we need to do for the American people.
Mr. Nunnelee. So is the work environment any different in
March of 2012 than it was in December, 2011, when these four
commissioners contacted the President of the United States?
Mr. Jaczko. Again, you know, that is probably a better
question to ask the others. Every day I come to work I work to
do the job with integrity and diligence, and that has not
changed. I did that in December. I did that in November. I have
done that throughout the time I have been chairman. So I
haven't changed in that regard in my continued focus on doing
my job and doing it as well as I can and every day to try to do
it a little bit better than I did the day before.
Mr. Nunnelee. Just this week, apparently, there has been a
public disagreement as to whether we have made progress
implementing the post-Fukushima reforms. Your comments in the
Wall Street Journal says we are behind. Another commissioner
says, no, we are ahead of schedule. When I get mixed messages
like that, how am I, as a policymaker, supposed to address a
very important issue of safety in nuclear power plants in the
United States?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, Congressman, I can't guarantee you
unanimity on the Commission; and I think that is a false
expectation. I think if anything I worry about, I worry about
statements or questions like this that could be interpreted to
mean that it is not okay for the commissioners to disagree; and
I think that is a very important tenet of our Commission, that
we are able to address publicly disagreements, different views.
That is the nature and the reason that we have a Commission. So
I do not consider that in any way, shape, or form to be a bad
thing.
What we do is we try and formulate positions. When we have
firm Commission positions, I articulate those as the chief
spokesperson for the agency. But in the process of developing
those, there are disagreements. And I can't make everyone agree
with me, nor do I want to. And I can't keep them from talking
to the press, nor do I want to. So I don't consider that to be
a bad thing at all, and I don't consider that to be reflective
of a bad environment. I consider that to be reflective of a
very good, positive environment.
Mr. Nunnelee. I understand. I am a Member of the House of
Representatives. I understand disagreement goes with the
territory.
I do think that bullying and intimidation, withholding
information from Commission members is a bad thing. And I want
to make sure that the Commission members and the staff people
have the resources they need and are working in the environment
they need to work in to make proper decisions.
Mr. Jaczko. Well, I would just say, Congressman, I would
think all of my colleagues, under oath, in Congress in a
hearing back in December were asked the question of whether
they had ever not had information they needed to make the
decisions; and each one of them answered that they had had the
information they needed.
So I have never intended to withhold information from any
member of the Commission. And as part of being chairman my job
involves helping to manage the agency; and that invariably
affects decisions of timing, of work flow, and sometimes that
can affect timing of information and prioritization. That is
part of the job.
So I think part of this disagreement stems from just a lack
of perhaps alignment among all of us on the Commission about
what that means.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Apropos of Mr. Nunnelee's comments, you say that the agency
is not on pace to meet its own timetable. There are four
commissioners that say that we are or have some disagreement
with you. That is the basic question. Are we or are we not?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, the Commission, in adopting a number of
the recommendations for the task force, set a target of
completion of all activities for implementation within 5 years.
Now, these are factual statements. The staff proposed to the
Commission a number--kind of the first set of actions that we
would take as an agency. Those actions recommend or suggest
that the timelines for completion would be well beyond 5 years.
So, given that factual information, without a change, we are
not going to meet the 5-year target that the Commission
established. Now, some commissioners may not feel that--some
may feel that is okay----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What about the issue of evaluating
recommendations on a case-by-case basis? You take a contrary
position. Or what is your position?
Mr. Jaczko. I am sorry? Evaluating----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The recommendations for upgrades.
Mr. Jaczko. Uh-huh.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are you taking a contrary position to
your other commissioners?
Mr. Jaczko. Well, the commissioners have, by and large, all
agreed--well, the Commission, I should say, has adopted all the
recommendations of the task force that we established,
including a number of additional recommendations from one of
our advisory committees. And there is only one recommendation
from the task force that the Commission has deferred. So, in
that case, I would probably disagree with my colleagues,
because it was a recommendation that I supported moving forward
on.
So I am not sure--so, at the general level, the Commission
is supportive of the recommendations of the task force. And
that is a position that personally I agree with.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Do you support the whole notion of
requiring a cost-benefit analysis of some of the changes
recommended?
Mr. Jaczko. I do not.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Tell us why.
Mr. Jaczko. I believe, consistent with what the staff of
the agency recommended, that these changes are necessary to
prevent a Fukushima-type accident.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is interesting--and we want to be
respectful of you--that some of the people you serve with have
pretty substantial credentials. They have been involved in this
area and have a degree of expertise and knowledge. How there
could be this--respectful of your position and your right to
disagree, how could there be this enormous gap here? What is
it?
Mr. Jaczko. I can't explain it. As I said, the staff of the
agency has recommended that we not consider these actions under
cost-benefit analysis. The staff collectively has tremendous
expertise, too, so I am comfortable with that staff
recommendation, and it is something that I have supported. But
it is a judgment call, and each commissioner can bring to it
different----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The staff has come to somewhat of a
unanimous view that supports your position? Or is there some
divergence of opinion within? Maybe people--I wouldn't intimate
that anybody would have to do your bidding, but, in reality,
you and your fellow commissioners have this major
responsibility. We would hope there would be some interchange.
Mr. Jaczko. Absolutely. And the task force that we
established recommended that these changes not be made with
consideration of the cost. On subsequent reviews by the staff
of the agency, the final judgment of the staff--and, again, I
can't say that I polled every single member of the staff--the
judgment of the staff was that they should not be subject to a
cost-benefit analysis.
So that is where the staff came out. I didn't influence
that or tell them how it had to come out. That is what they
came to as their judgment, as did the task force.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The industry is doing some things their
own. What is your view of the efforts and investments they are
making on their own behalf?
Mr. Jaczko. I certainly encourage them----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And consumers and public good.
Mr. Jaczko. The things they are doing are good. I think
they are a piece of the work that needs to be done. They are
certainly not all of the work that needs to be done. And I
think the staff has conveyed that to the industry as well.
So we certainly don't ever want to stand in the way of
progress and of efforts to make safety better. There are more
things that need to be done, though, than what the industry is
proposing.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Of course. I take from the article, and
you are welcome to back this up, that you are also of the
opinion that our U.S. nuclear plants are safe.
Mr. Jaczko. As I said to Mr. Womack, I would say, yes, that
they are all safe. There is one plant, however, that is not
operating. The Commission has said that--the staff has said
that that plant cannot operate until they meet a number of
conditions which we have yet to really work through and
identify. So I wouldn't say they are unsafe, but they currently
are not operating, and at this point the staff would not be of
the opinion that they could operate.
Otherwise, the plants are meeting our requirements, and
some of them have challenges and need extra oversight, but
otherwise they are safe.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Last year, I won't say I was a fly on
the wall, but I sat in on one of Mr. Shimkus's hearings in the
big room and had an opportunity--and we thought about doing it
here, and we may do something at a later date--to hear the
voices and opinions of some of those that you serve with. I
thought it was valuable to me.
I am somewhat disturbed that there is this apparent and
perhaps real friction between you and some of the other
commissioners. But we hope and know that you are working on
behalf of the public good, and we will be respectful of it.
Mr. Chairman, there are quite a few applications for new
reactor licenses, and there are always the continuing issues of
plant license extensions and power upgrades. Can you give us a
picture as to what we should anticipate over the next several
years? And, more importantly, since this is the Appropriations
Committee, whether you have the funding levels in your budget
to provide adequate staff to get these reviews done in an
expeditious manner?
Mr. Jaczko. Right now, I feel very comfortable with the
request that we submitted that we will have the resources to
meet the necessary, I would say, demands of the applicants.
We have right now pending one license application which is
near completion. That is for the Summer project.
Beyond that, there is one other new reactor application
license that is in a more advanced state of review which could
possibly come to final decisions in the next year perhaps or
potentially longer depending on how we review or deal with some
of the Fukushima events.
Beyond that, most of the license applications are a little
bit farther out, maybe in fiscal year 2013, fiscal year 2014,
and beyond for the license applications we have.
So there will be a bit of a break, in a way a pause,
because of really just where we are in the review for these.
But, again, none of that is inconsistent with what the
applicants are needing in terms of their time line for getting
an application----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are you gearing up for the SMRs at all?
In other words, I know there are some basic similarities here,
but I wondered whether we were beating the drum for this. I
think it has been bipartisan. I think the administration is
supportive of it. I am not quite sure where you are, but, in
reality, I think there is a general consensus that this is
something that we want to be identified with and will be
thoroughly vetted. Is this part of your overall budget picture
and projections as well?
Mr. Jaczko. Absolutely. As I said earlier, we are really in
a way waiting on the applicants right now. Our fiscal year 2012
request assumed that we would be receiving applications for
designs for small modular reactors in fiscal year 2012. That is
not going to happen. Right now, as Commissioner--as Secretary
Lyons said----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. He has been called a lot of things. And
we thank you both for your service; and Mr. Lyons has, of
course, been around for a long time, has a remarkable career
and institutional memory, so we count on him.
Mr. Jaczko. As he said, we don't anticipate until late in
calendar year 2013 receiving some of these applications for the
small modular reactors. But we are preparing to receive those
and are doing the work we need to do to be ready.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Pastor, anything else for the good
of the order?
Gentlemen, we want to thank you for your time here this
morning. I apologize for my absence during the hearing. We
appreciate what you do every day and want to thank your staffs.
Since we have had a number of those representing the
foreign media, again, we want to thank you and your staff for
being heavily involved in supporting the Japanese people in
their time of major crisis and anxiety; and the fact that your
people were there to back them up and assist them I think is a
mark that you ought to be very proud of.
So we stand adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


