- AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012 HEARINGS BEFORE A SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

?

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________
PART 3
Page
Food and Drug Administration.....................................    1
Department of Agriculture: Office of Inspector General Oversight.  325

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
PART 3--AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,

AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
?

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________
PART 3
Page
Food and Drug Administration.....................................    1
Department of Agriculture: Office of Inspector General Oversight.  325

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-581                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

WITNESSES

MARGARET HAMBURG, M.D., COMMISSIONER, FOOD AND DRUGS, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION
PATRICK McGAREY, ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER FOR BUDGET, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Kingston. The subcommittee will come to order. We are
happy today and pleased to have the FDA Commissioner, Dr.
Margaret Hamburg and Patrick McGarey, the Assistant
Commissioner for Budget for FDA. And you have a whole team
behind you. I know that. And we are looking forward to your
testimony, although we have read it, you have submitted it. So
you are welcome to just summarize it.
I wanted to make a few notes. Of paramount concern right
now, of course, are the budget constraints, and I know that you
guys were exempted from the President's freeze. But you still
have a 16 percent increase and in some of the areas where you
do have cuts, they are politically popular programs that will
probably be put back in there by our friends in the other body,
like the Natural Products Center, which is a $3\1/2\ million
cut. We certainly would work with you on the House, at least
this member would. But I don't know that the Senate is going to
go along with that. And I am not sure that you have targeted it
that way or not, but that was a concern of mine.
I also wanted to comment on a couple of other things that
you have in your budget. You have pointed out that the FDA
approves more drugs each year than all the other countries in
the world, combined, and that you approve them faster than
Europe does, and I think that is great. We are glad to hear it.
This committee has heard so many times over the years about
slow FDA drug approval. On medical device approval, you are
still up there and moving along, which is good and positive. So
we are glad to see that.
I am interested in the FDA track that allows the
stakeholders and witnesses to work with you and get quarterly
progress reports on items of interest. And I think that is
something very good.
You have also saved Americans $140 billion a year in
generic drugs, which I think is of interest. As you know, I
have some real questions on food safety in terms of what you
actually could accomplish in terms of the model that was rushed
through in December, even though it was a lot of hearings--
there were some hearings, but the last 2 years were marred by
the lack of bipartisan inclusion, and I would say that piece of
legislation fell in that category as much as anything else; for
example, the health care bill. So I think this Congress is
going to really keep a very close eye on that. What is your
number on that? Yeah, $382 million for that.
Dr. Hamburg. Some of it from----
Mr. Kingston. Two hundred eighteen million in
discretionary. And keep in mind, the money we are talking about
for your entire budget in many respects is 100 percent
borrowed. For every dollar we spend right now in America, 40
cents of it is borrowed. And if you look at the money that we
spend, interest on the national debt, over $200 billion a year,
and then put in retirement, health care, and national security,
that is about all the budget that is paid for, which would be
about 60 percent.
And spending is a bipartisan problem. It is something that
both parties have their fingerprints all over, and we need to
come to reckon about it. I was glad the President appointed a
commission on it. We want to work with the President throughout
this process. So much of the context right now as we look at
various programs and the way you or any other agency spends its
money is going to be in that prism of what is the best bang for
the buck; what is our want; what is our need; what is a
duplication? The GAO report was pretty significant and it came
out and underscored a lot of duplication. So those are some of
the things that are on my mind. And I want to yield to the
ranking member, Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
very much, Dr. Hamburg, for being here.
I also want to thank you for meeting with the Leafy Green
Marketing folks from my district. They were very impressed with
the opportunity to talk to you. You have in your testimony one
phrase that really struck me.
What you say is the FDA must do its job well, because there
is simply no other agency to fall back on, no one to backstop
us. Our role is unique and FDA must fulfill this unique role
completely and responsibly. And I hope as we go through your
budget that we can really help you do that role responsibly.
There is too much at risk by doing it in a mediocre way.
So I don't have a lot of comments to make other than we are
at a new turning point in American food safety history with the
enactment of the bill and the implementation of the bill. A lot
of agriculture out there has their eyes on you because they
don't know whether the people in your Department know anything
about agriculture. They know you know a lot about safeguarding
drugs, prescription drugs, and other kinds of programs at FDA,
but I think FDA is more known now on the medical side than on
the food safety side. So it is a new era, but it is one that is
critically important.
For example, Mr. Chairman, that I saw it firsthand. There
was an E. Coli contamination of spinach that came from my
district. The recall effort was voluntary, so anyone who had
anything to do with spinach, whether driving in the trucks,
planting in fields, on shelves, or in refrigerators at home, to
get rid of it, no matter where it was grown, because nobody
knew where the contamination started. Today Americans don't
consume as much spinach as they did before that recall. The
contamination episode had a devastating effect. Growers lost
hundreds of millions of dollars, and they didn't get covered by
any kind of insurance.
So it is extremely important that we and your agency be the
good cop. But it also has to be a smart one so that we don't
wipe out industries. I appreciate you coming today and I look
forward to talking further with you.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Farr. We have been joined by
Chairwoman Emerson. And I am going to recognize her after Dr.
Hamburg summarizes her testimony, if that is okay with you, Mr.
Farr. She has got another subcommittee she is chairing. So the
floor is yours.

Opening Statement

Dr. Hamburg. Well, thank you, Chairman Kingston, Ranking
Member Farr, and Congresswoman Emerson. I appreciate this
opportunity to present the President's fiscal year 2012 budget
for the Food and Drug Administration and to discuss our
priorities for the coming year.
This hearing does come at a critical moment for our country
and for our agency. We must be prepared to meet and capture the
scientific challenges and global realities of our modern world.
And the stakes for patients, consumers, our economy, and global
economic competitiveness have never been higher.
Our agency is charged with an extremely significant task,
to promote and protect the health of the American people. This
includes ensuring the safety, effectiveness, and wholesomeness
of products that the American people rely on in fundamental,
sometimes life-saving ways--drugs, vaccines, medical devices,
our Nation's food supply and more. But it also includes working
proactively to foster the scientific innovation that will lead
to tomorrow's new breakthrough products.
Both roles are essential to delivering progress to the
American people and both roles impact our economy by
encouraging consumer confidence, growing key industries and
creating jobs. And thanks to the support of the subcommittee,
we have been able to see tangible evidence of that impact over
the past year.
This year, we approved dozens of new drugs, vaccines for
seasonal and pandemic flu and medical devices for hearing and
vision loss, severe asthma, and to perform 3-D mammography
screening. We applied cutting-edge genome sequencing to trace
food-borne illness outbreaks. We launched a new system that
identified 100 food safety problems in its first 7 months of
operation. We collaborated with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration to develop and perform screening
tests to assure seafood safety and to reopen the Gulf Coast
fisheries after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. And that is
just a snapshot of what the agency has done in the past year.
As you can see, FDA is charged with an enormous and unique
set of tasks and, as was just mentioned, if we do not do our
job and do it completely, there is no other agency or entity
out there to backstop us. That is why I am here to ask for your
support of the fiscal year 2012 budget for the FDA.
The proposed budget includes $4.4 billion and identifies
four priority initiative areas: Transforming Food Safety and
Nutrition; Advancing Medical Countermeasures; Protecting
Patients; and fostering FDA Regulatory Science and innovations
and regulatory science facilities.
Compared to fiscal year 2010, the fiscal year 2012 budget
represents an increase of almost $1.1 billion, $382 million in
budget authority, and $694 million in user fees. And that
amount for user fees includes $60 million for three new user
fees that FDA is proposing.
In addition, in an effort to contribute to deficit
reduction, we will undertake nearly $30 million in contract and
administrative savings across the agency. These four
initiatives are critical to our mission of protecting the
public health and they also represent important opportunities
for our food and medical product industries to grow and
strengthen our economy. In other words, they will provide great
return on investment for products, for people, and most
importantly, for the public health.
And let me explain how. First, Transforming Food Safety and
Nutrition Initiative, contains an increase of $326 million to
build a stronger, more reliable food safety system that will
protect American consumers. We will use these resources to
aggressively implement the Food Safety Modernization Act that
Congress passed in December. This landmark legislation provides
FDA with the tools to establish a prevention-focused food
safety system, placing the primary responsibility for
prevention on the food producers and processors and leveraging
the valuable work of FDA's State and local partners. FDA will
also make sure that American families have the information they
need to make more healthful food choices through menu and
vending machine labeling.
For the Advancing Medical Countermeasures Initiative, FDA
proposes $70 million. Medical countermeasures include drugs,
vaccines, diagnostic tests and medical equipment that are
needed to detect and respond to deliberate, biological,
chemical, radiological or nuclear threats, as well as emerging
infectious disease threats. All of these threaten the lives and
safety of the American people. This investment will help
accelerate the development of countermeasures that we truly
need to meet critical national security and public health
needs.
Third, Protecting Patients. This Initiative, for which we
are proposing an increase of $123.6 million, will allow FDA to
establish a pathway for approving life-saving biosimilar
products. This could offer substantial savings to the Federal
Government and private health care. This initiative also
includes investments in scientific tools and partnerships to
enhance the safety of increasingly complex drugs, medical
devices, and biologics.
Fourth, the FDA Regulatory Science and Facilities
Initiative contains an increase of $48.7 million to strengthen
the core regulatory scientific capacity that supports all
elements of FDA's mission, and will enable us to truly
streamline and modernize our regulatory work by applying the
best possible science, especially as we address more advanced
therapies, complex devices and emerging technologies. It will
also allow FDA to outfit and occupy the Center for Biologics
and the Center for Drugs Life Sciences Biodefense Laboratory
complex, which will play a critical role in shaping our
strategies in response to pandemics, emerging infectious
diseases, and deliberate biological threats. Even in these
difficult times, the FDA's 2012 budget is essential to our
ability to take meaningful science-based action on behalf of
the American people.
With these investments and your support, I am confident
that we can build on our past successes and better ensure our
Nation's health. So thank you for the opportunity to testify,
and I am happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.010

REGULATING PRESCRIPTION DRUGS

Mr. Kingston. Thank you very much, Dr. Hamburg.
I also wanted to reiterate what Mr. Farr said about your
accessibility. We on both sides of the aisle truly appreciate
the time you have given us to answer lots of questions and we
will have more today. But we do appreciate the ongoing
dialogue. With that, I want to recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Hal Rogers of Kentucky.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And by the way,
congratulations on your elevation to this chair. We think you
will do a wonderful job.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you for your role in that, sir.
Mr. Rogers. We think you will do a great job, and you
already have.
I would like to focus, Mr. Chairman, my comments and
questions on FDA's role in regulating prescription drugs,
particularly opioid narcotics. Undoubtedly these drugs can make
a world of difference for patients suffering from cancer or
other terminally ill diseases which cause chronic pain. But the
abuse and diversion of these drugs is now our country's leading
drug problem. In the last decade, there has been a 400 percent
increase in those reporting abuse of pain pills.
And in Kentucky, we are losing almost three people a day to
prescription drug overdosing. My people and communities around
the country are doing their part in recognizing that we will
need a multifaceted approach to knock out abuse. Law
enforcement, treatment programs, and education will all be
crucial, but regulatory agencies need to do their part.
FDA, of course, has an altogether important role in this.
In 1995, FDA approved what you thought was the next miracle
drug for cancer patients, a controlled-release pain reliever,
Purdue Pharma's OxyContin. The active ingredient in Oxy is
twice as potent as morphine. Purdue immediately undertook an
aggressive marketing campaign to sell as much of their drug as
possible. They chased primary care doctors and doctors in rural
areas who may not have been as adequately trained in pain
management as perhaps others. They underplayed the drug's
addictive tendencies. And within 5 years, Oxy had become the
most prescribed brand-name narcotic medication for treating
moderate to severe pain. Purdue was raking in the dough, and
that is about the time the people in my district started
showing up in emergency rooms or in the morgue.
In 2001, Frank Wolf and I testified--Chairman Wolf and I
testified before the FDA asking that this powerful drug, twice
as potent as morphine, only be made available for the treatment
of severe pain where it can have the most positive impact on
patient comfort and care. Our pleas fell on deaf ears. And the
rule continued to be that OxyContin could be prescribed for
moderate to severe pain. You got a sore toe? Here, have some
OxyContin. Highly addictive. Terribly difficult to shake.
Purdue was ultimately fined in criminal court $600 million
for its unscrupulous marketing practices, and several
executives even faced criminal charges. They had to reformulate
OxyContin, and you have recently approved the new version. They
still sold $3 billion worth of the drug last year and its
generic spinoffs aren't far behind. I will let you decide if
justice has been truly served.
So what can be done? There is a thing called the ``Flamingo
Road'' where there are more pill-mill crooks operating clinics
in Broward County, Florida, than McDonald's drive-through.
People from other parts of the country, especially in my
district, my State, are hired by drug pushers to get on the
bus, go to Florida with them. They all go through the pain
clinics, come back with a barrel full of OxyContin and other
prescription medicines where they are sold for 10, 15, 20 times
what they pay for them. And people are dying because they are
too easily obtained. FDA has to be a partner in this fight.
Despite some positive FDA efforts in recent years through
additional labeling requirements, collaboration with partner
Federal agencies and increased communication with physicians,
prescribers, dispensers and patients still are woefully
underinformed about the risks associated with theseproducts.
FDA has to be fully aware of the implications of these drugs before
they go to market, which is why Congress instituted the REMS
requirement for extended release pain drugs in 2007, and these potent
drugs were carefully classified.
We simply can't keep handing these responsibilities over to
profit-driven drug companies. It is reckless, it is
irresponsible, and it is why prescription drug overdoses are
killing more Americans now than car wrecks. Think of that.
And that is why Mary Bono Mack, the Congresswoman from
California, and I have filed a bill called the Stop Oxy Abuse
Act which would moderate and change the moderate to severe
qualifications to be prescribed for OxyContin to just severe,
severe pain only. I would like your reaction to that.
[The information follows:]

Oxycontin Prescriptions

Potent opioid analgesics have traditionally been indicated for
moderate to severe pain. Some advocacy groups have called for the
removal of moderate pain in the indications as a means to reduce the
number of prescriptions for these products and thereby reduce the
opportunities for their abuse. FDA has denied this request for a number
of reasons. Pain is a subjective phenomenon and its intensity level is
primarily determined by patient report. What one patient might consider
``moderate'' pain, another patient may consider ``severe''. Health care
practitioners have traditionally used the terms mild, moderate and
severe to categorize a patient's pain intensity and to communicate with
patients and other health care practitioners. The use of these terms in
the indication section of the label along with the limitations of use
statement are intended to guide prescribers to understand that
OxyContin is not for mild, acute, or intermittent pain where other pain
management products would be more appropriate. The label also instructs
that it is not intended for use on an as-needed basis, nor is it
indicated for pain management after the first 12-24 hours following
surgery unless the patient had already been receiving the drug prior to
surgery and the postoperative pain was expected to be moderate to
severe and to persist for an extended period of time. The labeling is
directed toward legitimate use of these medications. Chronic pain
described by some as `moderate' can be very disruptive and extended
release opioids can be an appropriate choice for these patients.
Removing the term moderate from the indications for these drugs could
result in considerable confusion, and would not likely impact the
availability of the drugs or the amount of abuse and diversion
associated with them.

I am going to leave several questions for the record, Mr.
Chairman, if that would be okay.
Mr. Kingston. Without objection.
Mr. Rogers. Vern Buchanan from Florida, a Congressman, has
a bill that would reclassify all hydrocodone combination
drugs--Vicodin, Lortab and others--as Schedule 2 drugs, which
are more difficult to prescribe and obtain. Would this cut back
on abuse? I wanted to leave that for the record.
[The information follows:]

Reclassification of Hydrocodone Combination Drugs

Hydrocodone, when dispensed as a single drug--not in a combination
product--and not exceeding 15 mg per dose, is currently a Schedule II
drug. Today, all marketed hydrocodone drugs that are combination
products--for example, hydrocodone combined with another pain reliever
such as acetaminophen--are Schedule III drugs. Schedule II drugs
require a new prescription each time they are dispensed, whereas
Schedule III drugs can be refilled without a new prescription.
Rescheduling all hydrocodone combination products from Schedule III to
Schedule II would affect automatic refills for a prescription. Although
this change might make it more difficult to obtain these medications
frequently for non-medical use, this change would also create an
impediment to legitimate use by patients being treated for acute pain.
While it is true that drug usage data for hydrocodone products
documents extensive use, there is a legitimate medical need for these
drug products. To date, data on abuse potential of hydrocodone
combination products support their continued placement in Schedule III.
FDA has not seen rates increasing for visits to hospital emergency
departments related to hydrocodone product use, when compared to
oxycodone, a Schedule II product, according to data taken from the Drug
Abuse Warning Network of the Substance Abuse Mental Health Services
Administration, also known as SAMHSA. Nor does FDA see increased rates
of addiction, as evidenced by the need for opioid treatment, for
hydrocodone compared to oxycodone, according to data from the SAMHSA
Treatment Episode Data Set. This type of data, however, is not
sufficient for drawing conclusions about how to impact specific
criminal activity such as cutting back on pill-mill operations.

Mr. Rogers. Number two, Congress required REMS to ensure
that the benefits of a drug outweigh the potential risk. I have
heard some real concerns that FDA is allowing the drug
companies producing extended release pain medication to develop
a one-size-fits-all REMS. Considering that each medication is
different and poses unique risks to patients and the public,
how will this one-size-fits-all approach encourage innovation
in risk management?
[The information follows:]

REMS

Dr. Hamburg: FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, also
known as CDER, is in the process of developing a Risk Evaluation and
Mitigation Strategies, commonly known as a REMS for high potency long
acting and extended release opioid products. This REMS, which will
include measures intended to increase physician and patient knowledge
about the appropriate use of opioid drugs in the treatment of pain.
On July 22 and 23, 2010, FDA presented its proposal for a class
REMS for long-acting and extended-release opioid drugs at a joint
meeting of the Anesthetic and Life Support Drugs Advisory Committee and
the Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee. The objective
of the meeting was to gather additional feedback and comments from the
Committees and the public on its proposal to require a REMS for the
class of long-acting and extended-release opioid products.
FDA is currently analyzing the advice received from the Committees
and from public comments. Once these have been thoroughly analyzed, FDA
may issue a REMS request letter to the sponsors of these drugs. The
letter would describe the proposed REMS and provide a timetable for the
submission of the REMS and its implementation. Affected sponsors would
be required to implement the REMS, once it is approved.
The REMS proposal presented at the July 2010 meeting focused on
prescriber and patient education. Under this proposal, sponsors would
be required to provide patients with Medication Guides conveying
information on the safe use of all opioid medications as well as
product specific information. Sponsors would also be required to
develop prescriber education programs covering appropriate patient
selection, dosing, and monitoring, and training for patient counseling
in the safe use, storage, and disposal of opioids. The proposed REMS
would foster innovation in patient and prescriber education, which are
essential for improving prescribing practices and ensuring the safe use
of of long-acting and extended-release opioid drugs.

Mr. Rogers. And then finally, what is FDA doing to
incentivize and speed up the development of more tamper-
resistant or abuse-resistant formulations of these drugs?
[The information follows:]

Tamper- or Abuse-Resistant Drugs

FDA classifies Investigational New Drug applications for
purportedly tamper-resistant or abuse-resistant formulations of opioid
analgesics as Fast Track drugs for review purposes. FDA reviews New
Drug Applications for these products on a Priority Review schedule of
six months. In certain circumstances, the labeling for these products
could include data supporting the tamper-resistant or abuse-deterrent
features--albeit with a disclaimer that the impact on actual abuse is
unknown--which would allow the manufacturer or distributor to describe
these features in their advertising and detailing.

Mr. Rogers. Dr. Hamburg, I appreciate your being here today
and answering these questions and presenting your budget
request. And I am very focused on--in my own way, on the drug
abuse problem that is afflicting the country and killing young
people even as we speak.
Today in Kentucky, three people will die from drug
overdoses that could have been prevented. And I think the FDA
needs to join the fight. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you. Dr. Hamburg.
Dr. Hamburg. Well, thank you very much, Congressman Rogers,
for your very powerful statement about the serious problem our
Nation faces with respect to the abuse of prescription drugs.
And as you point out, it is one that takes a devastating toll
on individuals, on families, on communities and our Nation, and
its impact is very, very severe and far-reaching. And
successful, meaningful, and enduring solutions to it, as you
also point out, require true partnerships because there are
many players that need to play a role.
FDA has a critical role and we care deeply about it and I
am personally very committed to helping lead the agency to
engage more deeply on these issues with our counterparts in
government and in other sectors and to look very carefully at
where we have responsibilities and where our activities and
policies can make a difference. We are, as you said, looking
very carefully at how we can more effectively use the
authorities and tools that we have in terms of warnings and
indications for use.
We also have mounted a major initiative around the safe use
of prescription drugs, and it is critically important, and the
area that you focused on in your comments is a key component of
what we want to accomplish there. There also is an
administration-wide effort focused on this. And that is very
key, to engage law enforcement, to engage educators, to engage
the DEA who would be involved in making decisions in terms of
the reclassification.
Mr. Rogers. Can I help you spell Broward County, Florida?
Nine out of ten prescriptions for oxycodone in the country are
coming from Broward County, Florida; 9 out of 10. It is an
absolute pill-mill heaven. There are thousands of them there.
And I have asked the Attorney General to send enforcement to
Broward County to help us stamp out the problem. We have asked
the Governor of the State for a drug prescription monitoring
program, which he has refused, although some 40 States already
have the system in place.
Where do I turn? Can you change the rules by which these
medicines are prescribed for just severe pain? Why not do that?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, I think these are important issues and
as you pointed out, they do involve many different agencies
coming together. We approve--we review and approve medical
products for a certain indicated use, and that can certainly be
a part of our considerations. There are also very important
activities that have to do with the oversight of the providers
and how they are doing their prescriptions, the training of
providers and enforcement activities. So I think----
Mr. Rogers. It is very simple. It is really simple. This
drug OxyContin was built, designed, constructed for severe
pain, right? I mean, it is a 12-hour release pill. It is a
wonderful drug for those in severe pain in terminal cancer
cases and others, for example. But it is so easily dispensed
and it is so easily taken and it is such a wonderful drug to be
abused, but young people especially are crushing the 12-hour
release into an instant release, and you can imagine the
pleasure that gives. And it is irresistible. But it is killing
people. Can't you change that formula by which they are
prescribed, simply leave out ``moderate''?
Dr. Hamburg. In how we are approaching the warning labels,
the indications for use, we are very mindful of those concerns.
You also raised another very important point that I want to
underscore, which is how can we bring better science to bear to
make products that are safer and less subject to abuse and the
opportunities for innovation in this area. We need to go
forward today to address the current problem. We also need to
be making sure that we are pursuing those avenues as well. I am
heartened to hear about your work in this area and the bill
that you are proposing. We are eager to work with you. It
sounds like maybe I should make a visit down to Broward County
and learn more about it.
Mr. Rogers. Absolutely. I will pay your way.
Dr. Hamburg. I don't know that that would be allowed.
Mrs. Emerson. Mr. Chairman, can I ask you to yield just for
a second and make a comment? I agree with you. I am just
getting off a broken arm. And the first drugs that they threw
at me were an OxyContin-type drug. And while I was in pain, and
probably a lot of pain, I wasn't in severe pain. And so I was
afraid to take the drug because I didn't know--I know the
effects are really pretty dramatic. But every single time I
would go for a follow-up, Do you need some more OxyContin, do
you need some more of this drug, do you need some more of this
drug? And I took four Advil, which did the trick for me.
But I understand. I mean, they were just throwing the stuff
at me. And I am thinking it is just ridiculous. So I just flush
it down the toilet, which I am not sure you are supposed to do
that. I can't remember how you are supposed to get rid of it.
Dr. Hamburg. You are.
Mr. Kingston. We don't have to remove that from the record.
We have unanimous consent.
Mrs. Emerson. But anyway, it is troubling. It is very
troubling to me who just recently, 6 weeks ago, dealt with this
same problem.
Dr. Hamburg. It is an incredibly important issue with huge
ramifications. We are eager to work with you. We are involved
in activities in this domain. There is more that we can do. I
think the partnership in terms of this administration-wide
effort is going to make a real contribution as well. But I
would be eager, you know, to sit down with you, to visit the
Flamingo Road--did you call it--and also really lay out in more
detail where we as the FDA can make a targeted difference.
Mr. Rogers. That is the reason I asked you today. That is
why we are here. That is why I am here, is to have you answer
the question. If you strike out the word ``moderate'' and they
can only prescribe it for severe pain, we can then prosecute
people who are unscrupulously making zillions of dollars under
the guise they can prescribe it for moderate pain. This is done
every second of the day. But if you only allow them to
prescribe for severe pain, we could then prosecute and go after
the unscrupulous doctors and pain clinics that are killing our
people. It is pretty simple.
Dr. Hamburg. I think as you point out, targeting for
appropriate use is absolutely key, and we are trying to achieve
that through what we are doing in the REMS arena and
strengthening those. I think it is hard to--I don't think that
you would be satisfied with the results by simply addressing
that change in indication, because it is the broader abuse that
is happening that is--you know, I think causing this serious
national problem and it is--how you define ``moderate'' and
``severe'', I think we need to have a concerted effort that is
targeted at many levels to address a problem that is cross-
cutting, that involves both what are the kinds of drugs that
are available, how are they prescribed, what are the oversight
and restrictions on the use and abuse of those drugs and how
that is enforced.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your indulgence with
me for the time. That is exactly what we had to do in my
district. The State newspaper came out with a story that ran
for 6 weeks, front-page screaming headlines that my area was
the pain prescription capital of America, which prompted me to
start an organization we called UNITE, Unlawful Narcotics,
Investigations, Treatment, and Education. It is an amazing
organization. We have got 26 undercover agents now that do
nothing but arrest people selling drugs. They have put in jail
3,700 pushers selling these drugs from the Flamingo Road
source.
We have kids in hospitals every day. We have got kids dying
every day in the emergency rooms. We have got drug courts in
every county. We have built treatment centers. I go to drug
court graduations for people who finally kicked the thing and
hear these wonderful tales. It is a pervasive, deep, widespread
problem, killing more people than the automobile wrecks in the
country, and yet you sit there and say we will not really talk
about changing the prescription rules for this killer drug. And
I won't rest until we see an answer, ma'am.
Dr. Hamburg. Well, I am happy to continue to examine these
questions and go back with our expert team. My point, though,
is that I think if we really want to make a meaningful and
enduring difference, it is a different problem than simply
changing the indication, because it is--whether it is an
indication for severe or moderate, the prescriber ultimately is
making the decision of whether it should be given to that
patient for their pain. And I am not confident that a label
with an indication only for severe pain is going to change the
behavior of those on Flamingo Road.
Mr. Rogers. It will give us a chance to prosecute those
people that are prescribing that medicine for other than severe
pain, and we can stop--make a big point in stopping the problem
at the source. You are in charge of the steering wheel here.
And I expect some movement on this issue. And if you don't do
it, we will do it for you. I cannot be much plainer than that.
I hate to be blunt, but this is beyond a minor issue. This
is a killer in my district. It is killing my constituents and
all around the country. And you could make a difference.
Dr. Hamburg. Well, I am eager to make a difference. I
appreciate the severity of this problem and its huge
ramifications on the lives of people and the dislocations in
communities that occur and the terrible pain that so many have
experienced. I do feel that we have a critical role to play and
we will engage fully. I think that to be successful, it needs
to be a broader partnership, and I am also committed to
engaging in those partnerships so that we can make real
measurable progress in this domain.
Mr. Rogers. We will be listening. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. I share your concern, Mr. Chairman. And also I
think you have to go upstream and also look at the
manufacturers and the salespersons and the people that sell
that to the end users.
I know my cousin is a doctor and he says that most of the
information they get about drugs comes from the drug
salesperson who tells them you ought to use this for thisand
that. If there is that much supply out there going to doctors' office,
then there has also got to be something with the way the message is
being given to doctors. And I hope we can look into that as well.

MEDICAL COUNTERMEASURES

I think this conversation really goes to the point of how
important your agency is, the Food and Drug Administration, and
how difficult it is going to be to manage these critical issues
in the United States if Congress indeed cuts and slashes your
budget.
So a couple of things that I would like to see is if we
could get a better bang for the buck. One is in the area of
countermeasures, medical countermeasures. As you know, the
Medical Countermeasures Initiative was framed in the course of
2000, it was based on the fact that we put a lot of money into
preparing for the flu pandemic. I think Mr. Rogers played a
major role in pointing out that that was real serious. And what
happened last year is that the HHS shifted 170 million dollars
from their accounts to FDA accounts, to cover the new Medical
Countermeasures Initiative. But you need some, as I understand
it, you need some language to expand the other types of
countermeasures you can work on besides the flu. Essentially
the idea is if we want to have an infrastructure to do that. We
could look at countermeasures that would be made for other
kinds of emergencies that might come from biological weapons or
other things that could break out, contamination could break
out, beyond influenza. We have kind of isolated this work to
one countermeasure.
I wonder if you could speak for just a second how important
that is, how important it is to keep the money, how important
it is to get the language you need to be able to have those
other countermeasures.
Dr. Hamburg. Thank you, Congressman Farr. This is a very
important area for the health and security of our Nation. We do
face a set of serious biological threats from the naturally
occurring, such as pandemic flu or something like SARS, if you
remember a few years ago, or as yet an emerging infectious
disease threat. We also know that we are highly vulnerable,
perhaps increasingly vulnerable to deliberately caused
biological threats and biological terrorism, chemical
terrorism, radiological and nuclear terrorism, and the impact
in terms of the health of individuals would be enormous; also
the huge dislocations to our society, the disruptions in life
as we know it, the impact on the economy, the public's trust
and confidence in government and critical institutions and our
national security at its core.
So we want to be able to provide the kinds of medical
countermeasures necessary to fully prepare us both to rapidly
detect and respond to an emerging threat and to treat and
contain a threat should it occur. In a way, it is a form of
deterrence to be better prepared and to limit the damage that
can occur.
Mr. Farr. As I understand it, you have the money to do the
work. You just don't have the authority to look at these other
countermeasures?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, exactly right. The Secretary of Health
and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius, began a new initiative
last summer in the medical countermeasures arena and FDA was
given resources to begin important work from the monies that
had originally been appropriated for pandemic response.
Mr. Farr. And we put that language giving you that
authority in our legislation, but it didn't get into the latest
version.
Dr. Hamburg. Right. In order for us to be able to expand
these activities to address not just pandemic threat, but the
continuum of biological threats before us, we do need
additional language. It is a no-cost proposal. But that would
allow for the use against this broader set of very important,
potentially devastating biological threats.
So we would be very appreciative if you could take a
serious look at that. I think it would make a huge difference
to our ability to move forward in critical ways. There are
important gaps in key areas. We don't have a treatment for
acute radiation sickness, such as would occur after a terrorist
attack using a radiological device. We don't have antiviral
drugs to treat a number of critical, potential microbial
threats. We don't have the diagnostics that we need to rapidly
detect an emerging problem so we can treat it appropriately.
Mr. Farr. Yes or no? Can we assume that if these funds are
not provided through the mechanism proposed in the budget
amendment, that there is very little or no chance you can fund
those activities within the appropriation in H.R. 1?
Dr. Hamburg. That is the case. This is a program where we
are building a new capacity. These targeted additional dollars
are essential to fulfilling the mission of assuring that we
have the medical countermeasures that we need. We also in the
President's fiscal year 2012 budget are asking for monies to
continue those programs that we are beginning to put in place
now.
So it is going to make a difference. And, interestingly, as
this broader initiative around medical countermeasures was
being developed, one of the things that emerged was that the
role of FDA was absolutely crucial to success; that it involve
other components of government, but that the FDA's role in
actually being able to review and approve for safety and
effectiveness these medical countermeasures was the linchpin of
success.
So we very much appreciate your taking a serious look
atthis and helping to support efforts that will make such a difference
to our Nation and our security.
Mr. Farr. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired. Mrs.
Emerson.

DRUG SUPPLY CHAIN

Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much
for being here, Dr. Hamburg, and for the good job that you do.
I know you share my concern about the possibility for
counterfeit drugs to enter the United States supply chain,
whether it is from within the United States or from abroad. Yet
the potential for this corruption of the system and the
potential rewards for doing so is growing. And it is really
interesting and frightening to see how sophisticated some of
the methods the counterfeiters are using.
And I am thinking about one in Enfield, Connecticut, last
year where $76 million worth of drugs were stolen; and in
another year before, in Chesterfield, Virginia, in which about
$5 million of drugs were stolen. But this illustrates the fact
that this is a problem bigger than mere counterfeiting, and it
extends to stolen drugs which are removed from the supply chain
and simply lost before reappearing, and that can possibly be
here and it can possibly appear as treatments for us.
So last year, the committee included language asking FDA to
examine methods and technologies by which these drugs can be
tracked within the supply chain from the manufacturer to the
patient with a minimum of cost to either party or anyone in
between. And I wanted to follow up with you on that request for
new standards just to gauge your opinion of the possible role
for the FDA, as well as to ask you if you see a need for this
kind of a national system to ensure the drugs that we Americans
are taking are safe as well as affordable.
Dr. Hamburg. You raise a critically important issue. And
increasingly in our globalized world, we need to be thinking
about drugs coming from many parts of the world and complex
supply chains that drugs go through with webs of producers,
manufacturers, suppliers, repackagers, exporters, importers.
And all along the way, there are opportunities for the
potential introduction of problems, sometimes unintentional,
and, sadly, we know often deliberate. And we know that
counterfeiting is increasingly a very significant criminal
enterprise. And in fact because the penalties for trafficking
in counterfeit drugs are much less than in illegal drugs, there
is real concern that organized crime is increasingly entering
this space as well. And we know that the impacts on people are
huge.
You mentioned drug diversion. There was a recent case where
insulin was stolen, disappeared from the marketplace and then
reappeared. But the only way we found out that it reappeared is
that we started getting reports that diabetic patients were
taking insulin. They were depending on this drug for a very
serious medical problem and it was having no impact. And we
determined that their lots of insulin in fact were from this
stolen--so the ability to track and trace, as you pointed out,
is absolutely essential.
We would very much welcome the chance to work with Congress
to look at the opportunities for new legislation. I know that
there is a bill that Congressman Dingell has introduced that
would give additional authorities to FDA to help us to secure
the safety of the supply chain and address these global
challenges.
Mrs. Emerson. Let me ask you. California has a standard
which it is set to--I think it is set to be implemented in
2015. And even with the best possible State model, do you think
a state-by-state approach is more effective; or is it more
efficient to have one single national approach to the problem?
Dr. Hamburg. I think that this is a problem that crosses
State borders and crosses international borders, and I think
the goal of standards that are harmonized is very, very
important. It is important to our ability to really address the
problem. I think it is important to industries as they think
about how they would implement it, and the cost of
implementation as well.
Mrs. Emerson. Can you estimate the pervasiveness of the
counterfeit problem?
Dr. Hamburg. We need better data. It is actually a
worldwide problem that we don't fully know the nature and scope
of it. I think, startlingly, we do know that in some parts of
the developing world, as much as between 30 and 50 percent of
the drugs available in the marketplace for serious diseases are
in fact counterfeit.
In the United States, we have a much more closed system and
the FDA is working every day to ensure that the drug supply is
safe and that when you go to your pharmacy what you get is what
it purports to be. But we know that the problem is a real one
here as well, and that we need to be proactive and aggressive
and we need to be very cognizant, as I said, of the fact that
as the world becomes more globalized and more and more of our
drugs are coming from being manufactured overseas----
Mr. Kingston. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Mrs. Emerson. I will look forward to working with you,
Doctor.
Dr. Hamburg. You can tell this is a topic I care about.
Mrs. Emerson. I look forward to working with you, Dr.
Hamburg. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to go
early.

AVASTIN

Mr. Kingston. Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Dr.Hamburg, for being here.
I would like to focus for a little bit on the drug--I
believe it is pronounced Avastin. As I understand it, FDA
granted accelerated approval for Avastin for the treatment of
breast cancer in 2008 and now FDA is looking at withdrawing
that approval. Is my understanding correct?
Dr. Hamburg. There is an expedited approval mechanism that
is available that enables, on the basis of fairly early data on
drug safety and effectiveness, to grant a modified form of
approval, expedited approval, and then require additional
studies to be done; and then a decision is made based on that
accumulation of a broader set of data, whether the drug should
get full formal approval. And in this case after additional
studies were done and the advisory committee of experts was
also brought in to review the data, a decision was made not to
give Avastin full approval.
We are, I should say, in the process of working within the
legal framework of this approval regulatory mechanism to--we
granted the company that makes Avastin a hearing. They are
going to be coming to a public hearing with the FDA, making
their case. And because we are in the middle of that process, I
actually can't comment any more deeply about this drug.
Mr. Nunnelee. So you can't tell me what--you approved it
then, and you are putting it on hold now, and you can't tell me
what is the problem?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, the additional data that was collected
and examined, both by FDA scientists and reviewed by this panel
of outside experts, did not support the full approval for the
indication. However, as I said, because we are in the middle of
a legal process and I ultimately will be reviewing all of the
data under this system of a public hearing and a subsequent
decision, that I am really not at liberty to have a full
discussion of the matter.
Mr. Nunnelee. Sure. It is my understanding that this drug
doesn't cure breast cancer, but it does prolong a woman's life.
And the initial indications were it might prolong it as long as
5 to 7 months, and now maybe it is only 3 to 5 months. And
because it didn't do what it was originally thought----
Dr. Hamburg. If I could, because I am in a difficult legal
situation here, because there is--there is a legal process with
a hearing, and ultimately I need to be the final decision-
maker, and so I need to be at a distance from this--if I could
ask our center director, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, to speak to these issues.
Dr. Woodcock. Thank you. I am Janet Woodcock. I am the head
of the drug center at FDA. Avastin's trials in breast cancer--
it is approved for multiple cancers, many of these are full
approvals--showed--the original trial showed an effect on what
is called progression-free survival, which does not have
anything to do with living longer. It has to do with how long
before your xrays show that the disease progresses. The
subsequent trials did not show the same effect. It was a much
smaller effect on how long it took the xrays to worsen, all
right?
There is not a claim that Avastin improves survival in this
setting in breast cancer life. The dispute is over the length
of time that it takes to progress once you have metastatic
disease. Does that make sense?
Mr. Nunnelee. I may have said it wrong. Initially you
thought it would do it in 5 to 7 months, and since it is a
little bit shorter, you are saying let us just pull it?
Dr. Woodcock. The initial was a surrogate. That is why it
is called accelerated approval. Progression-free survival is
generally--and in this case was that your xrays don't get worse
is considered a surrogate for having some actual benefit to the
people, say, not developing pain or fractures or actually maybe
living longer. The subsequent trial showed a small effect on
your xrays not getting worse, which our advisors and our
oncologists did not feel would translate into a clinical
benefit that somebody would feel, either reduced pain, reduced
progression, or longer life.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired. Ms. Kaptur.

HEPARIN

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to take a little bit of a different tack than some of the other
members have and begin with the statement, the obvious
assertion that America will experience economic recovery when
people get jobs and they go back to work. And thus I follow
with interest the continuing outsourcing of U.S. jobs,
including by pharmaceutical companies making medicines and
devices everyplace else in the world and moving jobs outside
our country.
Every day I ask myself, how can we make goods in America
again so people can go back to work? There are some who believe
that we can fix what is wrong with our economy not by creating
jobs in our country, but by simply cutting back on public
health and safety, as is evidenced in H.R. 1, the continuing
resolution offered by the majority party that cuts FDA
inspectors for pharmaceutical safety.
It is a very interesting set of arguments we are getting
involved in: how we help our country recover. And thus I want
to return to questions I have asked in the past regarding
heparin and tracking what is really going on with the
manufacturer of heparin, the cost of that to the public sector
through Medicare and Medicaid, and go back to March 2008 when
the New York Times had an article, Dr. Hamburg, that said the
Food and Drug Administration at that point had linked heparin
to 19 deaths and hundreds of severe allergic reactions, though
the agency was continuing to investigate. And those deaths and
allergic reactions were due to components that ended up in
heparin that came from China; I believe through Canada, though
I am not sure.
So I wanted, first of all, to ask you whether you have
completed your investigations and how many people may have died
from those imported components. That is question number one.
Have you finished your report? Is there additional data?
[The information follows:]

Heparin

CDER's Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, also known as OSE,
completed a review of adverse event reports from the Office's Adverse
Event Reporting System in June 2009. OSE's analysis considered as much
data as possible on the adverse event reports with use of heparin.
However, we are not able to definitively attribute deaths to heparin
administration due to confounding factors or lack of detail in the
reports submitted to FDA. We continue to monitor for adverse events
that are reported with the use of heparin. FDA does not have the
details of the reports from Germany that you refer to and therefore
cannot confirm the number of lives lost in Germany.

Then I want to ask you this. You kindly submitted for the
record from previous questioning I had done, questions that I
had asked regarding heparin. And for people in the audience who
don't know, heparin is actually made from pig intestines. I
represent a lot of hog farmers, so obviously they are
interested in why we would go to China for the ingredients for
heparin. And those intestines are ground up, proteins are
extracted, and ultimately we get a liquid that people receive
in hospitals when they go in for operations. I don't know
whether it is a blood thinner.
Dr. Hamburg. It is a blood thinner.
Ms. Kaptur. A substitute for the--not the red blood cells
but for the white blood cells.
Dr. Hamburg. It keeps you from getting blood clots.
Ms. Kaptur. Now, what is interesting about what you wrote
in answer to my questions, you said, ``FDA approves
applications to market Heparin''--market Heparin--but it
doesn't say anything about manufacturing.
So one of my questions to you is, it is unclear where or in
which country ingredients are made. And I want to know, for the
three or four companies that are listed that are supposedly
marketing Heparin, how many of the ingredients actually come
from the United States?
I am going to push you a little bit on this, maybe not
today but in further questions. We see where China and India
may be places where all these ingredients are being made.
I am also going to ask you about damages. And I know that
my time is up here. But our government and the American people
were not able to recover damages, is that my understanding,
civil or criminal, from the Heparin deaths due to contaminated
imports?
And where would I get how much money is being made by these
pharmaceutical firms in marketing these products versus what it
actually costs them to manufacture? Can you get at that, or
where do I have to go for those numbers?
[The information follows:]

Drug Marketing Profits

The information that you are requesting is not information that
companies must report to FDA. In addition, FDA does not track this
information because it is not meaningful for evaluating the safety and
effectiveness of drugs. The financial information would likely be
available from the pharmaceutical firms themselves or from other
sources of industry financial information.

Dr. Hamburg. Well, you have asked a string of questions
embedded in the one important issue of Heparin. And some of it
we may need to get back to you on, in terms of your deep
interest in this.
The experience with the contaminated Heparin was a very
serious one. I think it was an eye-opener, not just to the FDA,
but also to the pharmaceutical industry and to our Nation more
broadly, about the fact that we really needed to be paying
attention to the fact that the supply chain for many products
in this Nation is complex and global.
As you point out, the precursor for Heparin that is used in
the United States and manufactured by United States
manufacturers, but much of the precursor does come from China,
which I think has more pigs than anyplace in the world. But----
Ms. Kaptur. We have a lot in Ohio, too, and we would like
to compete in this market.
Dr. Hamburg. But, you know, it caused, you know, as you
pointed out, serious allergic reactions and many deaths. In
response to that----
Ms. Kaptur. Do we know yet, ma'am, how many deaths yet?
Dr. Hamburg. I think it was, in this country--it is
impossible to know exactly how many. But in terms of the
documented deaths, I think people do----
Ms. Kaptur. Why is it impossible to know?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, because sometimes the providers don't
make the association between the death of a patient and the
contaminated Heparin. Patients that get Heparin, you know, in
the hospital often have very complex medical illnesses, and
when a person expires, the connection wasn't necessarily made
that it was because of the Heparin. As we saw a couple of cases
and the investigation was done and we began to understand the
link between the Heparin and a set of symptoms and fatalities--
but we know that it took a serious toll.
In response, we have put into place a number of important
protective measures, new screening tests, and safety systems,
also working with the regulatory authorities in China on this
and working with the private sector, so that we have safeguards
that this kind of event with Heparin will not occur again. But
it is a warning call about vulnerabilities in the system that
we need to work on.
I think my time is up in responding to you, but we are
happy to follow up further with you.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
And I want to thank the chairman for his generosity.
Trying to get to the bottom of this has been
extraordinarily difficult. And we are going to keep digging, we
are going to keep drilling down into this one.
And I would just say to the chairman, you know, we are all
struggling to try to find the money to balance thebudget. And
if you look at the amount of money that our government pays through the
Medicare and Medicaid accounts for Heparin, for a drug that is off-
patent, for material that is off-patent, unbelievable. So this has many
legs to it.
And I thank you very much. And we will have many follow-up
questions on Heparin. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. Well, I thank the gentlewoman.
And, as you can see, Dr. Hamburg, members of this committee
have a lot of passion about our issues and do appreciate your
time.

FOOD SAFETY MODERNIZATION ACT

I want to visit the discussions you and I have had about
food safety and the Food Modernization Act. Using the CDC
numbers which you have--and I agree with you, 3,000 deaths a
year is horrible. We need to do something about it--48 million
illnesses.
But where I have an issue, taking the emotion out of it--
and I know we have talked about this, but that 3,000 people
dying a year is down 40 percent from last year. Again, you
know, it is too high; we need to keep working. But it is down
40 percent from the CDC numbers. Forty-eight million foodborne
illnesses a year, that is down 37 percent, a decrease of 28
million from last year. Still too high, but in a country of 311
million people eating three meals a day, 365 days a year, we
are consuming 340 billion meals a year. And if you divide that
into the 48 million, you still have a food supply that is 99.99
percent safe.
Where is my math flawed on that?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, I think that the key numbers are that,
you know, we know that about one in six people get sick every
year from foodborne illness----
Mr. Kingston. Well, let me interrupt you a minute. Key
numbers come from the CDC, and those are the numbers I have
used, so those are the numbers I want to stay with. Where is
that math flawed?
Dr. Hamburg. Yeah, well, I think that is consistent with
their numbers. I mean, I think, as you point out, we are seeing
preventable deaths. We are seeing even more preventable
illness. That is associated with a set of other preventable
costs--costs to the health-care system, costs to economic
productivity.
Mr. Kingston. But you agree with my math, that it is 99.999
percent safe?
Dr. Hamburg. I would have to sit down and follow your math.
But we have one of the safest food supplies in the world, there
is no doubt about it. And we should be proud of that, and we
should make sure that it is maintained that way.
Mr. Kingston. Well, the concern that I have is, are we
targeting the 3,000 smartly and efficiently and effectively?
Because if we move that number from 99.999 percent to 100
percent, which you and I and I think everybody on this
committee certainly would want to do, are we going to get
there? Are we going to get that last percentage? Are we going
to get it with this bill?
And I will tell you why I have concerns about that. Sixty
percent of the illnesses come from Norovirus. And there is
nothing in there that attacks it. In your testimony, you
mentioned that you have permitted a test for it last year, but
that is the only mention of Norovirus.
And the CDC, on March 4th, said that, ``Appropriate hand
hygiene is likely the single most important method to prevent
Norovirus infection and control transmission. Reducing any
Norovirus presence on our hands is best accomplished through
handwashing with water and plain antiseptic soap.'' And yet we
are talking eventually 17,000 to 18,000 new FDA employees, and
that is not addressed in here. Sixty percent of the illnesses.
The second highest number of illness is from salmonella. Of
course, I come from poultry country. Now, before the Food
Modernization Act, FDA did finalize the salmonella egg rule,
July of last year. And something like 79,000 illnesses or 30
deaths, but that it could be avoided with this new food safety
requirement which you put into effect July of last year.
So, you know, I don't want to say that box is checked. I am
going to let you respond to it.
The third highest is Clostridium, and you don't mention
that in your budget.
And it would appear to me that those are the three things
that we need to target in order to close that percentage. And,
you know, in this tight budgetary time, I think that would be a
lot smarter of an approach.
Dr. Hamburg. You know, Mr. Chairman, I understand your
concerns. And I think that we all recognize that we have a food
supply that is generally very safe.
I think no one can argue, though, that we are experiencing
a set of preventable outbreaks due to a range of microbes, some
which cause more severe disease, some which are more prevalent.
But it is a range of concerns, and it is a changing panoply of
concerns.

SALMONELLA

Salmonella wasn't thought to be such a major concern in
products like peanuts. Today we know that it is a very
different situation. So----
Mr. Kingston. But actually say today--this was only July
that we had the new salmonella rule for eggs. And that wasn't--
--
Dr. Hamburg. Well, that is for eggs.
But if I can just--you know, I think what we need and
what----
Mr. Kingston. And I want to point out that the peanut
problem, which occurred in Mr. Bishop's district--and he and I
are all on the same page of it--but that was a criminal act and
not so much food safety as much as it was a criminal act.
Dr. Hamburg. But we are increasingly seeing salmonella in
those kinds of products, is what I am saying, is that there is
a--you know, we can't only have a food safety system that
addresses problems that have happened. We need a system, as the
Food Safety Modernization Act calls for, that really puts an
emphasis on preventing the introduction of contamination of any
kind.
And that is what I think is the huge opportunity here, is
to move toward a system that is really based on prevention so
that we can prevent those unnecessary deaths, we can prevent
the unnecessary costs to the health-care system, we can prevent
the unnecessary costs to industry and to our economy more
broadly.
We also, in a globalized economy, have a whole set of
additional threats to the safety of our food supply that we
need to be very mindful of and prepare for.
So we are trying to create a food safety system for the
21st century and beyond, and I think that we have a
responsibility to take that very seriously. Congress has given
us the mandate to do so. And, you know, I am very excited about
the opportunities to keep moving the dial so that our food
supply is as safe as it possibly can be.
Mr. Kingston. My time has expired.
Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wish we had a whole week of this panel. By the way, I
don't think we have ever had a head of the agency that has such
a tremendous academic and medical background as you have had. I
am just truly appreciative that you took this job.
You are the first responder to any problem that happens in
illness in America, no matter where it comes from. And your
agency is the one that has to stop it, find cures for it. I
think that we sometimes, in this big budget slashing that we
have to do here in Congress--and I wish it wasn't so much
slashing as, to use a medical term, since you are a doctor, is
that we could do, you know, just microscopic surgery, is what
we really need. Just as surgery is done that way, it has to be
very smart and very effective. But we don't do it that way.
I am thinking that we ought to have a week up here
discussing what would be a day without the FDA. If you didn't
have the FDA, everything would come to a grinding halt in this
country. Because, indeed, you are responsible for articles used
in food or drink, for not only mankind but for animals, things
that we don't think about that are regulated, like chewing
gum--you put a lot of that in your mouth--dietary supplements
and dietary ingredients, infant formula, beverages, even
including alcoholic beverages, fruits and vegetables, fish and
seafood, dairy products and shell eggs, raw agriculture
commodities such as what we grow in our area, you know, like
lettuce and carrots and things like that, the canned and frozen
foods, live food animals, bakery goods, snack food, candy,
chewing gum, animal feeds--I mean, just a whole list of things.

FOOD SAFETY MODERNIZATION ACT

In our new law that we passed in Congress, the Food Safety
Modernization Act, which did pass with broad bipartisan
support, and for that--and the chairman has already pointed out
the number of deaths that occur in this country due to
foodborne illness--the President has requested $183 million for
implementation of the new food safety law.
My question that goes to you is, what would happen if that
money was not appropriated, if Congress did not give you the
President's request of $183 million to take these new
responsibilities and tougher responsibilities that we have
mandated upon you?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, we are very committed to moving forward
with the implementation of the Food Safety Modernization Act.
And we are beginning to implement some of the very many new
mandates and requirements contained in that bill. We will be
able to make significant progress in key areas. We will
continue to be able to put forward the----
Mr. Farr. If you don't get the money is the question,
though.
Dr. Hamburg. Yeah. If we don't get the money, we will not
be able to fulfill all of the requirements of the act, without
a doubt. We will, importantly, not be able to fulfill the very
ambitious inspection mandate, domestically and internationally,
which will mean that we won't be able to get that hands-on look
at----
Mr. Farr. Let me follow up just on the inspections. A lot
of the products that we eat, particularly if you think about
the fresh vegetables we eat in the wintertime, a lot of those
do come from Mexico, and have to be inspected coming across the
border.
We also send and sell around the world a lot of food grown
in the United States. California grows 80 percent of all the
almonds eaten in the entire world. And that is more almonds
than all the people in the United States eat, so we have to
export those. Those require inspections in order to be
purchased by foreign countries.
If our side of the inspection falls down, we don't live up
to our regulations, what does that do to the movement of food
supply, particularly with fresh fruits and vegetables that
don't have any resale?
Dr. Hamburg. Yeah, that is a very important question. About
40 percent of the fresh fruit and produce that we do eat in
this country comes from outside our borders. So FDA has a very
serious responsibility to be able to assure the safety of those
products. And it means not just inspections at the border,
which are hard to do and very costly and time-intensive, but
actually going out to where the products are coming from and
trying to assure the safety of that supply chain.

FOOD SAFETY SYSTEM

As you point out, you know, we also need to have confidence
in a robust food safety system in order to support our exports
of foods to other parts of the world. And when there is an
outbreak, a preventable foodborne outbreak, it can have a very
devastating impact on the health of that sector of the food
industry, in terms of sales domestically, as you well know, and
also the ability to do exports.
And if we can't do the inspections that we need to do, we
will not be able to assure the American people that the food
that they are putting on their plates and serving their
families is safe and wholesome.
Mr. Farr. If you don't do the inspections, food doesn't
move.
Dr. Hamburg. Food doesn't move.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr and members of the committee, we are expecting a
vote maybe in the next 5 to 10 minutes. And it is going to be 2
votes followed by a 10-minute recommit. And what I would like
to do, if it is okay with the committee, is when the first bell
goes, I would like to vote, come back, give the gavel to Mr.
Nunnelee, then he can vote, and we can sort of rotate in and
out. That way, we can maximize our time with Dr. Hamburg, if
that is okay.
Oh, okay, just one vote. And so, yeah, there will be plenty
of time. We will be able to get this done. Aren't you glad?
Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to continue the questions about the Food Safety
Modernization Act. You may have already stated it, but let's
look at it specifically. How much is requested in your 2012
budget for implementation of the Food Safety Modernization Act?
Dr. Hamburg. How much is requested?
Mr. Nunnelee. Yes.
Dr. Hamburg. It is $183 million.
Mr. Nunnelee. $183 million. How will we know this time next
year if that $183 million has achieved the results that were
intended by the bill's passage? What specific methods of
monitoring and tracking will we have this time next year?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, we do intend, of course, to track very
carefully our performance as we move toward implementation of
the Food Safety Modernization Act. And I think we recognize
that there are a number of key areas that we have to make
significant progress on moving forward.
We need to begin to put in place the preventive risk-based
approach, working with the industry and with farmers and
producers to make sure that we have identified and agreed on
where the points of vulnerability are and what can be done to
shore them up.
We need to continue to expand our inspections. Of course,
it takes a number of years before an inspector is trained and
able to go out in the field and really perform at full
capacity. So some of the impacts of dollars today won't be seen
for a few years down the road.
We will be strengthening our import safety activities to
make sure that we both expand our inspections overseas but also
work more closely with sister regulatory authorities and with
industry to assure that foods are being produced, manufactured
according to our standards.
We will be working closely with State and local partners,
and that is a very important additional component of the Food
Safety Modernization Act that we haven't had a chance to talk
about yet. Very much it is a partnership. We will be working
with States and localities in terms of helping them to
strengthen their capacities and the contribution that they make
to monitoring the safety of the food supply and responding to
outbreaks when they occur.
So there will be very clear activities under way. We will
be promulgating produce safety rules. We will be putting in
place other guidances and taking other actions concretely in
terms of what is required for implementation.
But I do want to caution that much of the transformation
that needs to happen and the building up of program will take
time. It is not a 1-year activity. And it needs to be a
sustained activity, as well.
Mr. Kingston. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Nunnelee. Sure. I always yield to the chairman.

NEW HIRES

Mr. Kingston. You are talking about 17,000 new employees
and about $1.4 billion in a 10-year period, correct? That is
what the findings were. That is correct?
Dr. Hamburg. Is it--that number of new employees seems
awfully high.
Mr. Kingston. In a 10-year period of time, that is what
everyone was saying last year in Congress in the debate.
Dr. Hamburg. That was--I don't know how many FTEs they
were. Did they speak in FTEs?
Mr. Kingston. All right. It was a CBO estimate. You are
talking a massive bureaucracy in a time that, for every dollar
we spend, 40 cents is borrowed, in the background of a 99.99
percent safety rate in food.
I yield back.
Mr. Nunnelee. Your response was on activities. And I am new
here, but my observation is that when government measures and
monitors, it measures activities, not results. And so I guess
the follow-up question is not how are we going to measure your
activities, but how are we going to know in 2012 has this $183
million achieved any results?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, as we put in place this program, we are
asking for this money in fiscal year 2012, and, as I said, you
won't see the results that same fiscal year in all cases. But
in terms of impacts on people--and that, of course, is what
really matters--you know, we will see, if we do this right,
fewer outbreaks of foodborne disease. We will see fewer people
sickened by the foods they eat. We will see a system that can
better assure that not just food produced in this country but
food produced overseas coming into this country will--that that
imported food will be produced according to our same standards
and will, again, be as safe and wholesome as we can assure.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. I think my time has expired. I
will get back and follow up on the next round.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MENTAL HEALTH

I would just ask you to submit for the record, Dr. Hamburg,
if you could, in the past year how many drugs have been
approved in the arena of serious mental illness. Every year I
ask for that. I am always interested. It is very slow in
coming. I am wondering if you have been able to expedite the
platform for these very, very debilitating illnesses that
affect millions of people across our country.
[The information follows:]

Mental Illness Drugs

From February 28, 2008 to November 10, 2010, FDA has approved 11
new drug applications, or NDAs, to treat mental illness. Four of these
NDAs were new molecular entities. Additionally, 41 supplements for a
new indication with labeling changes were approved for drugs to treat
mental illness. During the same period, FDA approved 108 generic drug
applications for products to treat mental disease.

HEPARIN

But I want to go back to the Heparin issue. First, I want
to ask your opinion as a doctor. How complex a medical product
do you believe Heparin is versus other products that you
regulate? Is it at the top level of complexity? Is it medium?
Is it simple? How do you----
Dr. Hamburg. It is a very complex molecule, there is no
doubt about it.
Ms. Kaptur. All right. Do you know, as FDA, at which sites
all of the ingredients of Heparin are produced?
Dr. Hamburg. Heparin is produced with one of these supply
chains I was describing that has multiple inputs. And there is
precursor materials that come from many different sites, and
then it is consolidated----
Ms. Kaptur. And are you at those sites? Is FDA at those
sites?
Dr. Hamburg. We don't have the resources to be at every
site where every component of a product that is in an FDA-
approved drug is made. We try very hard to use our resources
wisely, and we are at manufacturing sites to inspect them
before we approve a new drug. But that is where the drug itself
is manufactured.
Ms. Kaptur. Made, not where the ingredients come from.
Dr. Hamburg. You know, we work with companies to try to
assure the safety----
Ms. Kaptur. Ma'am, I will tell you, I am a little
uncomfortable with what you are saying to me. If I bake a cake
at home and I look at where the ingredients are from, for
example, I know where they are from, or at least I think I do,
by reading the label. But for these drugs and medical products
like Heparin, it seems like there is a lot more that is being
offshored and we don't really know--how do under what
conditions those pigs actually live?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, one of the reasons why we have really
developed a much broader international program is so that we
can get a better handle on these kinds of issues. We now have
offices in China, for example, to enable us to be on the
ground, working with manufacturers, working with regulatory
authorities there.
Ms. Kaptur. I really wish I could get you on the ground in
Ohio so we could provide them with real competition. As I look
at some of the answers that were provided to past questioning,
it looks like Illinois has really got this thing wrapped up,
and maybe there is not as much competition as we think. Because
we are looking at three companies here, all in Illinois--
Schaumburg, Illinois; Deerfield, Illinois; Lake Forest,
Illinois--three companies. I wonder if they have connecting
doors. I don't know. I will have to take a ride over to
Illinois and take a look.
But according to information that you provide--you know, I
am really asking--I am going to become an expert in Heparin. If
Americans died, we ought to know why. And we ought to really go
back and understand that production chain intimately, because
it will instruct us on what is happening with other medical
products as well.
According to your answers to us in the record, one of my
questions was, what percent of Heparin's ingredients are
domestically produced versus foreign-produced? FDA could not
give an exact answer on that. Here is what they said: ``The
percent of Heparin components produced domestically versus
abroad is determined by each manufacturer according to their
specifications.'' And then it says, ``Manufacturers of the
finished product, Heparin, to be marketed in the United States
do disclose the source of the active pharmaceutical
ingredient,'' but you are not necessarily on the ground where
that source is being produced. And you say, ``FDA would need to
review each application to determine the percentage of foreign-
made components in each finished Heparin product available on
the U.S. market.'' So, basically, FDA doesn't know.
And it also says, there is a note, ``Please note that the
drug applications contain information that is a trade secret.''
Now, as I understand it, Heparin is off-patent. Am I correct?
This has been around for a long time. It is a trade secret,
commercially confidential or otherwise protected from
disclosure to the public under the Freedom of Information Act,
the Trade Secrets Act, the Privacy Act.
If something is off-patent, I mean, tell me here, why don't
the American people have a right to know where the ingredients
of Heparin come from specifically? What is missing in the law?
Dr. Hamburg. I think, you know, the problem is that Heparin
and many other products are made in complex ways that have
ingredients that come from many places. The companies take
responsibility for making sure, to the degree that they can,
that the supply chain is safe and intact. And we have a
responsibility to oversee that process.
But in terms of our resources to be in every place where a
precursor material is made, it is not----
Ms. Kaptur. Is it within your purview to impose user fees
on those companies to ensure that that product that comes back
here is safe? Or do you need more legislative authority to do
that?
Dr. Hamburg. You know, with respect to Heparin, after the
problem arose, there were some fundamental things that needed
to be done to shore up the safety of that product and, also,
that could be applied more broadly, things that involve
moreintensive screening of the precursor products, more intensive
screening of the manufacturing procedures, more intensive screening of
the final product----
Ms. Kaptur. And who is paying for that, ma'am?
Dr. Hamburg. It is a--you know, we are working with
industry. They do provide user fees for components of the work
that we do. Budget authority pays for many aspects of this
program. And industry directly, through their work, takes
responsibility for components of it, as well.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. There will be more questions.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Mr. Latham.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome. I apologize for not being here earlier. As you
may be aware, there are a few other things going on this
morning also. And I want to thank you for coming by and
visiting. I appreciate that very, very much.

LIVESTOCK ANTIBIOTICS

Last summer, the FDA released its final draft guidance 209
on antibiotics used in livestock production to keep animals
healthy and products safe. In the guidance, you laid out plans
to phase out the use of growth promotion or production
antibiotics, as the FDA refers to them, and increase veterinary
oversight on the farms.
The production antibiotics FDA proposes to eliminate serve
two roles: to improve the overall health of growing the animal,
and, thus, leads to improvement in feed efficiency and growth
as a result of improved health and gut integrity.
Given this final draft guidance will directly impact the
health of animals and livelihood of a lot of pork producers--
and you may be aware, in Iowa, we have, like, six pigs for
every human in the State of Iowa--I am really curious as to
what sort of outreach has the FDA done with the producers
themselves to get their input.
These are farmers who, you know, care for these animals.
They produce a bountiful and safe food supply. And I really
think that that type of outreach is extremely important to
really understand modern production agriculture.
And if you could just talk about that, what kind of
outreach, or is there communications going on at all.
Dr. Hamburg. Well, very much so. And our Center for
Veterinary Medicine has been deeply engaged in this issue and
in those conversations.
It is a very important concern. As you know, antibiotics
are vital for treating illness and disease in humans and
animals. It is a vital resource, but it is a limited resource
in terms of the number of antibiotics available. And there are
not many new antibiotics in the pipeline. We don't want to be
in a position where antibiotic resistance develops and we no
longer have tools to treat serious disease in people or
animals.
And that is why we are moving to try to define a framework
for their use that is really as judicious and thoughtful as
possible, never denying antibiotics for appropriate treatment
when there is an indicated medical need, but reducing use that
can contribute to antibiotic resistance and is not medically
indicated, not for therapeutic purposes.
We have been working closely with producers and with the
industry, have had, you know, a lot of ongoing conversations
and a lot of, you know, back and forth. We are trying to move
in a voluntary way to accommodate many of these concerns, and
working with the veterinary community so that we can make sure
that antibiotics are administered as appropriate and with
appropriate oversight.
Mr. Latham. Just to clarify, are you saying it is better to
wait until the animals get sick or to have healthy animals all
the way along?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, we want to have healthy animals, but we
don't want to use our antibiotics in ways that can cause
additional serious problems. And antibiotic resistance is a
very real problem.
When there is a therapeutic indication, antibiotics should
be used. When it is for growth-promotion purposes, that can
contribute to antibiotic resistance; it doesn't serve a
therapeutic purpose. And in terms of the overall health and
wellbeing of animal and human populations and our ability to
have this vital resource of working, effective antibiotics, we
need to move in some new directions.
Mr. Latham. I still question whether you are saying, you
are not--in my mind, it is better to have a healthy animal to
begin with, just like healthy human beings, rather than to wait
until you have--I would think it was more of a food risk with
diseased animals, if you wait until after the fact.
And the idea of growth promotion or whatever it is, is just
because they are healthy; it is not because they have hormones
or something being fed to them.
Dr. Hamburg. But we know that you can reduce the use of
antibiotics in those settings without compromising health of
animals. And we need to be judicious in how we use these very
vital resources.

ANIMAL ANTIBIOTICS

Mr. Latham. But I think you should give some credit, and,
certainly, I would hope that there is input from producers. I
mean, they are facing record-high input costs. They are not
going to be overusing anything, because their bottom line is
very much affected. And also, it is to their economic advantage
to have the healthiest animals possible out there to go into
the food system.
So, in my mind, it is a concern that you don't give the
appreciation maybe of the producers and their position that
should be, I think, well-deserved.
So, anyway, thank you.
Mr. Nunnelee [presiding]. The chair will recognize Ms.
DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Commissioner.
Dr. Hamburg. Morning.

H.R. 1

Ms. DeLauro. To all, my apologies. Secretary Sebelius was
testifying in HHS, but I wanted to make it to the hearing this
morning. And thank you for the good work that you all do at the
FDA.
Three years ago, Commissioner, the Science Board reported
that the FDA was so underfunded that it could not perform its
public health mission. Congress responded by increasing funding
in 2009 and 2010. That progress stalled with this year's
continuing resolution. And the House passed H.R. 1, which would
cut FDA funding by $241 million.
I have a series of questions that I would like answers to,
and specific. My view, as somebody who runs for office every 2
years, that if you can't quantify what you have, if somebody
can't tell you where it is all coming from and where your votes
are coming from, you don't have any idea whether or not you are
going to win. So it is about the numbers.
How would FDA accommodate that kind of a cut? And what
would it do to efforts to address problems identified by the
Science Board in 2008?
Specifically, if the cuts in H.R. 1 were implemented, would
it lead to fewer food safety and medical product inspections?
How many?
Would the cuts impact the amount of imported foods and
medical products that get inspected? How many?
Given that cuts would have to be enacted in a short amount
of time, would furloughs or reductions in the FDA inspection
force be necessary?
The President's budget closes some of the gap on needs
identified by the Science Board. Where does it leave us if we
lose ground in 2011 and then fail to fund adequately in fiscal
year 2012?
What would that do to the agency's ability to perform its
mission? What are the risks to public health if FDA isn't able
to perform its mission?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, we do face, you know, a very worrisome
situation in terms of the facts that, as you recognize, FDA's
mandates and responsibilities far outstrip our resources. For
many, many years, many decades, truly, we have been
underfunded, under-resourced, as that Science Board report
pointed out. And they called for very significant increases to
our budget over a 5-year period.
We have been very grateful for the resources that we have
gotten over the last 3 years to help build our budget. And it
has enabled us, I think, to put in place important programs in
key areas to protect the health of the public.
If we had to face cuts of the magnitude you are describing,
you know, it would be devastating. The size of the cut is equal
to the budget of, you know, one of our centers. Of course, we
would absorb it across the agency----
Ms. DeLauro. I am looking for some specific numbers, Madam
Commissioner, because I think that the impact is lost if we do
not have the numbers.
And, again, you know, I was concerned about funding last
year at this time when we spoke about what the Senate was going
to do with the bill on food safety, et cetera, and in order to
move on a piece of legislation which is so good and which is so
much needed. But without the resources to do it, what are the
consequences?
Now, it is not a question of even the--it is a question of
the resources for 2012. But we have looming here H.R. 1. I want
to know very specifically, as I said, how many food and medical
product inspections? What impact on imported food and imported
medical products?
[The information follows:]

H.R. 1 Food and Medical Product Inspections

FDA estimates that the reductions to the FDA budget in the House-
passed version of H.R. 1 will result in approximately 1,250 fewer FDA
inspections of firms that provide or manufacture food and medical
products. In addition, House-passed version of H.R. 1 will result in a
significant decline in funding that we could provide to our state
counterparts to support development of an integrated national food
safety system as well as a decline in funding to provide employee
training that would negatively affect the level of expertise within our
workforce.

And, you know, if you can't answer them today, I really
want it laid out very specifically so that it is well-known
what we are playing with here at our risk. And we need you to
talk about the agency's ability to perform its mission and what
the risks are to public health--above all, what the risks are
to public health.
[The information follows:]

H.R. 1 Public Health Risks

FDA estimates that the reductions to the FDA budget in the House-
passed version of H.R. 1 will diminish the ability of FDA to perform
its mission and protect the public health. FDA's ability to assure the
safety of America's food supply and medical products will be
substantially reduced. For example, the magnitude of the cuts may
result in approximately 1,250 fewer FDA inspections of firms that
provide or manufacture food and medical products. The reduced number of
inspections can result in an increase in the number of manufacturing
and safety incidents that threaten the health of patients and
consumers.
In addition, FDA also estimates that the reductions for FDA in the
House-passed version of H.R. 1 would result in 7,500 fewer FDA import
inspections to assure that imported foods and medical products meet
safety standards. A lower inspection rate makes it difficult for FDA to
monitor the safety of a growing volume of food and medical product
imports. The result is that Americans could suffer increased foodborne
illness and experience greater medical product safety problems
resulting in more sickness and deaths.
In addition, FDA also estimates that it must conduct analysis of
3,300 fewer food and medical product samples to identify safety
problems. This reduction in laboratory sample analysis may result in
increased incidents where foodborne contamination and drug, device, and
biologic safety problems would go undetected.
Furthermore, FDA's ability to implement the new food safety
legislation will be severely limited. The H.R. 1 reduction will likely
increase the risk of recurring outbreaks of foodborne illness and lead
to greater industry losses of revenue and market share.
Overall, cuts of this magnitude may limit FDA's ability to
stimulate and support industry innovation that offers promising new
opportunities to diagnose, treat, cure, and prevent disease. These lost
opportunities would diminish industry innovation and compromise the
development of new products that would improve the lives of patients.

I don't know if you have any of those numbers today----
Dr. Hamburg. I can't give you exact numbers in terms of how
many fewer inspections. I can tell you that it will be
significant. We will be unable to do inspections, domestically
and internationally, at the level that we need to be doing. We
are already not at the level that we want to be and that we
know really matters.
We will be delayed in our ability to review and approve new
medical products that come before us. That will have impacts on
people who need and are counting on those products. It will
have broader impacts on the economy and the health of the
companies making those products, the jobs associated with that,
our ability to maintain exports in key areas and our global
economic competitiveness.
Ms. DeLauro. Uh-huh.
Dr. Hamburg. We will not be able to do the work that needs
to be done to assure the safety of the blood supply--
fundamental things that matter to people every day.
So we need to be, obviously, very thoughtful. We all
recognize that we have to tighten budgets. And, you know, we
will work with Congress going forward to examine how we can
achieve important cost savings. And the President's proposed
budget does contain some significant administrative and
contract savings across the agency. But we have critical
programs, unique programs that are vital to the health and
safety of people.
Ms. DeLauro. It is going to be important to this committee.
And I just outlined some in the food safety area that I think
we need to have a catalog of--and you mentioned the blood
supply--of what that would that mean. I think it is critically
important for this committee to know that, in terms of what its
actions are going to be. And I also believe it is critically
important for the public to know what is about to befall them
if this piece of legislation sees the light of day.
Thank you.
Dr. Hamburg. Thank you.

FOOD SAFETY MODERNIZATION ACT

Mr. Nunnelee. I will recognize myself for a follow-up on
where I was at the last line of questioning, back on the Food
Safety Modernization Act.
We talked about how the budget request for this year is
$183 million. I will acknowledge that I am new here and I am
still learning. The approach that I have to take is the exact
same approach that I took in my business before I got here,
probably the same approach that American consumers have. It is,
What are we asked to spend, and what are we going to get for
what we spend?
So, $183 million for this year. Do you have a 10-year
estimate as to what the enforcement of the Food Safety
Modernization Act would cost?
Dr. Hamburg. We believe that, in order to fully implement
the Food Safety Modernization Act and all of its many important
mandates and requirements, that we would need the money that is
outlined in the President's fiscal year 2012 budget and we
would need likely comparable increases over the next couple of
years to get us to the overall working budget for this program.
As a businessman, though, I think you can appreciate that
there are some investments that have a greater return on
investment. And I think it is really important to underscore
that this opportunity that we have to really transform the food
safety system in our Nation is going to have much more profound
impact than what you are paying up front in terms of those
dollars.
It is going to reduce costs to the health care system,
preventable costs. It is going to reduce unnecessary lost work
productivity, which is going to be important to our economy. It
is going to support the health and growth of critical sectors
of our economy, the food industry, enabling them to have
broader markets here at home, more trust and confidence of
consumers, as well as stronger export markets.
So there is huge return on investment. And the costs of
these outbreaks of foodborne disease that we know can be
prevented are enormous, in the billions, you know, well over
$100 billion.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. I want to continue to pursue it,
but I think the chairman is back.

TRANSFORMING FOOD SAFETY AND NUTRITION

Mr. Kingston [presiding]. I am only worried about your
voting right now.
See, Dr. Hamburg, we are trying to run this in a manner
that is fastest on everybody.
I want to talk to you about the dietary guidelines. And I
know that you have been involved in this in New York City and
so forth. And I know that salt is always on everybody's drop
list. But there are so many articles that take the other side
of salt. And I will submit these for the record, but there are
five or six of them right here that kind of, on a fact-based
discussion level, talk about the sodium intake and, you know,
give a counter side to it.
And I think, as somebody with FDA, while it is okay for an
advocacy group to take a position, I don't think that FDA
should take a position on that until they have looked at all
the facts. And I am going to submit these to you. And I would
like you to get back to me and let me know what your comments
on that are for the record.

ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE XXI

Mr. Kingston. I also want to switch gears right now and
talk to you about a GAO report that came out about a year ago,
and it was on the Office of Criminal Investigations. And the
gist of it was that the FDA Office of Criminal Investigations
operates almost autonomously, with the director deciding which
cases he or she would report to FDA's senior management.
Are you familiar with that report?
Dr. Hamburg. I am.
Mr. Kingston. Have you taken steps to rein that in? Because
what the GAO said is that investigations really should come
through you and be part of the FDA core mission and consistent
with it and prioritize, rather than have an autonomous group
over there doing it their own way.
And the GAO report also pointed out that their budget had
risen by 73 percent since 1999 and the number of employees has
gone up 40 percent.
So would you care to comment on that?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, that component of FDA does serve a very
important role, but----
Mr. Kingston. Well, no, that is not my question. My
question is, have you implemented the GAO recommendations? Or
do you disagree with them?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, we reviewed it very carefully, took it
extremely seriously, and a group of individuals followed up in
terms of developing a set of actions that should be taken based
on that GAO report. We are moving forward with that. In
addition, we have----
Mr. Kingston. Well, where are you right now? I mean, can
you give me a list of what they are investigating and why they
are investigating it?
Dr. Hamburg. You know, I am not sure that I would be
allowed to give you a list of what they are investigating and
why, since they are ongoing investigations. I would have to,
you know--I would be happy to, if I could. But in terms of the
kinds of work that they do, it relates to some of the important
questions that Congresswoman Emerson was asking about, the
control of counterfeit drugs----
Mr. Kingston. So you feel like what they are doing is
consistent with the core mission, even though FDA's senior
management did not know what they were doing?
Dr. Hamburg. You know, I think that the GAO raised a number
of very important concerns that we are taking seriously. And,
as I said, you know, we looked at it and have developed a set
of action steps. We are also working closely with the
department's IG because it is all part of a coordinated effort
to address a set of enforcement and investigation activities.
So we are currently in a period both of trying to examine
systems and how it works; we have new leadership that is
overseeing that component of FDA broadly. And we are recruiting
for a new head of that office.
Mr. Kingston. What is their budget?
Dr. Hamburg. I don't know off the top of my head.
Do you know?
We would have to get that for you.
[The information follows:]

OCI Budget

For FY 2010, the Office of Criminal Investigation's budget was
$47,095,762, which includes payroll and operating expenses. The Office
of Criminal Investigations has 244 FTE.

Mr. Kingston. Okay.
Mr. McGarey, you are aware they have increased 73 percent?
That was the GAO number.
Mr. McGarey. Yes.

OFFICE OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS

Mr. Kingston. All right. Here is one of my questions. And I
am going to confess, it may be partly personal. There are two
Members of Congress who ride bikes to work, and I am one of
them. If I Google ``Novitzky''--do you know Jeff Novitzky? You
do know him?
Dr. Hamburg. I don't know him personally, but----
Mr. Kingston. Does he answer to you? Who does he answer to?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, he is an employee of that office.
Mr. Kingston. And so, who would be his boss?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, his boss would be the head of that
office, reporting through our----
Mr. Kingston. And that is the vacancy right now, the head
of that?
Dr. Hamburg. There is a vacancy, and we have an acting
head, of course, in that office. And then----
Mr. Kingston. So he would answer to the acting head?
Dr. Hamburg. And to the ACRA, the Assistant Commissioner
that oversees our inspectorate.
Mr. Kingston. So he is four away from you, so to speak? Is
that----
Dr. Hamburg. I suppose that----
Mr. Kingston. Here is my question. And, you know, all the
very important issues in food safety and drug safety and
everything. If I Google ``Novitzky''--and I invite you to do
it, because I did it this morning; I just wanted to confirm.
``Novitsky and Lance Armstrong,'' do you know how many hits
come up?
Dr. Hamburg. No, I don't.

LANCE ARMSTRONG

Mr. Kingston. 116,000. And including going to France to
investigate Lance Armstrong. Now, if he has broken the law,
then that is a very serious matter. But it almost appears to me
that there is a little adventurism going on here, that Mr.
Novitzky is operating on his own.
I would like to know how much has been spent on this
investigation and why so much money has been spent. And is
there anybody here who could give me the answers to that?
Dr. Hamburg. I don't think we could give it to you now, but
we would be happy to follow up with you. And this is also, you
know, in conjunction with the Department of Justice.
[The information follows:]

Lance Armstrong Investigation Cost

The FDA Office of Criminal Investigations, known as OCI, estimates
that it has expended $17,450 to cover investigative travel costs
covering a timeframe from mid-2009 through February 2011. These are the
only expenditures allocated to this case from OCI's operating budget
thus far. This does not include estimates of agent salaries. OCI has
one primary case agent assigned to this investigation.

Mr. Kingston. But you are aware of this investigation?
Dr. Hamburg. I am.
Mr. Kingston. And you are aware that, I believe, millions
have been spent, lots of time?
Dr. Hamburg. I don't know----
Mr. Kingston. And I would like to know what priority that
is in the food chain, because what I am very concerned about--
and I hope that I am proven wrong--but that, because it is a
celebrity, and one great way to make a name for yourself in
this town and in politics is to bring down a celebrity--and,
certainly, all people, whatever their status is, need to follow
the law. But it appears that millions of dollars are being
spent, lots of employees are involved in this. And I am not
sure why so many resources would be put in front of the issues
with Heparin that Ms. Kaptur raised or the issue with OxyContin
that Mr. Rogers raised or the issues that Mrs. Emerson raised.
So what I want to see from you on this priority list--and I
understand you have to keep some of this quiet--but I would
like to know where this is in the priority list and see how
many dollars have been spent. Because I really believe this is
one man's tear, maybe a personal issue, after somebody else.
And I am not sure where the balance is.
But, again, I want to know where it is on the priority
list, why it is where it is on the priority list, how many
people are in this investigation, and how much it has cost the
taxpayers.
Dr. Hamburg. Okay. I appreciate your concern and have
raised some similar questions, myself, within the agency. And
we will get back to you.
[The information follows:]

Lance Armstrong Investigation Priority

Under a long-standing policy established by the Department of
Justice, FDA does not comment on open investigations.

Mr. Kingston. And do you know the irony of it?
And, Mr. Farr, I am going to shut up in a minute.
But I just want say to you as a bike rider, it is one of
the healthiest things Americans can do right now. And I know of
your personal interest in health. But this is an icon who
revolutionized bike riding and brought it home to so many
Americans. And, again, if he is guilty, you know, that is a
different matter. But I just sense that, you know, this is
blown out of proportion, in terms of resources put into it. But
in terms of public health, this is a huge icon that your agency
is trying to take down. And maybe it should; I am not saying
you are wrong on this. But what I am saying is you are really
going after somebody whose name is synonymous with ``health.''
Dr. Hamburg. I understand what you are saying. You know, it
is an ongoing investigation in coordination with the Department
of Justice. You know, I can't speak to the details, but we
would be happy to provide you with some ofthe information that
you asked for.
I also hope you wear a helmet when you ride your bicycle.
Mr. Kingston. I do. And I occasionally stop at red lights,
as well.
Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Well, Mr. Chairman, with this disclosure of how
much you ride a bike, I want to invite to you the greatest
bike-riding event in the entire world. It is called the Sea
Otter Classic, out in Monterey. It features bike events of
every single type, international. So I hope someday----
Mr. Kingston. As long as they have a slow lane, I might be
able to make it.
Dr. Hamburg. Well, and I have to confess, I tried to do a
bike ride of the 17 Mile Drive but turned around before we
completed the whole circuit. I can sort of blame my kids for
not wanting to go further, but----
Mr. Farr. Well, we are a bike-friendly community. Thank
you.
A lot of this discussion has been around cuts and
essentially new appropriations.

FSMA USER FEES

Mr. Farr. I would like to focus for a minute on user fees.
When we passed the Food Safety Act, we had some user fees in
there in the House version. It got knocked out in the Senate
version. There was a user fee and an annual registration fee,
the Food Safety Enhancement Act annual registration fee of $500
a year for food facilities. And I understand that the food
facility or the industry supported it and consumer groups
supported it and it was to provide FDA with needed additional
funding. Where is that user fee proposal now?
Dr. Hamburg. I think that at the present time, there is an
interest in continuing discussions around fees that could help
to support the Food Safety Modernization Act. As you know,
industry had been supportive, or components of industry at
least, of some kind of a registration fee. Clearly, when you
think about food safety, it is an issue where both the public
and industry have huge investments and concerns in terms of the
outcomes, the benefits. So it makes sense for it to be a shared
responsibility in terms of supporting the programs.
We hope that there will be continuing discussions with
industry and with Congress about user fees, and I think as the
President indicated in his budget, we are hoping that in 2013
there will be proposals that deal with that. But action before
then would be most welcome as well.
Mr. Farr. We need the authority to do that. Perhaps we
ought to revisit that, Mr. Chairman. My district, when I was on
the county board of supervisors--and I think in every county in
California, the county environmental health offices have a
restaurant inspection fee. Every kitchen is required to be
inspected. Of course, nobody likes that. You know what? It has
an incredible effect on making sure that the food preparation
in all our restaurants and food for-profit institutions are
done according to health standards, and I think there doesn't
seem to be anybody wanting us to repeal that fee. I think you
get--if people find a benefit for the fee, they will use.
There is another fee that the President's budget
anticipates is going to raise $61 million. It is a volunteer
fee. It is called the Voluntary Qualified Importer Program. I
wondered if you could just tell me how that is working. As we
talked about earlier, I am very concerned about safe imports,
because a lot of fresh product grown in Mexico comes into the
United States and fresh product grown in the United States goes
to Mexico and because Mexico is the number one trade partner
with the State of California, and California is the largest ag
State in the union, a lot of that trade with Mexico is
agriculture.

IMPORTED FOODS

If that agriculture trade is delayed because of inspection
issues, either on the Mexican side or the U.S. side, it is just
lost. Everyone is concerned about this. You want to do
thorough--but quick--inspections. So you created this sort of
fast-track program, to move food product expeditiously.
I wondered if you think this qualified importer program is
going to work and work so that those who are paying to be in
the program will get fast tracked.
Dr. Hamburg. I think as we have talked about already, the
challenge of dealing with all of the imported foods is a huge
one, and we need to find ways to extend our reach and we need
to find ways to have a risk-based approach. And this is one way
to help in that regard where we can reward people with good
track records in terms of being able to recognize that they
have demonstrated adherence to standards and quality. They
don't need the level of inspection, et cetera that other
purveyors may require. We need a risk-based strategy overall so
that we can really target limitedresources. But we are
developing a set of new tools and strategies, some that came with the
Food Safety Modernization Act, in order to extend our reach
internationally and to utilize third parties.
Mr. Farr. Do you expect to meet that goal of $61 million in
fee revenues this year?
Dr. Hamburg. I think we don't yet have the foundation of a
program in place and it will take a while to build up a
program. But I think that we would anticipate that it will be a
program that will be subscribed and successful. And I would
hope we would be able to recover that amount of money. But
again, this is a request for 2012. So we won't be seeing it
immediately.

LEAFY GREENS

Mr. Farr. Well, would you pass on my sincere thank you and
appreciation for the work that Mike Taylor is doing in meeting
with growers. I know. I know where you are. You are hiding back
there; but, Mike, sincerely, the effort you have made to sit
down and listen and show the concern and understanding for a
very complex process of trying to ensure leafy green food
safety. Mr. Chairman, almost everything we produce in the
United States has some kind of process where you can sterilize
it and sanitize it, except leafy greens like lettuce. You can't
cook it. There is no heat process. So you really have to
develop all of that food safety into the growing practices and
to be able to have traceability in that.
And the industry is--the California industry is way ahead
of the world, and we are excited about it. And remember, they
were the ones that came before this committee when Rosa was
chair, and I think shocked us all by saying we need to be
regulated. Well, they went out and set up a bunch of tough
regulations and now they are asking the Nation to be regulated
like they are. And I think it is a good program.
Mr. Kingston. I agree with the gentleman, and I had an
opportunity to be briefed on what the California program was,
which is voluntary, and I thought it was a very positive step.
Incidentally, for what it is worth, one of my first jobs was a
cook, and the way we sanitized the lettuce was--I hate to say
this in front of Dr. Hamburg--but we soaked it in salt in order
to kill the bugs. And I am not sure if that would meet her
standards or not. But it was so much better. Dr. Hamburg, I
might have to give you some some time.
Ms. DeLauro. Sounds good to me, Jack.
Mr. Kingston. I knew I could count on you. The Italians
would appreciate.
Ms. DeLauro. Lots of salt, pepper, oil and garlic and
parsley. That is all you need to make it happen. That is right.
Mr. Kingston. The Southerners and the Italians merge on
that.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.

GENERIC DRUG FUNDING

Commissioner, H.R. 1 dropped the language specifying the
level of generic drug funding in the 2010 bill. There is no
report accompanying that bill. So there is no idea of what
level the bill would provide. Since H.R. 1 also cut funding for
the drug-centered FDA by 10 percent below 2010, 14 percent
below the 2011 request for the drug center, we can assume that
a cut in generic drug would use at least these amounts and
probably much more, given the lateness in the fiscal year.
Let me ask you about your concern about the impact of the
cuts to CDER on generic drug review work. And do you, of
course, see a slowing of application reviews and a loss of
savings to patients in the health care system as a result? And
again, what I am trying to get some idea of so that we know
what the consequences are, is a sense of how many fewer generic
drugs would be approved under H.R. 1. What can you tell us?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, we have been making progress in the
generic drug area in terms of addressing the backlog and moving
product review forward, and it is really quite impressive. We
review about--we approve about two drugs per business day at
the present time. And we know that generic drugs are making a
huge difference in terms of access to critical medicines. And
this cut would set us back. It would mean that our backlogs
would increase, and we would have fewer drugs being reviewed
and approved in a timely way.
Ms. DeLauro. Do you have any idea how many?
Dr. Hamburg. Again, I would prefer to get back to you with
exact numbers. Again, it is one of those issues where we have
to not be penny-wise and pound-foolish. A small cut to that
program is going to have repercussions in terms of costs to the
health care system. I think about 75 percent of prescriptions
in this country today are generic drugs, and they are resulting
in huge savings.
Ms. DeLauro. Savings. That is the point I want to try to
make, because we are taking a look at how we are trying to save
money and cut back the cost in health care. Now, there is also
something that--you don't have to comment on this--something
that I wanted to go after, and that is this opportunity that
the pharmaceutical companies have where they pay to delay, pay
to delay a generic drug from coming to the market, so that they
are in essence paying their competitors to do that. They have
agreements in order to do it. If that were not allowed and if
we could move generic drugs to the market sooner, on that one
specific item I mentioned on the pay to delay, if the Federal
Government is purchasing drugs for TriCare, for Medicare, for
Medicaid, it is about a $3 billion savings. And when you think
about the savings that can be made if we have generic drugs
going to the market,that in fact we can begin to look at how
health care costs get reduced, which is what we are trying to do.
The other piece is what I mentioned in terms of the pay to
delay, immediately--and that follows on the generic drug piece,
because $3 billion we could apply to some other effort,
including reducing the deficit rather than taking the money
from food safety modernization or from inspectors or for
dealing with some of the other areas that we do. And those are
the places that we ought to start, rather than putting at risk
the health and safety of people in this country.
If I can quickly do a food modernization piece, because it
is hard for me to stay away from this area, the legislation
calls for the inspection of high-risk food facilities once
every 5 years initially, and dropping to a frequency of once
every 3 years. Low-risk plants would initially be inspected
every 7 years and then dropped to one, once every 5 years.
Based on the information you currently have, how many food
facilities would fall into the high-risk category and how many
would fall into the low-risk category? And in order to meet the
mandate, how much more funding would FDA need to reach those
inspection frequencies and how many more inspectors would you
need to hire?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, first I should have thanked you for your
leadership on food safety over the years. It has been most
appreciated. In terms of your question, let us see if Michael
Taylor--he says 8,000 in the high-risk category in 2012.

HIGH- AND LOW-RISK ASSESSMENTS

Mr. Taylor. Yes, the ongoing assessment of the bill. That
is the current----
Ms. DeLauro. Eight thousand in the high----
Mr. Taylor. In 2012 we are shooting for about 8,800 high-
risk assessments. And that will play out as the bill is
implemented.
Ms. DeLauro. Low-risk category?
Mr. Taylor. We do a total of 15,000 inspections, if you
include the State inspections. And we mostly divide up--we do
most of the high-risk, and States share in that, but also do
some low-risk inspections.
Ms. DeLauro. Which is why my prior comments about knowing
what we are able to do or not able to do when you are looking
at high risk, 8,000; not a small number for us to have--not the
tools that you need in order to be able to get the job done.

STATE AND LOCAL PARTNERS

Dr. Hamburg. And the mention of the inspections done by
States gives me the chance to underscore a point that I did
make earlier, but I think you were out of the room. But another
casualty of cuts in H.R. 1 would potentially be our opportunity
to help support the State and local partners and the ability to
help strengthen those on-the-ground programs that are so
important to an integrated food safety program.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro.

FOOD MARKETED TO CHILDREN

Dr. Hamburg, I wanted to talk to you about the Interagency
Working Group on Food Marketed to Children, the tentative
proposals that came out in December 2009; and we are having a
comment period, and I know it is the Federal Trade Commission
and the Center for Disease Control, USDA and you, and it really
is something that concerns me, the potential overreach based on
these guidelines that are sitting on the table right now, and I
know we are having a comment period. But under these guidelines
that are out there, the food that would not be allowed to be
advertised on television shows in which 50 percent of the
audience is children, could include peanut butter sandwiches,
eggs, granola bars, noodles, chocolate milk, pretzels,
Cheerios, bread, Graham crackers and cheese.
Mr. Taylor, I can see you squirming. I will go on. Raisin
bread, vegetable soup, yogurt, some salad dressing and, again,
natural cheese. And what bothers me is that--oh, and the
television shows that teenagers watch, basically college
football, Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, Full House, Jane Goodall's
Heroes, NASCAR--it is the only thing I can keep up with--Nick
News, Comedy Central, Sports Center, USA soccer. So these items
would not be allowed to advertise on there. Doesn't that strike
you as an overreach, particularly since these items are allowed
on WIC to be sold?
Dr. Hamburg. I think that the effort is really geared at
trying to make sure that there is an opportunity for
information about health products to be as accurate and
informative as possible, and that certain products that are
targeted to youth audiences in particular often are targeted in
ways that are misleading in terms of their nutritional value,
and it is the appeal of the sugary--sweetened sugar, sugary
cereal.
Mr. Kingston. Let me ask you this. It seems the nanny state
has a solution for everything. Good old Momma Government is
here to tell you how to raise your kids. I might want to serve
my kids baloney sandwiches. In fact, these peanuts, which this
committee routinely enjoys eating, two packages would exceed
your guidelines and they would not be allowed to advertise
because of the salt.
Mr. Taylor, I am going to invite you to come speak next
time because--he is kind of like a referee in the background.
You can't see him from here. But what does the nanny state
want?

HEALTHY KIDS

Mr. Farr. Healthy kids.
Mr. Kingston. Let us talk about healthy kids. Are you
familiar with the family-friendly MTV show called Skins?
Dr. Hamburg. I am not.
Mr. Kingston. Well, it is not exactly something you want
your 14-year-old necessarily watching. And yet you could watch
Skins, which is basically kind of a titillating-type show. I
haven't watched it. I have channel-surfed through it. But you
could watch that show, but you could not buy Cheerios--Cheerios
would not be allowed to advertise on it. Doesn't that strike
you as--even for momma government--a little bit inconsistent?
Dr. Hamburg. Well, from the FDA perspective, our role is to
try and provide accurate information to consumers so that they
can make informed choices, hopefully informed choices that----
Mr. Kingston. But isn't the labeling law going to do that?
Dr. Hamburg. I think it is very, very important to provide
that kind of information so that people can begin to see what
is in their foods.
Mr. Kingston. I know you want it so that when I take my
wife out for a romantic Valentine's dinner, we have to read
through the content of the food before we can order our fish
and steak. And I am not going to let you steal my romantic
evening from it, but I have got to say I don't know where the
nanny state is planning to stop. It is just one thing after the
other that you want to control.
But think about it. I want to invite you to look at a
review of the show Skins and think, We are saying, fine, you
can watch it, freedom of speech, parental control, I am not
here knocking Skins, but I am saying it is ironic that you can
watch Skins but Cheerios can't be advertised on it because that
might really hurt our teenagers, not the fact that they are all
running around in skimpy little clothes.
Ms. DeLauro. I have got to watch the show, Jack.
Mr. Kingston. If I haven't drummed up a little advertising
and interest in the show. Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to run because we
got called for votes. But I think if we are going to go into
what is advertised on television, let us go after all these
prescription drugs that are just drowning the airwaves. By the
time they give you the disclaimers, they tell you you are going
to die. I don't know why anybody wants to buy it. But they seem
to be very effective and I think it is abusive.

BORDER PRODUCTS

Getting back to border issues, I wondered if you could get
me some information to give to this committee on the number of
tests conducted on microbials and pesticides for fresh produce
at the border. You don't have to give me that right now, but if
you could get it to the committee, and the time it has taken
the agency to return the results of those tests. I am really
looking for the number and the time.
[The information follows:]

Microbial and Pesticide Inspection Tests

In FY 2010, ORA performed more than 2,200 microbiological analyses
and more than 1,700 pesticide analyses on imported fresh produce
samples. These numbers reflect multiple microbiological analyses
performed on samples. For example, an imported produce commodity may be
analyzed for the presence of Salmonella, E. Coli and Shigella. This
would constitute a single product sample with three distinct analyses.

Microbial and Pesticide Test Results

The time for reporting microbiological findings of products sampled
during import exams will vary based on the product being analyzed, the
type of analysis, such as foodborne pathogen, and the analytical
finding. The minimum timeframe in which a negative analytical finding
may be obtained from a rapid screening method for microbe testing
typically ranges between three to five days. However, when analyzing
more complex products and foodborne pathogens, this timeframe will
range between 10 to14 days. In addition, when the initial screening
results are not negative, an additional four to eight days is required
to perform confirmatory testing. FDA continues to do research and
collaborate with others to develop both more rapid and sensitive
screening and confirmatory tests.

Microbial and Pesticide Inspection Resources

ORA continues to prioritize its available resources to maximize our
public health protection impact. We continue to identify and implement
new rapid screening methods in our field laboratories, providing FDA
with the ability to rapidly screen imported commodities for the
presence of microbiological contaminants. In addition, we continue to
use our mobile laboratories at the borders to provide on-site
microbiological screening of imported products. These laboratories
allow ORA to screen a high volume of imported product in an expedited
manner, providing FDA with greater assurance products do not contain
microbiological contaminants.

Mr. Farr. And then I want to know whether you have--and you
can do that in writing to the committee--enough resources to
carry out and analyze and quickly report the results for those
tests. This is where speed is essential, and if there are any
gaps in being able to provide that speed, I would like to know
about it.

COCOA BEANS

And lastly, I just want to read something and get that also
on the record in writing, because I am not looking for the
answer today. But I would like for you to be aware of an issue
regarding import procedures for issuing release notices for
cocoa beans. It has come to my attention that several of the
cocoa processing industry are facing time delays and additional
financial burden at U.S. ports because of the need to clean the
product at the port, not at the processing facility. I don't
even know all the facts, but I will submit it to you and you
can get back to us.
[The information follows:]

Cocoa Bean Imports

Imported cocoa beans from Brazil, Indonesia, and Malaysia
are subject to, detention without physical examination--or
DWPE--due to a historical presence of live insect infestation.
The product can be released into U.S. commerce if the importer
shows the product complies with import standards or if the
importer reconditions the product to successfully address the
insect infestation problem. The surest way to accomplish the
latter is to have the cocoa beans fumigated and then cleaned of
any insect detritus.
FDA does not require cocoa beans to be fumigated or cleaned
at the Port of Entry. According to Chapter 9 of FDA's
Regulatory Procedures Manual, the importer should provide to
FDA details of the process the importer will follow for
fumigating and cleaning the cocoa beans. Chapter 9 describes
two acceptable methods of reconditioning shipments of cocoa
beans. Either one of the options, if correctly implemented,
will result in a release of the shipment into U.S. commerce.
There is no requirement stating these activities be carried out
in any particular location or at the Port of Entry, though
certain activities should occur before the cocoa beans are
delivered to the roasting plant.
In 2010, FDA met with the National Confectioners
Association--or NCA--regarding concerns over the fumigation and
cleaning process. Some FDA Districts were requiring processors
to hold `tailings', such as sticks, rocks, and dead insects,
for FDA to examine after the fumigation and cleaning process.
NCA explained it was not feasible for industry to comply with
this requirement because of current industry practice. After
reviewing the information provided, FDA determined that it
generally would not need processors to hold tailings to obtain
release. FDA provided this information to the affected District
offices and is in the process of reviewing the entire guidance
regarding reconditioning of imported cocoa beans subject to
DWPE.

Dr. Hamburg. Thank you. I have to confess I am not up to
speed on cocoa bean imports, but we will get back to you with
information on that. And on the other, it is very, very
important.

ONSITE DIAGNOSTICS

I would just add to what you said about time being
essential with the testing of fresh produce coming into the
country, it is an area where we have huge opportunities to
apply better science so that we can have onsite diagnostics to
give us answers quickly and to be able to move products more
swiftly, which matters to companies, and it matters to the
quality of the produce, and it matters to people who want those
foods on their plates.
Mr. Farr. When you think about it, as we move from a fast-
food society to this so-called slow food, fresh food, we are
going to have to be extra fast at making sure the slow food is
what we claim it to be. Thank you.
Dr. Hamburg. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr, I was just complaining to the very
distinguished Democrat clerk that I think you guys took out our
timekeeper back here on the television. So you might have
another 2 minutes if you want.
Mr. Farr. I am finished, Mr. Chairman. We have got to go.
Mr. Kingston. Dr. Hamburg, we appreciate it. We are going
to have to run on you. We will have a lot of questions for the
record. But I do want to say you are an extremely important
agency to every single household in America, And we all take a
lot of pride in your work and we all have opinions of what you
are doing right and what you are doing wrong. But we want to
work through this process with you, and we appreciate what you
are doing. And while the hearing is ending, our discussions
won't.
So thank you, and this committee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.281

Wednesday, March 2, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

WITNESSES

PHYLLIS K. FONG, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
ROBERT W. YOUNG, SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE INSPECTOR GENERAL ON RECOVERY
ACT
GIL H. HARDEN, ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AUDIT
KAREN L. ELLIS, ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR INVESTIGATIONS
JOHN LEBO, DEPUTY ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR MANAGEMENT
Mr. Kingston. The committee will come to order. We
certainly appreciate you being here, and wanted to welcome not
just the inspector general, Phyllis Fong, but the deputy
inspectors, Bob Young and Karen Ellis, and Suzanne Murinn.
Okay. We appreciate your being here today and appreciate
your testimony, because I think it is one of the most
interesting hearings that we ever have on the hill, and
particularly in this committee. It is always well received. We
have found that the op tempo right now on Capitol Hill is
pretty fast, and everybody has not just one hearing at a time,
but often three.
With that, let me yield to Mr. Farr, if you have any
opening statement.
Mr. Farr. I am interested in hearing the testimony, and
then I have a couple questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. So the floor is yours.
Ms. Fong. Okay. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman, and
ranking member Farr. Thank you for the opportunity to come up
today and talk about our work at USDA. And I want to start out
by acknowledging the appreciation that we in the OIG have for
your interest in our work and your longstanding support for us,
and we want to congratulate you on your new role in the
leadership of this committee, and we look forward to working
with you as we move forward in the next few years. So let me go
ahead and introduce some of my colleagues today.
Mr. Kingston. I was hoping you would, because I sure
dropped the ball on it.
Ms. Fong. Yes. We had some last minute changes, so let me
help.
Sitting here at my far right is Jack Lebo, who is the
Deputy Assistant IG for Management. Next to me is Karen Ellis,
who is the Assistant IG for Investigations. On my left here is
Gil Harden, who is the Assistant IG for Audit. And at the end
of the table is Bob Young, who is the Special Assistant for
Recovery Act, and the reason they're all here today is because
they're going to answer all the tough questions. So just feel
free to direct them to them.
Well, you have my full written statement, so I just want to
offer a few brief comments on three areas of Department
activity where we have really been focusing our attention, and
those three areas are, as you can imagine, oversight of the
Recovery Act money; secondly, strengthening food safety; and,
third, looking at improper payments within the Department,
which is an issue of great interest to all of us. So let me
start out with our work on the Recovery Act.
As you know, the Department received $28 billion across a
broad range of program areas, and with your support we received
$22 million to provide oversight. So we are lookingat virtually
every ``Recovery Act'' program to ascertain whether the recovery moneys
have been spent efficiently and in accordance with the law. Currently,
we are looking at program delivery. We are looking at whether the
people who got the money should have gotten it, and we are looking at
whether the funds went for the correct purpose.
Next year we are going to be looking at performance results
to see how the performance measures were met. So this year I
just want to highlight a few audits that were significant. We
issued an audit on single family housing guaranteed loans,
where we found that 28 out of our sample of 100 loans were made
to ineligible borrowers.
We also issued a report on the single family housing direct
loan program where we found that the agency did not ensure that
calculations of borrower eligibility were current when they
closed the loans. And then we did some work in the SNAP program
where we found that the agency did not review state fraud
detection units, which are a critical part of the management of
that program.
Let me just turn to food safety next, which remains a top
priority for us. We focus in this area on making sure that USDA
programs safeguard the food supply. We have issued two audits.
Let me talk about two audits. We have issued one on beef trim
and E. coli where we found that the agency could do a better
job of taking samples of E. coli in ground beef to ensure that
the product is free of contamination.
We have also started work in the multi-state egg recall
area. We are looking to see how effective USDA's system is for
detecting salmonella; and, as you can imagine, this work is
going to take us a little bit of time. We are in the middle of
it, but we were very troubled to learn that of the 288,000 eggs
that were recalled last fall, over 270,000 of them had the
official USDA grade mark on them. And we are trying to
understand how that could have happened and how the
coordination between AMS, FDA, and others worked in that
situation, so we are right in the middle of that work.
In the area of improper payments we are spending a lot of
time, because we believe it is important that USDA programs
deliver the correct benefits in the right amounts to the right
people; and so, we have done a number of audits in this area
over the past year. We looked at USDA's suspension and
debarment program, and we found that that program is not
working as well as it should. The Department could better
protect its programs by debarring individuals and entities that
have been convicted of committing crimes against the
government, and we found that the Department actually rarely
suspends program violators in that sense.
We also are in the middle of looking at the BCAP program,
the Biomass Crop Assistance Program. Some of our initial
assessments in this area are that the program suffered from
hasty implementation, and so the management controls in that
program are not as good as they should be; and, as a result, it
appears that USDA may have inappropriately made matching
payments to some landowners, so we are in the middle of looking
at that as well.
In the SNAP program, which is of course one of the
Department's largest programs, we devote a lot of effort to
looking at fraud committed by retailers. We have done a lot of
investigations in the past year on benefits trafficking, which
are situations where a recipient exchanges his or her SNAP
benefits for less than face value with a retailer, and then the
retailer redeems and claims full reimbursement from FNS. And we
found that the amount of money involved in that kind of fraud
can be very significant. It can be in the millions of dollars.
For example, we had a case in Florida where two retailers
were involved in about $6 Million in trafficking. They were
successfully prosecuted as a result of our investigation. We
are also doing audit work on improper payments in FNS. As you
know, the SNAP and the school lunch programs are high risk
programs, and so we are looking at how the Department is
addressing, how it plans to address these rates of improper
payments, how it plans to bring down those rates, and we
anticipate issuing some audit reports this year with some
recommendations on that.
And so in conclusion, we look forward to answering your
questions; but, before I end, I want to respectfully request
your support for the President's request for us for Fiscal Year
2012. I understand that we are in a very difficult budget
situation, and I understand that government-wide, we are all
trying to deal with this issue of the deficit.
We do believe that our work provides value, and so we ask
that you consider the request for our office as favorably as
you can. So we look forward to answering your questions, and
thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Fong follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.294

Mr. Kingston. Well, thank you very much, and in response to
your last request, often those numbers are actually set by
another committee, and so we don't have as much control on it
as we want to ourselves. But we certainly plan to work with
you, and we do recognize the importance of your good work.
One of the questions that I wanted to ask you about in
terms of the error rate and improper payments, though, you have
not mentioned farm payments, and I think that we should look
very carefully at SNAP error rates and at farm payment error
rates. And one of the reports that I have read, and it may have
been last year's testimony, but it was one of your reports, it
was just incredible to me the number of people who had broken
the law fraudulently, and yet still were involved in the
program.
And your number of 3981 that says FNS did not debar 3,981
SNAP retailers, I am just amazed. Why? Why is that so hard? Why
is that even a thought process that if you break the law, you
know, maybe we are not going to take you to jail? Maybe we are
not the ones to prosecute you, but we are the ones who say you
are not going to participate in the program anymore, and so
that's it.

SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT

Ms. Fong. Well, I think we agree with you that the
suspension and debarment process needs a lot of work within
USDA, and we feel very strongly that if a person has been
convicted of a crime, especially involving a federal program,
it makes perfect sense to debar them from participating in USDA
programs as well as all government programs, and we are working
with the Department to implement that.
I know that on our investigation side, whenever we have
convictions and indictments, we provide a monthly report to the
agencies within USDA and we make it known to them that here it
is. Here is the list. Some agencies are more responsive than
others; and, I think one of the issues that we are dealing with
right now is working with the Department on its regulations, on
suspension and debarment, to make sure that the exclusions that
they have for certain program areas really make sense.
We do not have a basis for evaluating whether their
exclusions make sense, but we do question them. So we are
working on that.
Mr. Kingston. Who is responsive, and who is not?
Ms. Fong. I believe RMA has been responsive.
Mr. Harden. RMA is actually one of the agencies that is
most responsive and uses suspension and debarment quite
actively. FNS' explanation to us, which we are still working
with them on, is that they put the retailers on it.
Mr. Kingston. RMA is who?
Mr. Harden. The Risk Management Agency.
Mr. Kingston. Yeah. I was thinking Risk Management.
Ms. Fong. Crop insurance?
Mr. Kingston. No, Risk Management is involved in SNAP.
Mr. Harden. No. You asked where in the department.
Mr. Kingston. Oh, okay. All right. Yeah. Okay. So you are
talking farm.
Mr. Harden. It is outside of FNS.
Mr. Kingston. Yeah. I got it. We were blending farm
payments. Okay. Who is not responsive?
Mr. Harden. One of the examples that you gave with FNS is
they put their retailers on a list that takes them out of the
program, but they don't share them with the actual list that
debars them from all government programs. And that's where we
are working at the department now on each one of the
recommendations to work with the agencies as to their
justification for excluding programs for suspension and
debarment.
Mr. Kingston. Why is that so hard, though? Because here we
are working with it and I understand your role is working with
them; but, it still seems to me that under the management of
USDA it shouldn't be that much of a mystery. Either you are
doing this or you are not doing it, so I am asking your opinion
of it. I am not holding you responsible.
Mr. Harden. I am kind of in the same boat you are. We don't
understand why it is so hard. But when we start talking to the
different agencies and counsel's office, and trying to see and
provide us with evidence as to why something should be
excluded, they have yet to provide that information, so we
still have those recommendations open.
Mr. Kingston. Well, you know, it is interesting. In this
town, both parties always talk about waste, fraud and abuse as
a way to cut spending, and we are all in agreement with that.
You are the folks who always have these unbelievable stories of
waste, fraud and abuse, and yet in my years on this committee
in Democrat and Republican Administrations, it always seems to
be that we are working to get this under control.
I think right now we need to go ahead and get this under
control, and any advice you can give us on, okay, here is how
to do it, because these folks aren't going to do it on their
own. You've got to go ahead and put a hammer on them and make
sure it is done. So my time is up, but I want to continue that
discussion.
Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will just follow
up. I mean is the authority there for all the agencies to do
it? Is the training, because it is sort of a legal role. You
can appeal these, I imagine, so is it a lack of training among
personnel? I mean what is it it takes to crack down? And it is
universal in the department.
I mean you didn't go into any of the farm paymentprograms,
and you know, we just hear abuses of that all the time, usually,
reading about it in the press; but, you audit those payments as well?
And nothing in your report here about it.
Ms. Fong. Let me address suspension-debarment at a more
philosophical level.
Mr. Farr. Okay. Yeah.
Ms. Fong. This is an issue that it is very difficult, and
we see it among many departments and agencies in the executive
branch, because frequently IGs come in and say, ``you need to
really pay attention to this, you need to act against the bad
actors.'' What you will hear from the program side is ``Well,
we understand that, we see where they made a mistake, but we
depend on these entities to deliver the programs.'' And so if
we were to debar them or suspend them, there would not be an
adequate delivery.
Mr. Farr. But a lot of those you are talking about programs
that go to private sectaries, and aren't they bidding on those
programs competitively? Isn't there some competition out there
who could pick up that bid if they were disbarred? And aren't
you in charge of the counsel of all the AGs to be looking at
this?
Ms. Fong. Exactly. Exactly. And the reason I am bringing
this up is because a number of us as IGs have testified on this
issue in the last year. There've been hearings in some of the
other committees on the hill. We are all dealing with these
issues. And so what we are trying to do as a group of IGs is to
make sure that our internal processes work, that we are
identifying parties that are appropriate for suspension or
debarment, that we are providing notifications and lists of
those parties to the departments, and that we are issuing
reports that point out where the department really needs to do
further work.
Mr. Farr. Is the procedure for this different with each
department?
Ms. Fong. Well, each department has its own regulations.
Mr. Farr. Okay.
Ms. Fong. And I think USDA's are unusual.
Mr. Farr. Do they have enough authority? I mean there is
nothing missing in congressional enactment that you need. It is
just trying to get a standardized process, somewhat
standardized process here, if they each have their own
regulations; but, it seems to me that this sort of--all the
reporting of contract frauds I mean--you know. Bill Gates is
next door and I will bet there is a lot of discussion going on
right now about defense contractors.
But, you know what? Your testimony is essentially the same
as the testimony was made 20 years ago to this committee, and
what is changing in this field? And I think the chairman is
right about suspension and debarring of people.
Mr. Kingston. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Farr. Sure.
Mr. Kingston. And I am going to emphasize that there is a
high degree of frustration here, because I think Mr. Farr is
absolutely right. Ten years ago, different administration,
different people at the table, different people on this panel
but same testimony, and I think we really would love to see,
you know, the end of all this, whatever.
Our constituents are crying for it, and I feel very
strongly that whether it's ``Red'' state or ``Blue'' state
politics, it should still be the same measurement. We have got
to crack down on this. So we have a lot of unanimity, I guess,
on that.
Mr. Farr. Do you need more authority?
Ms. Fong. I don't believe it is an issue of authority. And
to add a little more nuance to this, we are engaged with the
Department, the CFO's office, the chief financial officer's
office is engaged with all of the agencies to move them forward
on this and we are in consultation with them on their
regulations.
We believe that progress is being made, although it is
slow, and so we are continuing to engage with them. We are not
going to let this issue drop, because it's a government-wide
issue and we need to prioritize.
Mr. Farr. Do you prioritize? I mean there are some issues
here about SNAP, and I am glad you are going after, sort of,
the vendors, rather than just the individual, who may be poor
and illiterate and may be misqualified; or, essentially,
children who are in the wrong line in school, I mean, you are
looking at the bigger cost issues.
I have some follow-up questions, but my time is running
out. But I really get a sense of, I mean, what I think is what
we are surprised to see; that there is nothing in here about
the farm payments that are being made, and that whole list of
categories that I think we yesterday pointed out that there
were--what--32 different programs of dealing with where
individuals could qualify for federal assistance.
Ms. Fong. Well, our testimony was developed, focused on
sort of the highlights of what we have done in the last year.
That's not to say that we are not looking at the farm programs.
We have a lot of ongoing work in that area; and, in terms of
improper payments, we have, as you know, responsibilities under
the new improper payments law in the executive order to look at
the Department's efforts across the board to make sure that
each agency is identifying in where their improper payments lie
and that they have good plans to remediate their improper
payments. And so we are in the middle of doing all of that, and
FSA, you know, is amongour list of entities to look at.
We also have work going on in BCAP, which I think you might
have noticed we highlighted in our testimony. We are very
concerned about how that's all developing.
Gil, would you like to add?
Mr. Harden. Another area that we will be looking at
improper payments for farm programs is the SURE program, which
is a new program.
Mr. Kingston. Did you say SURE or sugar?
Mr. Harden. SURE, supplemental revenue. I am trying to
remember what the acronym stands for.
Mr. Kingston. Well, is it a disaster program?
Mr. Latham.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess somewhat to follow up on the topic here in your
semi-annual report, the second half of 2010, your investigation
disclosed two brothers who were able to defraud SNAP of about
$800,000 over three years by exchanging SNAP benefits for cash.
And a similar problem was found in the WIC program. What we
have been told for years, that this wasn't going to be
happening, to the extent that apparently it is, what is
happening? Is there something new going on, or what?
Ms. Ellis. Is this on?
Mr. Latham. There is no button there or switch.
Ms. Ellis. Okay. Good. It makes it easy for me. What we
have found, I mean I think the idea being that going to the
electronic benefit transfer would eliminate or reduce fraud. I
think what we have found out in our work is that it has made it
easier for us to build our investigations, because everything
is done electronically, and there is a record now.
We get to a point now when we do our investigations where
we can literally sit in our office, and on a computer watch
transactions occurring. So it may have had a deterrent effect,
maybe, at first. But what we have found is that for us the
crime has just become more sophisticated, more technologically
advanced, making it much easier for us to build our cases more
so on paper; whereas, before, our EBT cases, or at the time our
food stamp cases, were more field work intensive. So it has
just raised the level of technology.
Mr. Latham. So it is easier for you to track, but we still
have very innovative people out there trying to do.
Ms. Ellis. Yes, and they do try to find different ways to
circumvent the system.
Mr. Latham. In your opinion, are there things that we could
do legislatively or whatever to help you or to really crack
down further?
Ms. Ellis. I think for our purposes the tools are there for
us with regard to legislation and laws. I think it is a matter
of working closely with the agency and the agency working with
the states, and where my audit counterpart can help out with
finding where there are weaknesses or loopholes and make
suggestions to the agency.
I do have to say though that in my years of working at USDA
and working with FNS, they are always very open to our side of
the house to investigations. When we find problems, they will
work with us to try to remedy them.

FRAUD IN RECOVERY ACT PROGRAMS

Mr. Latham. In the same report, rural development and the
``Recovery Act'' had $1.56 billion in loans that were meant for
buyers of very low incomes for the single family housing direct
loan program, if you look over here, where the answer is over
here. Okay. And, apparently, there were some people getting
loans that their incomes were not being verified or too high to
qualify, or something, what is the reason for that or what
needs to be done?
Mr. Young. Well, in that particular case, the rural
development or rural housing service wasn't getting the
documentation they needed to review. They hadn't set up a
second party review, so loans were being approved, but they
didn't have that second party review to ensure that they had
all the information ensuring that the people getting those
loans were eligible for the loans. Their control process broke
down and allowed some ineligible loans to be made.
Mr. Latham. Were there guidelines in place to verify?
Mr. Young. Yes. There were guidelines. I think the reason
some of this happened, you had a lot of money that needed to
get out very quickly. And some of the people were somewhat
overwhelmed because of the number of loans they were making.
And, as a result, some of the controls fell by the wayside,
such as second party review.
Mr. Latham. Who was rushing?
Mr. Young. There seemed to be within the agency staff, a
feeling that since this money was made available, they wanted
to get that funding out or those loans out as quickly as
possible to address the recession, to address the farmers that
needed help in the housing area.
Mr. Latham. Okay. So I mean was there a dictate from above,
or something, that said no matter what, don't follow the rules.
Get the money on a shovel and move it out the door?
Mr. Young. No. I am fairly sure there was no one saying
don't follow the rules. But I think just the sheer volume of
the work they had to do, when you have so many people and so
much work to do, sometimes some of those controls fall by the
wayside because of the sheer volume of program participants.
Mr. Latham. Okay. My time is expired. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. There are a couple on your side over here
before I was, so let them.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. No questions.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Grace.
Mr. Grace. I am listening in awe.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
random observations.

SNAP PROGRAM ERROR RATE

First of all, I don't know, and if we could get this
information, how the SNAP error rate of approximately 4.4 ranks
in comparison to other government programs, and that is such as
direct payment to farmers, oil subsidies, or mineral subsidies.
I also understand there were serious mistakes that were greater
than anything that we are talking about here, and the
guaranteed housing program, that in fact were the errors. And
the people who were responsible were bankers, and that is in
your testimony.
So it would be interesting to note that 27,000 loans were
ineligible for the program--33 percent of the portfolio with a
projected total value of about $4 billion. So I think it would
be useful to lay out, because there is always an abiding
interest in what happens in the SNAP program. It is always
interesting to me that that is the place where we direct our
attention. But we have got some other serious offenders here,
and quite frankly the error rate, I believe, since 2004 has
gone from around 10 percent down to about now 4 percent.
We have had a tremendous rise in the number of people
participating in SNAP, and as I congratulated Secretary
Vilsack, yesterday, I think that managing that increase with an
error rate that is a low one by some standards, but I think for
the benefit of the committee, it might be useful to look at
this information so that we can have an accurate picture and
not just kind of cherry pick, either from the side of a farm
payment issue, or from the side of the SNAP issue. So let me
ask you to provide me with that information, if you can.
Ms. Fong. Okay.
Ms. DeLauro. And SNAP is USDA's largest program in dollars
spent, number of participants, so we are looking at what is
ostensibly a low error rate. That doesn't say we shouldn't
correct what we need to, but we ought to be equitable in our
correcting and emphasize where the most egregious offenders
might be.
And I don't know if you know something about what the
percentage of error rate with regard to the guaranteed loan
program, with the mineral subsidies. I don't know if you have
that off the top of your head, now.
Ms. Fong. We can provide a chart, too, that the Department
compiled in its Fiscal Year 2010 PAR----
Ms. DeLauro. That would be great.
Ms. Fong [continuing]. Which lists the improper payment
rates for all of the agencies within USDA.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.297

Ms. DeLauro. One of the things I wanted to follow-up,
something that Mr. Farr said. Well, we are going to get another
round, I am sure. What would you need? In other words, you make
recommendations to the agencies, and this is every inspector
general. And it is nice to see you all again, anyway. Thank you
very much for being here.
You make the recommendations and then you rely on the
agencies to carry out the recommendations. Correct?
Ms. Fong. Correct.
Ms. DeLauro. Is that right? Now I am also taken with, so
then with your portfolio of the various audits, investigations,
and what you have to do, and agency recommendations, and
following up year in and year out, you need to have staff that
deals with all of that for you to have accurate information and
data to know what they have done and what they haven't done.
Correct?
So I have got a two-part piece here. One is what else could
we do for you that would allow you to have a greater
opportunity for follow-up with the agencies to see where they
are going and to be able to monitor that more closely. And then
I would like to ask you is given that the OIG's office is cut
by $8.7 million under the budget that was passed last week, it
is a reduction of about 10 percent.
The USDA OIG's budget was cut more than any other IG office
in other departments again, as I understand it. Treasury,
Interior, a cut of one percent. The less, Defense IG, received
an increase of 17 percent, because ACR would be enacted. So
late in the fiscal year what would be the impact of the cut to
your office? Would you have to furlough employees? If so, how
many?
How would this impact the work of the OIG? Would audits,
investigations have to be delayed or suspended? Would the
office miss statutory deadlines for audits? How would your
office have to reassess its priorities? Would your office have
to shift away from investigating improper payments in order to
focus on public health and safety priorities?
My time is up. I'll repeat them in a second go-round so
that you can answer this for us, both from the point of view of
what you need to continue to follow-up on these investigations
and audits, and what would the majority's cuts to the OIG
budget at USDA mean in terms of your workload and your
personnel?
You can answer it in the next round. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you for your indulgence.

FRAUD IN FEDERAL PROGRAMS

Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Ms. Fong, what I don't understand is it appears that the
fraud is common. Would you say that that's true or false?
Ms. Fong. Fraud is common in any particular program?
Mr. Kingston. In all of them. I mean from the housing to
farm programs to SNAP. Those are the three we have talked
about. It seems to be common.
Ms. Fong. I think what I would say is that in general, if
you have a federal program that has a lot of dollars and, in
particular, in situations where dollars are going out quickly
and people see an opportunity, it is human nature that there
will be some element of the population who will look for a way
to take advantage of a federal program. And so, I think, if you
look government-wide, virtually every program will have some
level of fraud. Now, that's not to say that while that's not
surprising, that's why we are here.
Mr. Kingston. But would you say the government is easier to
steal from than other places?
Ms. Fong. Well, I don't know if it is easier to steal from
the government or other places.
Mr. Kingston. That is why I voted against a bailout.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Fong. But I will say that I think the government has in
place a structure to try and deal with those situations, and
that structure is comprised of program managers on the very
first level of defense who need to pay attention to make sure
that their programs are run effectively and have the minimum
potential for fraud. And then the next level of defense is the
IG system, which, you know, is here to help the program
managers get a third party objective look and advise on how
they can tighten up. And, if in fact people get through and
commit fraud, we are here to go after them so that there is a
deterrent effect against future fraud.

LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAMS

Mr. Kingston. Well, let's talk about the $4 billion in the
loan programs, the loan guarantee programs. It said that a lot
of people got loans that weren't eligible. Did any employees of
the USDA lose their job because of that incompetency? Ms. Fong.
Ms. Fong. I would suggest--my sense is that the answer is
no, but you might want to ask the undersecretary for RD that
question.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. You know that is an interesting
response, because last year I had a similar question to you,
and you had said, ``No. You need to ask them, because we only
make the recommendations.'' Maybe there needs to be something
that bridges your action with their action a little bit
stronger, because it appears that if your recommendations are
merely academic, and then from then on out somebody is not
going to do anything about it, then we are going to continue to
have these repetitive hearings.
I had a friend of mine, many, many years ago, right out of
college, real smart guy, was the treasurer of his church. I
mean he was like 23 years old, just out of college, a really
bright kid, and figured it out that the preacher was stealing
money out of the collection plate. And he went to the adults on
the vestry and he told them. This was a preacher. Everybody
loved the guy. He was great. How could he be stealing? It can't
be possible.
So what they ended up doing is they planted $20 bills in
the congregation and wrote down the serial numbers, and they
did this several times. And the last person to get the
collection plate was the preacher and those $20 were gone. So
they went to the church, and the church said--their reaction,
and this is my 23-year-old, idealistic friend who believes in
everything good and great and the church says to him--the upper
church says, ``Well, don't do anything rash. You have to be
careful about these things.'' This is a preacher stealing! And
the message to the 23-year-old was, you know, you don't always
have to play by the rules. They're optional.
And I wonder if we haven't sent that signal in the USDA
that, you know, some fraud is going to happen, and maybe we are
not going to be that tough about it. I mean $4 billion in the
loan guarantees and nobody gets----
Ms. Fong. Let me just clarify, a little bit. In that audit
we found that it appeared that a number of borrowers who should
not have gotten housing loans got them. Now, as it was pointed
out, it was a guaranteed program, so the banks are the ones who
bear the brunt of it.
Mr. Kingston. Did they get eliminated from the program,
from eligibility?
Ms. Fong. I don't believe RD has taken action on that, and
here we get into the whole issue of how the program agencies
want to deliver their programs.
Mr. Kingston. But, the banks, just like the grocery stores,
should be responsible for their own employees and they should
not be eligible anymore. And if we are sending a signal, that
is the option.
Ms. Fong. Well, I do not believe our office is sending that
signal. We have gone up against the program.
Mr. Kingston. Does it drive you crazy?
Ms. Fong. Yes. We have continuing debates about this audit.
We have briefed the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary, and
they are committed to taking action.
Mr. Kingston. Well, my time has expired, but I think what
would be really good is you guys turning up the volume to us
and saying, ``Okay, you people in Congress need to know we are
giving the same testimony over and over again. And you are the
bridge, and it is not getting through to the peoplewho should
be taking role and kicking tail. And it's not happening. We can't do
it, but you all can.'' And I don't think we are hearing that from you,
because what I'd like to get, we will have another round, is some
recommendations where do we go from here.
[The information follows:]

(Recommendations for what needs to be done to strengthen ``the
bridge'' between OIG recommendations and implementation.)
Agency leadership and staff have been very positive in responding
to OIG's recommendations. OIG works closely with agency officials and
staff to timely reach agreement (i.e., achieve management decision)
and, in coordination with the Office of the Chief Financial Officer
(OCFO), implement agreed to actions. However, issues do arise in
reaching agreement and final action on some recommendations. When that
happens, we follow established procedures to elevate our concerns.
In USDA's Departmental Regulation on Audit Followup and Management
Decision, DR 1720-1, Appendix A (which is currently being updated),
there are specific steps in place that agencies are to follow in
reaching agreement on OIG recommendations. Included are elevation
milestones if agreement is not reached within a 6-month timeframe. The
timetable and actions described below do not preclude elevation to the
next level at any time. The timeline follows.

Within 60 days of the audit release date, the agency must
propose a preliminary management decision to OIG for each
recommendation in the audit report for which there was no management
decision made at the time of report issuance.

If an agreement with the preliminary management decision
has not been reached within 90 days, both OIG and the agency will alert
their respective senior officials of the differences and potential
problems in reaching agreement.

If agreement has not been reached within 120 days, OIG
will prepare an Audit Decision Paper summarizing disagreement with the
preliminary management decision, and will discuss the Audit Decision
Paper with the management officials.

If agreement with the agency head has not been reached
within 135 days, the Audit Decision Paper will be elevated by OIG to
the applicable Under or Assistant Secretary.

If, after 150 days, an agreement has not been reached, the
Audit Decision Paper will be elevated by OIG to the Department's Audit
Follow-up Official, the Deputy Secretary, who will render a management
decision.
If an agreement still has not been reached within 6 months (180
days) after issuance of the final report, the audit is reported in
OIG's Semiannual Report to Congress.
In April 2010, the Secretary established an initiative to close out
late OIG recommendations. The agencies have taken the Secretary's
initiative very seriously. All agencies are working diligently with the
Office of the Chief Financial Officer, who has been instrumental in
this initiative, to reach final action in order to get old
recommendations off the books. Agency staff have also been responding
more timely to new recommendations reported by OIG.

Mr. Farr.

IG AUTHORITIES

Mr. Farr. To follow up on that, you don't take the legal
action, you just point out the error or the misconduct, and
then it's up to the agency's lawyer to prosecute? Or what is
it, AG?
Ms. Fong. Or take whatever action. In this case, I don't
believe we found fraud in any of those situations. It was not
fraud. It was more oversight or not following the regulations,
so it's not criminally prosecutable. And so, then the question
is what is the agency going to do about it. Is it going to
comply with its regulations or is it going to change its
regulations?
I think that is a policy issue that they are struggling
with right now. Let me just address, philosophically, the whole
structure of what IGs do, and I think all of you are bringing
this issue on the table out of a sense of frustration; and,
certainly, we have that sense as well. As IGs under the law we
report to you and we report to the Secretary, and we issue our
reports directly to you and we testify before you.
We bring to you issues that we think are significant, and I
am very pleased that at these hearings you are so interested in
what we are hearing and you want to see further action--I think
you are going about it the exact right way--that you are having
these oversight hearings, that you are talking to the
Department officials, the policymakers, and you are putting it
on the table with them: What are you all going to do about
this; because that is exactly the right role for you and for
us.
Mr. Farr. But that goes to my question of the authorities.
I mean you have authority to blow the whistle, but you don't
have the authority to stop the game.
Ms. Fong. Precisely. The Inspector General Act very clearly
says we cannot run a program. We do not make decisions on
funding. We cannot fire employees unless they are within our
own office. And it's there for a reason.
Mr. Farr. But you pointed out in your testimony what you
are going to do with your additional money is you are going to
increase the instruction on suspension and debarring. Is that
the right word? To give the agency staffs the knowing how to do
that properly, right, is that what it takes?
Ms. Fong. We can. Part of our role is to inform, to
educate, to persuade, and convince. A part of our role is to
provide information so that the agencies can act on that
information.
Mr. Farr. But your responsibility then is to train people
on how to use the authorities they have to take some legal
action to stop the game, so to speak.
Ms. Fong. I would hesitate to use the word
``responsibility,'' but I will say a role that we can play is
to educate and train.
Mr. Farr. Well, I mean I think everybody on this committee
is frustrated. And I am sure every committee and subcommittee
of appropriations is frustrated in hearing this testimony,
because yeah, we do like to hear the whistleblowers, but we are
frustrated that once you hear it that the agencies aren't
playing the role they're supposed to play to effectively remedy
the situation.

STATE ENFORCEMENT OF SNAP

I mean throughout your testimony, that's what I kept
understanding, and some of your audit responsibilities are,
because some of the cops in this are not federal cops. We deal
with states. What are the states that have the worst reputation
of not being able to do enforcement?
Ms. Fong. You are talking about the nutrition programs?
Mr. Farr. SNAP is the biggest program in the whole USDA.
Ms. Fong. We may have to provide that information to you,
because we don't know that.
Mr. Farr. I think you said you had that.
Ms. Fong. Well, we have the improper payment rates. We can
provide you a chart on improper payment rates within programs.
Mr. Harden. That's not the state.
Ms. Fong. Right. Right.
Mr. Farr. Pardon me?
Mr. Harden. The listing of programs that have improper
payment rates is not the same as the states that are the bad
actors. That would be two different lists.
Mr. Farr. What is the one--we have some information about
Texas and Indiana.
Ms. DeLauro. That is erroneous. The highest error rates, as
I understand it, is Texas and Indiana.
Ms. Fong. That may be. They are on the watch list, yes.
Mr. Farr. So that is for error rates, but what we are
talking about is weak enforcement. Right?
Ms. Fong. Well, they may be related. The fact that there
are high error rates may, if a state has a very high error
rate, then the agency needs to be focused on that and to employ
whatever tools they have to penalize, as it may.
Mr. Farr. So walk us through the process. You have a SNAP
program. It is the biggest program USDA has, the most money
going out. You work for the states, because we don't administer
it. It is state administered.
Mr. Harden. Right.
Mr. Farr. So what we do is monitor. So if you find an error
rate, then what? Who slaps the hands of the state and how do
you do it?
Mr. Harden. Well, where it starts, initially, is the Food
Nutrition Service provides the oversight through their regional
offices to the states, and states have high error rates. They
have ways, for like the SNAP program, of administering
sanctions to the different states to encourage them to lower
their error rates. And then they also have----
Mr. Farr. Encourage them to lower their error rate.
Mr. Harden [continuing]. Bonuses.
Mr. Farr. They just defrauded the Federal Government a lot
of money and you are going to get encouraged. ``Don't do this
anymore.'' Is that all that happens?
Mr. Harden. I am not going to be able to speak all of FNS's
process, but they are the first line of oversight in terms of--
--
Mr. Farr. But you are overseeing them.
Mr. Harden. And we would go in and look at how they are
running the program and are they following up and carrying out
the roles and responsibilities that they have. And if we find
that they aren't, then we would be making recommendations as to
how to strengthen those weaknesses.
Mr. Farr. My time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. I think we're seeing a theme here.
Mr. Latham.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In your testimony, there was a case in Massachusetts, a
corporation that collected millions of dollars in government
money for services they never provided. Apparently it was an IT
training, or something like that. And it's just amazing to me
that this is a prepaid voucher system, where they got the money
ahead of time but never provided the service.
How widespread is this system? Is there no control over
this? Or how did this happen?
Ms. Ellis. This is to kind of explain, when you buy a
computer, sometimes you prepay on your personal computer
training. And sometimes we take advantage of it, and we
actually go to the store where you bought the computer, and we
get that training, and sometimes we don't.
And in this case, it was very similar. It was a large
company that gave IT-type training, that the government had
contracts with. And certain training aspects were not followed
through.
The people did not go to the training. But still the
company charged.
In answer to your question, we did work this case jointly
with several other federal agencies. And within USDA, there
were a number--I'm looking at my list, I'm going to say maybe
about ten different USDA agencies, that also had contracts with
this company.
So it was pretty widespread.
Mr. Latham. Ten different USDA?
Ms. Ellis. USDA agencies that had contracts with this
company for this training purpose. In addition to other federal
agencies.
Mr. Latham. With similar results with all of them?
Ms. Ellis. Yes. What had happened was our agency worked
with other federal law enforcement agencies as a team, and we
investigated this company and the various contracts.
So we were able to pull all of our information together.
GSA was one of them, Department of Commerce, and DOJ worked
jointly with us.
Mr. Latham. Can you give me a list of the other agencies
that were involved with this also?
Ms. Ellis. Yes.
Mr. Latham. Please, if you would.
Ms. Ellis. I'll supply that for the record.
[The information follows:]

(Listing of other agencies involved in investigation of the
contractors and the pre-paid voucher false billings.)
Working with other Federal investigators, OIG determined that a
corporation doing business in Massachusetts collected millions of
dollars from the Government for services it never provided. The
corporation offered training on computer software and other information
technology. Using a pre-paid voucher system, agencies paid up front for
training that the company never delivered. We found that several USDA
agencies were victimized by this scheme. In April 2010, the corporation
agreed in a civil settlement to return a total of $4.5 million to the
Government.
This was a joint investigation by USDA-OIG, General Services
Administration (GSA)-OIG, the Department of Commerce-OIG, and the
Department of Justice. The investigation involved USDA agencies
affected by the corporation's scheme, including: Agricultural Marketing
Service, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service, Food and Nutrition Service, and Economic
Research Service.
OIG was recently notified that GSA's Office of Acquisition Policy,
Washington, D.C., determined it was not necessary to exclude the
corporation or the president of the corporation from Federal
contracting. The corporation is still providing services to GSA.

Mr. Latham. And you've made recommendations, I assume, to
the Department as far as how to correct or keep the integrity
of this--I have real concerns about a voucher program where,
it's after the fact, the money's out the door.
Ms. Ellis. Yeah. We work closely with the Department. What
we did is we issued our reportive investigation, which then
showed the results through DOJ of the sanctions that were taken
in the sentencing.
We then send it to the Department, to ask them to take some
sort of admin action. This one that I am not sure that they're
in the process of debarring; because there are so many other
agencies involved, especially GSA, who probably has the main
contract.
My guess is----
Mr. Latham. Why would they have to wait for other agencies,
other departments?
Ms. Ellis. Well, we would work with them to make sure they
are debarred. There is like a list that this company would go
onto.
And that's why--I personally don't know right now who is
actually taking the action, whether it's us or----
Mr. Latham. No. But I mean, you said that you were waiting
for other agencies to act. If you knew the facts in this, why
wouldn't you go ahead and respond?
Ms. Ellis. Oh, because we can't enforce the actual
suspension and debarment. We would have to wait for the USDA to
take that action. And we would follow up with them. And my
assumption is that they----
Mr. Latham. Are they acting?
Ms. Ellis. I don't know the answer to that, offhand.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
In Puerto Rico in the Nutrition Assistance Program,
apparently they're allowed to cash in 25 percent. And this is
U.S. taxpayer dollars going down to support the program.
But you are able with your nutrition program to get 25
percent of your benefit in cash. So potentially there's about
250-some million dollars that could be used for other purposes,
rather than nutrition.
Is there any way of knowing where the money's going? And
now they're talking about being able to use it in restaurants
and fast food places, and--anybody?
Ms. Fong. We did some work on that, the Puerto Rico
program, a number of years ago. But I don't recall the results.
And I hesitate to speculate.
But my guess is that Puerto Rico's delivery system is
unique. I think it's the only jurisdiction that allows a cash
takeout.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Ms. Fong. And I'm not sure if that's a federal----
Mr. Latham. I just hope this isn't a pilot program for the
rest of the system. I mean.
Ms. Fong. It doesn't appear to be.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Ms. Fong. I don't know if that's because of local law or a
federal law. I just don't know that.
Mr. Latham. I think they have their own program that we pay
for, yeah.
Ms. Fong. Yes.
Mr. Latham. Right. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. If I can, because I want to get in a question
eventually about N60 testing, that you were engaged in. But let
me just go back quickly to what I was asking about and
answering the questions that I laid out.

BUDGET CUTS

I think it's clear that everyone wants to provide you with
what you need in order to deal in terms of the followup. And it
would be useful if we can have conversations about that, that
would allow you to do your job better, given the nature of the
law with regard to IGs.
But given the nature of the cut that is intended,
particular to the OIG at USDA--and which is not the case for
other IGs, the impact on your office.
And as I said, if you could tell me now. If you can't, I
would like to know this. But I want an answer to this. Would
you have to furlough people?
Ms. Fong. Okay.
Ms. DeLauro. Yes? Or----
Ms. Fong. Short answer, yes.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. How many? Do you know that now?
Ms. Fong. We would be looking at our whole staff.
Ms. DeLauro. Whole staff?
Ms. Fong. Our whole staff for a period of time.
Ms. DeLauro. Your entire staff for a period of time, given
the cut that was passed last week in the House of
Representatives. How long would you have to furlough for?
Ms. Fong. Our preliminary numbers would show, I think we're
looking at about six weeks.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
Ms. Fong. And I should say that, you know, we would do it
on a rolling basis.
Ms. DeLauro. Fine. I understand. I'm just trying to get a
sense of what we're dealing with here.
Obviously now maybe the next two questions are moot. How
would it impact your work? Every audit, every investigation
would, even if you rotated, it would have to scale back?
Ms. Fong. Yes. There would be a tremendous impact. As you
know, because of the nature of our work, we don't have a lot of
money in our budget. It's all pretty much tied up in staff
salary and benefits.
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Fong. And so any significant reduction would impact our
staffing levels, which means that our priorities would have to
greatly change. We would only be able to address the very
highest priority work.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. And I really want this in writing. I
want to hear from you about what this means. If we can't
quantify this, then we're just dealing in speculation as to
what this means.
And I think it's important for the members of this
committee, and I think it's important for the rest of the
members of the House to understand what the nature of this cut,
as a ten percent cut to the OIG, and particularly in your case
what that means.
And all of our discussion about improper payments, all the
authorities, all that we would care about is really, it's gone.
It's gone. We would not be able to follow up on any improper
payment.
Thank you. Let me move to N60 testing.
Ms. Fong. I'll provide that, for the record.
Ms. DeLauro. Please, I would like that, for the record.

N60 TESTING PROTOCOL

I want to say a ``Thank you'' to you for completing that
audit on the N60 testing protocol. Which is, for my colleagues,
FSIS' samples beef trim for E. coli, taking 60 samples from
large lots of beef trim to test.
This was an audit that I requested in November. The OIG
finding that this procedure does ``not yield a statistical
precision that is reasonable for food safety'' is astounding to
me.
It confirms the concerns that have been expressed in that
the sampling system is flawed. By recommending that FSIS
redesign its sampling methodology to account for varying levels
of contamination, it makes you wonder if it undercuts
everything that they are working on now, since it seems like
they have to start over.
Questions: Is there an estimate of how much the E. coli
0157 H7 levels in the FSIS regulatory sampling program have
been understated by using the N60 sampling technique?
What would be a better sample to capture a more accurate
picture of the levels of E. coli, 0157 H7, in a bin of trim?
FSIS adopted an industry-sampling technique, when it
started to use N60. Industry has made claims that the levels of
E. coli have been declining in beef. What would you advise the
industry, based on your audit findings, for the FSIS sampling
program?
Was OIG able to provide more specific recommendations to
FSIS, beyond placing its testing process on sounder statistical
ground, by redesigning its sampling technology?
Given that FSIS generally agreed with the recommendation,
do you have a sense of how much time this process would take?
Mr. Harden. In response to the first questions, in terms of
the prevalence rate?
Ms. DeLauro. Yes.
Mr. Harden. I mean, that's part of the whole problem. They
do not know what the prevalence rate is, and they had not
completed the underlying study to know how prevalent E. coli is
in beef. So that's where they have to go back and really finish
that study that was started, or start over with that.
And then they would have to decide for themselves what type
of confidence level they would be willing to take, so that that
would then drive the types of samples or the size of the
samples they would need to take.
We did talk to them about that; it would be very resource-
intensive, and we offered some alternatives that they could
consider as they're going forward, such as maybe dedicating a
specialized team to go in to do the sampling that is needed;
and also to make themselves aware of what the industry is doing
in terms of testing; because a lot of big beef plants and
companies do their own testing.
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Harden. And we've encouraged FSIS through several----
Ms. DeLauro. My time has expired.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. And the Chairman has been generous. So we'll
come back on it, so I can get the answers to the other
questions.
Mr. Kingston. We will.
Ms. Lummis.
Ms. Lummis. Mr. Chairman, the committee can enjoy a rare
reprieve from the sound of my voice today. Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kingston. You can always submit questions for the
record.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
I was just looking at an analysis of the effects of the CR
that was passed last week on your office, the potential
effects. And I heard the discussion with Ms. DeLauro just now.

CIVIL RIGHTS CASES

But last year, we also added some additional requirements
for the Inspector General in connection with the Pigford case.
And of course, there were several provisions that were put in
there: Approval of neutrals, additional documentation, attorney
certification, transparency of claims determinations, and
distribution of funds and reports.
And I don't think there is a member of this subcommittee,
or even in the Congress, who has any interest in seeing the
Federal Government make one single payment to anybody who
doesn't have a legitimate and proven claim under the
settlement.
But I do have a couple of questions for you:
There has been a significant amount of attention to the
fraud issue. And I'd like for you, if you could, to briefly
share with the subcommittee your office's experiences or your
activities with respect to any fraud that was associated with
the Pigford I claims.
Then I'd like to know whether or not your office hasbeen a
part of any ongoing discussions with the USDA or the Department of
Justice with respect to executing the legislation, particularly the
fraud provisions, and what were those discussions;
Whether or not it's your office's intention to focus
potentially on Pigford, or we focus on fraud in the other
classes of cases that were included in that legislation, and
the bill requires that your office conduct a performance report
audit of the claims processing. And I'd like for you to tell me
how that is going to be accomplished.
And what methodology you're going to use in determining the
processing in evaluating the validity of the allegations of
fraud or fraudulent claims. How do you anticipate getting at
that information?
And overall, if you developed a plan of action to pursue
examining fraud?
And the final question: Do you have adequate staff and
resources to carry out the responsibilities that were put on
you by that legislation?
Ms. Fong. Okay. Let me offer a few comments about how we're
going to approach the Pigford situation, and I'll invite Gil
and Karen to chime in.
With respect to Pigford I claims and fraud, I believe our
policy on that was to refer all potential fraud claims to the
Department of Justice. And that mechanism has worked well. So
we have not been involved in that.
Now with respect----
Mr. Bishop. Did you make any referrals?
Ms. Fong. Yes, we did.
Ms. Ellis. Yes, we received a number of hotline referrals
throughout the years. And we just packaged them up and sent
them over to the FBI.
Mr. Bishop. Do you know how many of those were found to be
meritorious, or valid?
Ms. Ellis. We have that information, but I don't have that
offhand. I could provide that for the record.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Would you?
Ms. Ellis. Yes.
[The information follows:]

(Provide information on the investigative results of the referrals
you made to the FBI in Pigford I.)
Since January 2000, OIG has referred a total of 2,083 complaints to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) involving allegations of
fraud related to the class action suit filed against USDA known as
Pigford I. The complaints were received via telephone, mail, fax, and
e-mail. While we do not generally receive updates from the FBI, we have
learned that of the 2,083 complaints referred, 3 individuals have been
convicted and sentenced to date.

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Ms. Fong. With respect to Pigford II, as you point out, the
claims Resolution Act of 2010 included a requirement that our
office do a performance audit of all claims before the claims
are paid out, in an effort to prevent improper payments.
And we have been working very closely with the Department
and with Justice to get the timing on all of that correct,
because we can't actually start auditing until the settlement
agreement has been approved by the judge. And I think that's
still pending.
But assuming that all happens at some point, and we get the
access to information issues all ironed out, we will be keeping
a close eye on how those claims are processed.
And we are developing our audit plan to do a statistical
and performance audit, which will be quite resource-intensive.
And we believe this will hit our office some time by the end of
this fiscal year into next fiscal year. So we will be quite
busy in Fiscal Year 2012 doing this work.
In terms of the other classes who have claims against the
Department----
Mr. Bishop. That was the Native Americans and----
Ms. Fong. And the women?
Mr. Bishop. The women.
Ms. Fong. Exactly.
Ms. Ellis. The Hispanic farmers.
Ms. Fong. And the Hispanic farmers, yes. I think Secretary
Vilsack announced recently that the Department has entered into
an agreement with those classes. As part of that agreement,
there is a provision, I believe, that says that the Secretary
can make a request to our office to do a similar kind of audit,
similar to the one that we are going to do for Pigford II,
involving performance auditing, statistical sampling, to ensure
that claims that are paid out are appropriate.
And we anticipate that we could very well get that request.
And if so, we would give that request very serious
consideration. And that would involve quite a bit of our audit
resources as well.
Mr. Bishop. Do you have the resources?
Ms. Fong. Well, you know, we haven't really answered that
question for ourselves. We are committed to carrying out the
requirements of the law. And we will do the audit. And what
that will mean is that we will have to prioritize everything
else.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired.

SNAP ERROR RATES

Ms. Fong, I want to make sure the committee has this for
the record, in terms of error rates on the SNAP program, Texas
and Indiana are high. Maryland is actually in the second slot.
That would be for 2009. We don't know what it is for 2010.
Now 2008 you had up there Connecticut had a very high rate.
Ms. Fong. Five percent.
Mr. Kingston. 8.16 for 2008. However, it improved
remarkably. And also I want to say there were all kinds of
other ones. I see a lot of fluctuation in these.
Yeah, Iowa had a high one. Georgia's okay, though. I'm
proud to say.
But the one I was real interested about, though, was
Delaware had a very high rate in '07 of nine percent, and now
it's 0.7.
Do you have any idea how they improved that much? I'll
share this with--did you get involved in that?
Ms. Fong. We have not done any audit work in Delaware on
their improper payment rates. But----
Mr. Kingston. Well, they certainly would win the most
improved.
Ms. Fong. You know, I think you have a good point there.
Maybe----
Mr. Kingston. And maybe we should get some Delaware folks
to Texas. I don't know----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kingston. We might put them on the road.

IMPLEMENTATION OF OIG RECOMMENDATIONS

Mr. Young, I want to ask you some questions, because I'm
just picking on you. You're a reemployed annuitant? Right?
Mr. Young. That's correct.
Mr. Kingston. And so you're probably the freest person in
this room. You can say whatever you want to say. And you've
seen a lot of things.
So whether it is guaranteed loans, whether it is fee cap,
whether it's foreign payments, whether it's in SNAP, you've got
to have thoughts on what needs to be done, from a
recommendation standpoint. And they might be different in each
program, we understand that.
Mr. Young. As far as--I guess it's sort of a mixed bag
amongst the agencies.
We make a lot of recommendations in the audits we do. I
think some agencies are very receptive and move forth to try to
address what we've asked them to do, and do a pretty good job.
I think there are others--and there's a whole variety of
reasons--it could be anything from staffing to they don't
necessarily, they've said they agree, but they don't truly
agree--in other words, ``I'm going to tell the IG that yes,
we'll go forth and do it,'' but they're not really committed to
doing that, for a variety of reasons.
It could be staffing, it could be they simply don't agree
with the concepts that we've come up with.
But it's a very difficult thing, as far as getting action
completed and getting it completed timely.
As I said, some agencies are great, they move very quickly.
Others drag there feet. And then that's where we work with the
Department and try to push them, work with the Secretary, work
the office of the chief financial officer, in trying to push
those agencies to implement what we've recommended and to do it
within a timely fashion.
Mr. Kingston. Well, now Mr. Farr brought up, in terms of
these programs, it's more the institution that is at fault. And
it might just be incompetency. Maybe it's laziness. Maybe
they're not doing their due diligence on applications.
But that's where we're concerned, because I'm assuming
that's where the big money is.
You know, if a farmer participates, who isn't ineligible,
shame on him. And he should be penalized for it. But there's
also the other, you know, if there's a government employee who
wasn't doing the paperwork right, and they're repeat offenders,
we would be concerned about that.
If there's a grocery store chain, who has the employees,
who are bilking the SNAP system, then it should be the chain
that's out of it.
There should be a very high standard for that.
And what I would like--as my time is almost over--is if you
could submit to us, for the record, what would be your
recommendations? Not broad at recommendations, but very
specific recommendations, perhaps per agency, or whatever.
Because we really, I think the tolerance level is very low
at the moment. And there's a great opportunity for all of us to
do something for the American taxpayers, and say, ``Look, we
just are not going to put up with this anymore.''
Year in, year out, it's either fraud, or it's incompetence.
But money's going out the door that should not be going out the
door. And that money could be spent elsewhere.
And my time is up. And Mr. Farr?
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

APHIS

Let's go to one of the agencies.
First of all, I want to thank you very much for doing the
audit on APHIS, on the dog dealers. I've been interested in
trying to eliminate these puppy mills, and I'm interested in
APHIS doing a much better job.
And you pointed out that the APHIS had major deficiency in
their enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act. Why is that?
Mr. Harden. It was basically the agency's approach or a
lack of an effective approach for the inspectors' carrying out
the program. They tended to want to try and educate the problem
dealers into getting better, as opposed to issuing fines and
penalties.
Mr. Farr. Well, that's laudable. But I mean, we all try to
do that.
But that's not the way other agencies work. I mean, there's
always some education in there. But some of these breeders are
just awful. I mean, if they're going to try to make awful
people get better, it's still awful.
Mr. Harden. Which is the point that we were trying to make
with the audit report. And you know, in response to the
recommendation, they agreed to take stronger enforcement
actions. It will take us going back to see how well they do it,
to know if they really changed how----
Mr. Farr. Well, you pointed out they didn't even accept all
of your recommendations.
Mr. Harden. They have, at this point.
Mr. Farr. They have?
Mr. Harden. They have.
Mr. Farr. Including the ones that would confiscate animals
that are dying, or seriously suffering?
Mr. Harden. We have gotten agreement on those
recommendations. I can't tell you exactly what they've done.
Mr. Farr. And to count each animal as a separate violation
in a case involving animal deaths and unlicensed wholesalers?
Those were two that in the report that I got that they hadn't
reached agreement on.
Mr. Harden. We didn't reach them at the time of report
issuance. But we continued to work with the agencies after we
issue it, if there is not agreement, to get that agreement. And
I know that we have reached that agreement now.
Where they are in terms of implementing the corrective
action, is what I don't have in front of me.
Mr. Farr. I'm curious. When you go out and do these audits,
do you actually visit sites? Or do you just look over their
paperwork?
Mr. Harden. No, we actually visited a number of sites,
which is the pictures that were in that report, which were
quite difficult, were from our people going on site, and what
they saw.
Mr. Farr. This is something that I think goes to the
Chair's question also, about implement. You do your work and
you make these recommendations. And then some of them take them
seriously, and others don't.
You know, an animal welfare committee I think is pretty
interested in making sure that the laws that we've enacted get
enforced.
How can we make it better? Is it to take an audit? Does it
take Congress asking to do an audit to get people's attention?
I mean, we can't do that with everything----
Ms. Fong. I understand.
Mr. Farr. Where's your oversight rule?
Ms. Fong. You know, I will say that in the enforcement in
the Animal Welfare arena, we have done a number of audits over
a number of years. And we've found major problems three or four
years ago, which is why we went back in and did this audit.
We wanted to make sure that APHIS actually corrected the
problems we saw the last time, with respect to enforcing
penalties and other issues.
And you know, the sad story is that with this audit, it's
clear that there were still problems. They have said that they
are going to take very specific actions in terms of developing
training and hiring specialists, and developing new information
systems.
We will probably need to go and look at this again. Maybe
in a year or two, once we give APHIS a chance to actually take
a look at this.
And I will remark that we understand that you have
introduced legislation to address some of the loopholes that
exist in the current AWA that deal with internet dealers. And
we think that that's actually a very useful piece of
legislation to address an issue that we did find.
Mr. Farr. Could I get a letter of endorsement from you?
That would be terrific.
Ms. Fong. You have my public statement. [Laughter.]
Mr. Farr. Well, I appreciate that.
I mean, I think it would help this committee a lot if we
would know, you know. Also I think what you've also, Mr.
Chairman, raises, there is some as we go through the rest of
the agency and through their departments, some questions that
we ought to be drilling down on in the subsequent hearings.
Ms. Fong. Okay.
Mr. Farr. The last one--oh, I'm running out of time. I
wanted to go the California Organic investigation----
Mr. Kingston. Can I ask unanimous consent that--go ahead.
Mr. Farr. It will be my last question, Mr. Chairman.

ORGANICS

If you could respond to the California Organic
investigation of----
Ms. Fong. The fertilizer?
Mr. Farr. It was to deal with fertilizer dealer that was
certified as organic, and then switched ingredients and didn't
tell anybody. And so you ended up using improper protocols.
Or I mean, they did.
And you cracked down on the California--I mean, what
happens is these people get certified by independent
certifiers. And has this gotten cleaned up? Is it California's,
CDF--what is it, Department of Food and? And Agriculture.
Ms. Ellis. Yeah.
I could tell you, that was our first investigation. We do
have a few more involving that. But in working with California,
they are very proactive in getting out front on top of this
issue.
And so I can't speak so much for state level as to what
they are doing there with regard to legislation. But I do know
that they are trying to make sure that they keep this from
happening in the future.
Mr. Farr. And your role was what?
Ms. Ellis. We conducted the criminal investigation into
this matter, and ended up getting an indictment of the
individual, which I believe was sealed up until very recently,
because he had left the country, and several months ago
actually came back into the country. And we were able to catch
him and serve him with the indictment.
So it's still in the judicial process. We have not finished
the investigation.
Mr. Farr. Thank you.
Ms. Fong. I would just like to mention that we do have a
number of other audits planned in the organic program. We've
got a couple ongoing, involving the dairy industry, and the
list, the process for making the list----
Mr. Harden. The substances that go on and off the National
List of Prohibited Substances, we'll be looking at that later
this year.
And we also have work in the crop insurance area, because
they have a pilot program, or a new program, for organic
operators in insurance.
Mr. Farr. I appreciate those audits. And it's a program
where they're labeled as very highly respected in the
community, in the consumer community. And I think that we have
to make sure that--there's a lot of people trying to take
advantage of it, because they get a better price. And so
they'll try to sneak stuff in and label it organic. And it does
injustice to every legitimate grower out there, who's
struggling to make sure that they can get their product to
market and be legitimate.
So do those audits. Thank you.
Ms. Fong. Okay.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

FOOD SAFETY

Mr. Harden, let me come back to you.
I think we were talking about what would be a better
sample, for a more accurate picture on this. What would you
advise industry on the audit findings here, because industry
has made claims that where E. coli 0157 H7 is declining?
And the specific recommendations to FSIS beyond, if you've
made any beyond putting this on a sounder technical ground? And
have they agreed? And if they have agreed, what's the timing
this process is going to take, given that do not know what the
level of contamination might be?
Mr. Harden. I'd have to get back to you on the specific
time frame.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
Mr. Harden. But in terms of FSIS working with the industry
and a better way to know the number, we've recommended to them
to have the inspectors that are in the plant to look at the
results and know how well a plant is checking for itself;
And if the test the plants are running to test for E. coli
meet FSIS' standards, to maybe use those results as well in
building how they know how prevalent E. coli is.
Also, we've talked to them about, and recommended, that
they look in evaluating their plants and knowing which ones are
at greater risk for having E. coli contamination, so they know
that they're putting their resources at testing those plants
may be more frequently than the ones that have a better system.
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm. I just would make a quick comment on
that. I think once again, we may be relying on an industry to
share their data with inspectors, who are also talking about
the potential for furloughing inspectors. That was done last
week, as well, in the budget resolution.
And your last point was? I'm sorry, because I had--the
industry?
Mr. Harden. Oh, having FSIS evaluate the----
Ms. DeLauro. Risk-based----
Mr. Harden. Risk-based----
Ms. DeLauro. Risk-based. I must tell you, if they don't
know what the level is on terms of estimates, it makes it very,
very difficult. Except if you have repeat offenders.
But it makes it very difficult if you don't have a way in
which you're determining what the level of contamination is.
Then it's to base your inspection on risk, because you don't
know what the risk is.
So we've got more to talk about in this area, and how we do
get to safe and uncontaminated beef.
Ms. Fong. I believe we have an audit going on, a second-
phase to the FSIS audit of the N60 testing.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
Ms. Fong. And we're going to be going out into the field
this spring to look at plants and how they actually do the
testing.
And I think we'll have some more specific----
Ms. DeLauro. Beautiful----
Ms. Fong. Observations----
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you----
Ms. Fong. And we'll be happy to work with you.
Ms. DeLauro. Yes, this is an area of very high interest to
me, as you know. And I thank you for the study. I really
appreciate it.
Ms. Fong. Right.
Ms. DeLauro. Let me ask again--I know you addressed
Salmonella in eggs, and that you're auditing AMS in terms of
what happened with the Wright County egg outbreak? Is that
right? You're auditing AMS?
Mr. Harden. Actually, we're looking at multiple agencies in
the Department, AMS being one of them.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
Mr. Harden. The audit of eggs was generated out of one of
the recalls, one of the big recalls. But we're looking at
APHIS' role, FSIS' role, and AMS' role.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
Mr. Harden. The issue that we've recently brought to the
table, that we talked about in the testimony, is one where AMS
needed better coordination with other agencies. But we're
working on that particular issue right now, but it will be
broader----
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm. Well, but as you know, inspection of
in-shell eggs is the responsibility of FDA. This is why we need
a single food safety agency, in order to be able to deal with
it. Otherwise, we've got varying people looking at what is
involved in food safety.
Just a word about the audit, how extensive is it? What are
you doing?
And then my final question would be: Are you going to
examine the memorandum of understanding between FDA and AMS
that sets out each agency's responsibility, that make the
recommendations for improving the coordination between the two
agencies on in-shell egg safety?
Tell me about the scope of the----
Mr. Harden. The answer to that is yes. The basic objective
of this particular audit is to look at USDA's control over
shell eggs, to detect and report the presence of Salmonella and
other contaminants, and also to look at how they coordinate
with FDA on this.
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm. And in each instance--in other words,
we are going to get some idea of the level of overlap, or
duplication, or lack of either, given that we have multiple
agencies that are trying to deal with one function here, and
what falls between the cracks?
Quite frankly, what falls between the cracks is the public
health of the people of this country.
So thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

PEANUT PRICE REPORTING

Madame IG, in March of 2009, I think you completed an audit
of in-shell peanut prices that are paid to farmers and reported
to the National Agricultural Statistics Service, which data the
FSA uses to calculate program payments.
Your office indicated that you believe that the price data
supplied by the peanut buyers is unreliable, and that FSA
should seek authority for mandatory price reporting for all in-
shell peanuts.
And I look forward to the Department resolving this issue;
but it would seem that any proposal to provide new FSA
statutory authority on price reporting should be done in the
context of the 2012 Farm Bill, as opposed to a stand-alone
issue.
And of course, we expect that there will be substantial
changes and modifications in the programs, which should really
be a part of that discussion, whenever it happens.
But I did have some other questions I wanted to ask you: Is
there any further activity on the part of the OIG's office on
mandatory peanut pricing reporting? Or is it now just in the
hands of the Secretary and FSA?
And well, the '02 Farm Bill and the '08 Farm Bill both
encouraged USDA to use the world market price in determining
peanut prices.
And I find it curious--and I don't know whether it came to
your attention or you found it curious also--that the
Department never followed through in exploring a world price
option.
Many people in the industry, both producers and sellers,
believe that a mandatory pricing requirement is really just an
effort on the Department's part to lower the price of peanuts.
Last year, I asked you if you had any evidence that
indicated that the information that the peanut shellers and
others were providing to NESS was fraudulent. And you indicated
that no, you answered no to that, that there wasn't any
evidence of fraud.
Is the Department, from your determination and your audit,
really certain that a mandatory pricing reporting requirement
would elicit factual information, as opposed to just creating
the possibility of options payments to largefarmers, which are
not included in the data? And do you think that the mandatory price
reporting would ultimately result in the creation of a real futures
market for peanuts, which would have the potential of destabilizing the
prices for peanuts?
And the final part of that is whether or not you have
information of any other industries or any other commodities,
where that reporting is required?
Ms. Fong. That's a long question (laughing).
Let me just offer a few comments. You're right, we did do
that audit a few years ago on the pricing for shelled peanuts.
And at that time, we felt very strongly--and we still do
feel very strongly--that because of the way that reporting is
structured, it's voluntary, there's no way to really verify
that the prices that are reported are accurate; that it's not a
good basis for the Department to set its prices.
And so we made our recommendation.
I think you're right that the Farm Bill is the right
vehicle in which to address that issue from a policy basis. I
don't believe that we have done any follow-up work since our
audit was issued.
And I think you also indicated that there may be an issue
with respect to other commodities, whether other commodities
have a mandatory requirement for reporting. And as far as I
know, others do not.
This is an issue actually that we took on for the first
time with peanuts. And we understand that there may be
implications for other commodities.
And my sense is that if we were to look at it, that we
would, in the interest of having hard, good, verifiable data,
upon which to make a decision, that our philosophy would be
``Why wouldn't the Department want good, certifiable data?''
from a philosophical standpoint.
Now I understand there may be some economic issues and some
other policy issues that we have not addressed.
Mr. Bishop. So you basically have not gone any further than
the report that was issued in 2009? And I guess you're waiting
for us to deal with it, for Congress to deal with in the Farm
Bill.
Ms. Fong. That's correct. We believe it's basically a
policy issue at this point.
Mr. Bishop. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Bishop. And if there aren't
any other questions, then I'm going to move to adjournment.
And let me just say this, Ms. Fong. You have a lot of
interests on this committee. We've always been very
appreciative of your work. And I think we would like to get
these follow-up questions answered. And there might be a few
more that are submitted to you.
But we truly appreciate everything that you do. And with
that, the committee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.319

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.320

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.321

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.322

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.323

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.324

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.325

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.326

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.327

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.328

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.329

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.330

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.332

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.335

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.338

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.339

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.340

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.341

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.342

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.343

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.344

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.345

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.346

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.347

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.348

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.349

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.350

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.352

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.353

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6581A.354

W I T N E S S E S

----------
Page
Ellis, K. L......................................................   325
Fong, P. K.......................................................   325
Hamburg, Margaret................................................     1
Harden, G. H.....................................................   325
Lebo, John.......................................................   325
McGarey, Patrick.................................................     1
Young, R. W......................................................   325

