- AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________
PART 9
Page
Commodity Futures Trading Commission.............................    1
Farm Credit Administration.......................................  399

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
PART 9--AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,

AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013
?

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________
PART 9
Page
Commodity Futures Trading Commission.............................    1
Farm Credit Administration.......................................  399

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
75-803                     WASHINGTON : 2012

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

WITNESS

GARY GENSLER, CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION
Mr. Kingston. The committee will come to order. We have
today the last of 11 hearings that this subcommittee has had
this year. They have been good productive hearings. And what we
are going to do, because of vote schedules and pressures, and
members having other hearings, is ask our witness to dispense
with the reading of his statement. I look forward to a good
discussion with you on is this an expansion of the NFL or are
we doing some fuzzy numbers. We actually have, I think, a
little bit of a conversation that we need to have about that.
But I think in the interest of time and the fact that Mr. Farr
and I are already here, we would probably like to go into Q&A,
so with that, Mr. Farr.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.002

Mr. Farr. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think yes,
because of time we will need to use all the time in Q&A, but I
just want to say that I am deeply impressed that people like
Chairman Gensler will come and work for the Federal Government.
With his background on Wall Street and so on, an ability to
have a cop on the beat looking for abuses, fraud, and gimmicks
is absolutely essential. I think we have one of the best and I
would just thank you for your public service.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.004

Mr. Kingston. And Chairman Gensler, we will go ahead and
yield to you. I do have concerns that while the number of
transactions--we are looking at this thing a little bit
differently, and we will get into that, but let me yield to you
for your opening statement.

Opening Statement

Mr. Gensler. I thank you and will keep it brief. I think
the CFTC is a good investment to the American public, to all
the constituents, because anybody in your district--a farmer, a
rancher, a producer, a commercial company--relies on these
markets to lock in a price and lower risk and then focus on
what they do best, invest in America and create jobs: 94
percent of job creation in America, 94 percent of private
sector jobs, is in those end users in your districts across
America.
CFTC has been asked through the Dodd-Frank Act to expand
oversight not just to the futures market but to the swaps
market and, yes, in my prepared testimony I analogized to the
NFL; if they were to take on 8 times the number of games,
because that is what we are being asked to do, to take on this
$300 trillion market. But even if it is not 8 times the number
of games, I think the stark reality is we will have twice the
number of intermediaries in the market, meaning we used to have
about 130 futures commission merchants, and now we will pick up
somewhere in that same vicinity of swap dealers. We will
probably have triple the number of trading platforms and
clearinghouses. We currently oversee 32 of them, we estimate
that will grow to 100.
So whether it is 8 times the number of games that we have
to spread the same number of referees over, or 2 to 3 times,
because there will literally be at least 3 times the number of
fields of play and twice the number of big entities that we
have to regulate in this market. And it is critical to have the
funding. We have only asked for 50 percent more, and I know it
might appear bold, but the extra $100 million is critical to
protect the American public and make these markets transparent
and work for your constituents. So I thank you.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.016

MARKET SIZE

Mr. Kingston. And let me start off with this because there
has been--I know you have seen some articles, looking at one
recently that really challenged this. And one of the statements
was the swaps markets see roughly 2- to 4,000 transactions per
day, but it is a nominal amount where you are claiming that it
is 8 times larger than the market and that is what people are--
I guess we are getting some pushback on your testimony.
In terms of the NFL, the CFTC does not regulate the paper
value of abstract financial instruments, but the participants
and the entities that make the marketplace work, the number of
registrants has actually grown by about 5 percent since 2000,
from 62,000 total to 65,000. And so I think one of our major
differences right now is that yes, you have some electronic--a
lot larger numbers, but you are still only looking at those
that grow from 62,000 to 65,000.
Another part of this that I wanted to mention is that
during the Dodd-Frank testimony you said there were 15 to 20
dealers globally who made up 99 percent of the swaps markets,
but now you are talking about registering 150 of them, and that
is a lot more money just to get 3 percent of the market. So
with that, let me ask you to respond.
Mr. Gensler. Well, the market is--and these are global
markets--the worldwide market in swaps is over $700 trillion
and it is estimated that a little--about half of that, or $300
trillion more is here. We didn't create that figure, that is a
real figure. That is what the real risk is: 8 times larger than
the futures marketplace.
It is correct that it is fewer transactions than 8 times
the transactions. People usually enter into these transactions
in big bulk, but it is truly 8 times the size.

REGISTRANTS

In terms of the number of registrants, the 65,000 that the
chairman refers to includes something called ``associated
persons,'' I can't remember the figure, 58- or 59,000
associated persons, these are salespeople that somehow anywhere
in this great country of ours sell a futures product.
But where the rubber hits the road is we currently have 32
trading platforms, from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and
Intercontinental Exchange--32 trading platforms and
clearinghouses--that we estimate will grow at least double, and
our estimates are that it might be to triple that--the
clearinghouses, the swap execution facilities and foreign
boards of trade.
Secondly, we currently oversee 123 futures commission
merchants and we estimate that somewhere between 100 and 150
swap dealers will register.
To the last part of your question--looking just simply at
how many dealers are members of the largest clearinghouse--in
London--it is a little over 60. Because of the law as passed
there is something called the pushout. Many of those 60 have
told us they will register maybe two different legal entities,
two legal entities in a large bank and so forth. And so that is
why we think we will end up with between 100 and 150.
Mr. Kingston. But when you have that many that register,
you still have the active--the volume of it are going to be in
the 15 to 20, and a lot of the ones who register will be semi-
inactive, registering for whatever legal reasons they need to,
correct? And they are not going to have that much of a
workload, it is going to be----
Mr. Gensler. I think we share a view that we will triage
for amongst the largest, and in our prepared remarks we have
amongst the 14 largest, it would be our hope that we could be
spending more time with them, which is sometimes called the G-
14. We have also leveraged off the National Futures Association
that they will do the registration and do the frontline
examinations. We will rely on them as a self-regulatory
organization for the dealers. So I think on the trading
platforms we are the front line.
Mr. Kingston. And that is one thing with the SROs that we
think you may be underutilizing because they are doing a lot of
this work already, and I don't know how much duplication that
you need to have in it from some of the stuff that they are
doing, because I don't think any of them have caused any
problems from the financial meltdown or whatever. Their methods
have proven to be sound.
Mr. Gensler. I think what we are saying is yes, we will
rely on the SROs somewhat. They are planning on additional
funds to their budgets. They have estimated between $35- and
$45 million at the NFA to register these 100 to 150 swap
dealers. But we need to oversee the NFA and also be there to
answer very important questions from all of these registrants
about these rules.
Mr. Kingston. But they are not people that--you don't have
to necessarily breathe down your neck. They want the same thing
you want is what I am saying. It is not like okay, these are
potentially bad guys, these are potentially more partners and
cooperative.
Mr. Gensler. Oh, they are most definitely partners and
cooperative, and they are very good at the NFA. I share that
view. But ultimately what we are trying to do is have enough
staff and technology in place to protect your constituents in
your district and throughout this country of ours, because this
is a vast market that has a lot of risk. And it was part of the
financial crisis. I don't think we can get away from that.
Mr. Kingston. I am out of time and look forward to more
rounds. Mr. Farr.

INCREASED RESPONSIBILITY

Mr. Farr. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
this hearing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for being here and,
again, for your public service.
We have had a lot of comments by staff and others, but what
really impressed me is looking at this letter signed by 96, I
think, different entities calling themselves the Americans for
Financial Reform, and they sent it to every Member of Congress,
and essentially pointing out that what we did in Dodd-Frank
law, which is the law of the land, is that we increased your
responsibility exponentially. And what they are urging is full
funding of the $308 million and essentially pointing out that
the President's request for $308 million is minuscule in
comparison to the $340 trillion in notational value of markets
that are supervised by the CFTC. The CFTC is only 10 percent
larger than its peak size in the 1990s. But futures markets
alone have grown fivefold since that time.
So with this incredible new responsibility I think the
argument here is well, maybe we should think huge increase, but
we have written a tough law that needs to be monitored. And I
tell folks at home when they ask me all about this thing, I say
it is like setting a speed limit and then not having any cops.
We have got to have the regulators in place. And so I would
hope that we can come up with full funding.
Our committee hasn't gotten our allocation, so we have no
idea how much we are going to have to cut from the President's
budget, but it is not always across-the-board cuts, some
programs get added, some get cut. The bottom line is our budget
of the House, at least under Republican control, has been a lot
less than the President's.
So I think my real only question is, had we fully funded
you last year to what you asked for, could some of the crisis
in the oil crisis or other kind of crisis been avoided? It
mentioned here the crisis that went on with MF Global. What is
your feeling, had Congress given you what you asked for in the
first instance?
Mr. Gensler. I think, and I appreciate this committee's
work with us that helped us get even the $3 million increase,
but I think if we had gotten more of an increase, particularly
with 2-year money as you have been helpful with us, one, we
could have helped grow the agency, train the staff to be ready
because we will finish the rule writing some time this year.
Congress asked us to do it in a year, it looks like it will
take us about 2 years, but we have completed over 29--29 final
rules.
And so additional staff would help us be ready for what is
going to be truly a monumental task of registering nearly 200
new entities. Now, we will use the NFA where we can, but we are
going to have to actually be ready to consider market
participants' registration. We will have to be ready to examine
these folks.
If we are able to get the funding for 2013, not everybody
is going to come on board the very first day. We will have to
work through and get the best people and hire them. So I fear
that many market participants will have to queue up and not be
able to get their registrations through. And the American
public will not have the confidence in this market.
So back to the football analogy, I think part of the reason
you have referees on the field is so the fans can have
confidence in the integrity of the game. It is not just so the
players don't get injured, which is critical, but it is also
that the public can have confidence in the field of play. And I
think that is where the analogy is.
Mr. Farr. Well, oftentimes when you want to get like a law,
and you can't do anything about changing the law and you don't
have the votes, then you try to stall the implementation of the
law. You kick it and squeeze it and trim it, the idea not
giving you enough referees to have, as you say, the fans trust
the game. I think your testimony points out that you really do
need the staff and the technology to implement this new law,
which I think is a very beneficial law for our country.
My time has expired. I will yield back.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you. Mr. Graves.

FUNDING

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for being with
us, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. I know you are aware, just as we are in
appropriations with the difficult challenges we face as a
Nation, and it has got to be tough from your perspective. I
know there are a lot of games, a lot of players, or whatever
the analogy we want to use, but the fact is there is only so
much, so many dollars or so many fans that continue paying to
come to the game that seems to be oversold oftentimes. And we
are as a committee facing some of the greatest challenges: How
do we bring our Federal Government to a balanced budget
environment? And certainly seeing a big increase like this is
difficult.
I have three children at home, 9, 12, 13 years old, and
elementary school, middle school, and they don't know about all
this stuff, but one day it is going to hit them. And they are
going to be the ones, along with the children all across this
country, that are burdened with the debt that we have as a
Nation. It is really hard for me to go back home to them. I
spoke to a fifth grade class a couple weeks ago and explained
to them how a chairman can come before us and request 50
percent more in spending for whatever reason. It is really,
really difficult to explain that.
How would you, if you were standing before that class or
before my children or the children of the Ninth Congressional
District of Georgia, how could you stand before them and say,
you know, I know we are going off the cliff and I helped push
the accelerator down just a little bit more? How do you share
that with them and reassure them that their future is okay,
that it will be an opportunistic, prosperous future for them?
Mr. Gensler. I too have three children just a few years
older, three daughters, so I know how it must be. How I explain
it to them is that this market that Congress has asked us to
oversee helped cause a crisis. And millions of Americans are
out of work, and you know about aunt so-and-so that is out of
work and so forth, so we go through the actual people we know
out of work and who have lost their homes, which is true in my
family as any other. I might have been fortunate to be on Wall
Street, that doesn't mean all my relatives and everybody had
that payday, so to speak.
And so this investment, this investment of $100 million in
the context of a multitrillion-dollar Federal budget, in the
context of 8 million people having lost their jobs, is a good
investment. I say it is absolutely a hard sell in Congress. I
admit that.
Mr. Graves. You would share with your children that wise
financial advice is that you borrow more to save yourself from
the fiscal insolvency you have today.
Mr. Gensler. I think in a targeted way, I am just talking
about the CFTC because I think, Congressman, you and I probably
share the view that we need to get this Federal deficit down
and not borrow from the future that our children and
grandchildren will have to face with that. But I think this
$100 million extra is just a reality that this vast market grew
up unregulated, this thing called the swaps marketplace, and we
need to have some effective oversight to that market.
I think it lowers cost to so many of the companies in your
district. If they get a little bit of the--see, right now an
unregulated market tips the advantage to----
Mr. Graves. I hate to interrupt, but we hear this all the
time. For every dollar you give us, we save somebody $7 or we
create $7 of economic development. If that is the case, why
don't we just tax everybody 100 percent, and put it all out
there in Federal Government spending? We would all be much more
prosperous. Is that the example or the model?
Mr. Gensler. No, no, no. Here the example is more, whether
it is referees on a football field or whether it is police in
your cities in Georgia, that you want at least a funded police
force in those cities so people feel safe at night to walk the
streets and why we have traffic lights as well. So I am not
suggesting anything more that that.
Mr. Graves. I understand. And I hate to be pushing this so
much. It is just I am going to have a hard time looking at my
children saying, well, the swap market has grown so much and
therefore we have got to invest 100 million more dollars, but
it will be okay because I am sure some other department head
will come before us and say, hey, I found 100 million we can
save, plus more. That is yet to be the case. Everybody has come
before us saying we need more, we need more, and we need more.
It is just not there.
Mr. Gensler. I understand.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I do have some other
questions later relevant to the market.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you. Ms. Kaptur.

MF GLOBAL

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Chairman
Gensler. I have a little difficulty with the amount of money
being requested in this budget. When I look at the size of the
market that you state in your testimony you wish to regulate
and oversee, 37 trillion notional, and then 300 trillion in the
swaps market. I would be very interested in your commenting a
little bit later on what we could actually--where we could
place a fee to raise the money to pay for the staff that you
need. But my questions go to the CTFC itself.
Why didn't your Commission monitor the segregated accounts
and transfer them to another FCM prior to MF Global's
bankruptcy? So the first question is a ``why'' question.
And the second one in this first round is a ``who''
question. Who at the CFTC is responsible for initiating the
enforcement actions?
On the first question, why didn't the CFTC monitor the
segregated accounts and transfer them to another FCM prior to
MF Global's bankruptcy? According to the information I have,
there were warning signs well in advance of MF Global's
bankruptcy, the largest really in our country, I think ever,
that your Commission utterly failed in its responsibilities.
Throughout 2011, John Corzine had a large position that his
board questioned and his risk manager expressed concerns about
that. There were also public and obvious warning signs in the
weeks prior to the bankruptcy, three of them. MF Global was
downgraded, and that would lead to calls for more margins. It
lost its primary dealer status, and FINRA asked it to reserve
more capital. It was obvious that they were strapped for cash,
and yet the CFTC let things fester and put account holders and
customers at risk.
This has the appearance to those from the outside that the
Commission was buying time for Mr. Corzine and his company.
So my question is, why didn't you monitor the segregated
accounts and transfer them to another entity prior to their
bankruptcy? Who at the Commission is responsible for initiating
enforcement actions? And why haven't you initiated enforcement
actions against MF Global's directors and executives? It would
seem to me, based on testimony even by Jill Sommers, that the
transfer of funds from customers' segregated accounts is a
violation of your own rules.
Mr. Gensler. I am glad you referenced Commissioner Sommers,
because I just want to say as this matter turned to an
enforcement matter that could involve John Corzine and so
forth, though the lawyers said I didn't need to, I am not
participating in the enforcement matter just because he and I
had worked at the same firm 14 years ago.
But if I could answer in a broader general----
Ms. Kaptur. Who is then responsible, Mr. Chairman, for
initiating the enforcement action?
Mr. Gensler. Generally speaking, enforcement actions come
up to the Commission from the Division of Enforcement, this 170
or so people, and that we are requesting today to grow a bit.
They bring things up to the five-member Commission. Right now
the five-member Commissioner, Commissioner Sommers is taking,
is the lead commissioner on this matter.
Ms. Kaptur. But you are chairman of the Commission,
correct?
Mr. Gensler. That is correct.
Ms. Kaptur. Under normal circumstances you would have
initiated it, would you not have?
Mr. Gensler. Well, procedurally, they are initiated by the
Division of Enforcement. The Division of Enforcement recommends
various actions to the Commission. Although in this enforcement
matter the general counsel said there was not a reason to not
participate--it had been 14 years since I worked with Mr.
Corzine--I thought it was best not to be a distraction, not to
participate in a matter where John Corzine might be part of
that situation. But as a more general matter----
Ms. Kaptur. Are you saying, then, the Commission has
initiated enforcement actions against MF Global's directors and
executives?
Mr. Gensler. I am not participating in it, so I could read
in the press, just as you would in the press, but I believe as
a matter of public record that that is correct.
Ms. Kaptur. And the main question: Why didn't the
Commission monitor the segregated accounts and transfer them to
another FCM prior to MF Global's bankruptcy?
Mr. Gensler. Again, I am not participating in the matter,
but if I could talk about Futures Commission Merchants, there
are about 120 of these. Our regulatory system, as the chairman
noted, relies on self-regulatory organizations, either the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange or National Futures Association, to
be the frontline regulators of these 120 or so Futures
Commission Merchants. And the mechanisms that we were talking
about just moments ago would be used for swap dealers as well.
Then what we do is we also, then, with sufficient staff,
monitor these self-regulatory organizations for cause, and then
also go into the individual entities.

SIPA BANKRUPTCY ACTION

Ms. Kaptur. May I ask why did the CFTC allow SIPA to take
charge of MF Global's bankruptcy, given that almost 99 percent
of MF Global's accounts were commodity accounts? And as I
understand it, this was a chapter 11 bankruptcy instead of a
chapter 7. Chapter 11 bankruptcy allows assets to be
transferred to MF subsidiaries and creditors. This action
seemed to favor the creditors instead of commodities traders,
especially farms and ranchers, and had the result of protecting
MF Global's creditors, especially the large banks. Who are the
people within the CFTC that were responsible for this decision?
Mr. Gensler. Again, if I can talk about generally how the
law works, because I am not involved in the specific
enforcement matter and bankruptcy, but generally speaking if
somebody is both a Futures Commission Merchant and registered
at the SEC as a broker-dealer, many of the Futures Commission
Merchants, or dozens of them, are both. As a broker-dealer they
come under SIPA laws. And if there is one customer account in
the securities area, that takes precedent. And that is how I
understand the law to be.
So there are protections in bankruptcy, in SIPA, that also
refer to the Commodities and Exchange Act and directly refer to
the Commodities and Exchange Act, but these dual registrants--
and this would be true and has been true, if you looked at the
Lehman bankruptcy, for instance, would be another example that
that was the case.
Ms. Kaptur. In closing on this first round let me just say,
Mr. Chairman, that given the CFTC's recent nonperformance,
actually serving the interest of bank creditors of MF Global
and not protecting the interest of MF Global's customers nor
the public interest, as a member of this committee I might ask
why your Commission should be allowed to continue as a
regulator? And as we move forward in terms of taking taxpayer
money to try to expand what is occurring at the Commission, I
don't agree with the premise that the reason that the
regulation of MF Global did not occur was because you didn't
have enough money. I think there were real problems inside, and
I am very, very reluctant to whitewash what happened in the
Commission over recent history. I just wanted to place that on
the record in the first round, and I thank you.
Mr. Kingston. I thank the gentlewoman. Ms. DeLauro.

CURBING SPECULATION IN OIL

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you. I
apologize for dashing in and out, but there are many hearings.
For the second year in a row, Mr. Chairman, you have come
before this committee, you have requested an increase in your
budget to $308 million to be able to carry out the CFTC's
expanded mission of regulating $300 trillion in swaps and
derivatives markets and the 37 trillion commodity futures
market.
Last year Congress only provided you with $205 million,
which according to your testimony has limited your ability to
properly oversee the swaps market and curb speculation and
manipulation.
Last year, the majority on this committee would have cut
your budget even further, by 44 percent, to $172 million.
Again, just yesterday, the majority on the House Budget
Committee defeated an amendment that would have provided the
CFTC with funding to curb excessive speculation and
manipulation in the oil markets.
This is disappointing. After last year's testimony from
Exxon CEO Rex Tillerson said that any price for crude oil over
$70 is speculation. A recent report from Goldman Sachs
estimated that excessive speculation of the oil markets as 56
cents to the price of a gallon of gas.
We are all consumed with the issue of the price of gas. It
is now on average nationwide about $3.88 a gallon. In my
district it is $4 or more at the moment. And so that if we are
concerned about the price of gas, and the issue not being the
question of supply, one would think that we would want to move
in a direction of trying to find out what in fact is actually
happening in the markets with regard to speculation.
But if we do not for a second year in a row provide you
with the resources to complete your congressionally mandated
expanded mission, how will you be restricted from curbing
speculation and manipulation in the oil and gas markets?
Mr. Gensler. I thank you, Congresswoman. Though we are not
a price-setting agency, we are given tools to make sure that
these markets are not only transparent but they are free of
fraud and manipulation, and no one party in the market has a
concentrated position. We do that through position limits.
These tools will be harder to use if we don't have the
funding. And I know that we have a lively exchange about the
size of these markets, but the swaps market dwarf the futures
markets. And so we would have to spread our enforcement staff
thinner than we already do. The 170 people there are only
slightly bigger than we were in 2002, maybe 10 percent bigger,
and the markets are more complex.
So rising energy prices are just yet a reminder, though we
are not a price-setting agency, it is a reminder that you want
to have an effective cop on the beat to police these markets
for fraud and manipulation.

EMERGENCY AUTHORITY

Ms. DeLauro. Let me just follow up. As I understand it,
CFTC, under the Commodity Exchange Act, has emergency authority
to restore orderly trading, to set temporary emergency and
margin levels to fixed market position limits when market
manipulations affect a commodity, or another major market
disturbance prevents the market from accurately reflecting the
forces of supply and demand.
Since 1976 the authority has been used four times, 1976 for
potato, 1977 for coffee, 1979 for wheat, and in 1980 for grain.
Will you consider using the CFTC's authority on an emergency
authority to set margins and position limits to curb excessive
speculation in the oil markets?
Mr. Gensler. I think we are tasked with always using our
authorities to make sure that these markets are orderly and
that they work for the benefit of all those people that are
hedging a risk or who are using the markets to price a
commodity. The four examples that you mentioned were pretty
specific, three of them in the potato, cocoa, and wheat markets
were actual or threatened manipulations, and the fourth was
actually when this government imposed the grain embargo. That I
am old enough to remember. So they were very targeted
situations, but the Commission will always use whatever
authority is available to us.
Ms. DeLauro. Well, further--I want to try to get one more
in, and I have to go back and I don't want to disrupt my
colleagues.
Mr. Kingston. The gentlewoman is recognized for 1 more
minute. Will that handle it?
Ms. DeLauro. That is fine. But I would hope, given what
people are saying with regard to the speculation and you have
the authority to do something about this, the price is $3.88,
$4 in most places.
Mr. Farr. $4.60.
Ms. DeLauro. $4.60, okay. Then I think we need to look at--
you need to examine your need to impose that authority that you
do have. Don't wait for us, because you won't get it back. You
know, you have got the authority, you need to act on it.

USER FEES

User fees. The President's budget request for CFTC included
the collection of user fees to offset the cost of
appropriation. This brings CFTC into line with all other
Federal financial regulators--SEC, FDIC, you know the litany. I
have introduced legislation to authorize the collection of user
fees to offset the costs of CFTC appropriations in a manner
similar to the SEC. With any user fees there is always a
concern that they will discourage trade and harm market
participations.
Do you think a small user fee would impose any real burden
on market participants? Do you support the collection of user
fees to provide the CFTC with a sustainable long-term funding
source?
Mr. Gensler. I support anything this committee and the
authorizers would like to do to help us get funding.
Ms. DeLauro. Is that a yes?
Mr. Gensler. Well, the President actually put it in his
budget as well. So I support working with this committee and
other committees of Congress.
Ms. DeLauro. Is it a burden on the market participants in
your view?
Mr. Gensler. We as an agency, $300 million would be $1 for
every million dollars in the U.S. swap market, so it would be a
limited----
Ms. DeLauro. Limited.
Mr. Gensler. Yeah.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. Emerson.

POSITION LIMITS

Mrs. Emerson. Thank you, welcome. Sorry I am late, we are
all kind of stretched thin these days.
Just to follow up what Rosa said with regard to
speculation, I think there is some legislation out there that
is being sponsored by Bernie Sanders in the Senate and Maurice
Hinchey and some other Members here in the House that actually
would more or less force you all to embrace position limits
with regard to futures markets, et cetera. What do you think
about that idea?
Mr. Gensler. Well, I have supported position limits. I
think they are very helpful for the integrity of the markets.
We are not a price-setting agency, but I think it ensures that
no one party has a concentrated position, speculators. The
markets are give or take in the oil markets, about 15 percent
producers and merchants, about 80 to 85 percent financial
actors and other speculators. So really what position limits do
is--amongst that 85 percent--no one party can have too large a
position. They meet and they disagree in a marketplace, and
that is where a price gets set. So I have supported that, very
much so.
Mrs. Emerson. Can you do it without--can you set those
types of position limits without us doing legislation?
Mr. Gensler. We finalized position limits in October. There
were two further things that have to happen. One was we have to
finalize a joint rule with the SEC on further defining the word
``swap.'' I think most of us know what the word ``swap''
means--but--my daughters don't--so we are working actively with
the SEC to finalize that rule this spring.
Mrs. Emerson. Okay, I will follow up with Mary Shapiro
since she comes under my subcommittee. So thank you very much.
Mr. Gensler. She is terrific and we are working very well
together, but it is just a lot to do.

SWAPS AND SWAPS DEALERS

Mrs. Emerson. And I wanted to ask you about some hedging
and swaps issues, so I can't even get into the joint rulemaking
piece, but we will do some questions for the record.
Have you all actually, though, defined ``swap dealer''
before you have a formal definition of ``swap''?
Mr. Gensler. Absolutely. There are two rules. We are closer
to finalizing the swap dealer definition. It is in front of all
10 commissioners, and actually has been since late December. We
are prepared to vote on it at the CFTC.
Mrs. Emerson. But I am just curious how we can define a
swap dealer before we can define what a swap is. Because
doesn't it beg the question, couldn't there be other people who
are swap dealers but you don't pull them in? It wouldn't be
pulled in until after you have defined ``swap.''
Mr. Gensler. You are absolutely correct, Congresswoman. We
put them both out as proposals and actually, before that,
something called an advance notice of proposed rulemaking and
we had roundtables together. Neither would be effective until
the other is finished. So they both need to be finished.
Mrs. Emerson. I mean because it is kind of strange.
Mr. Gensler. We are together on this one.

HEDGING V. DEALING

Mrs. Emerson. So I have a big ag district. Ag is the number
one industry in Missouri. So a lot of our producers and a lot
of our energy companies actually practice hedging to mitigate
commercial risk. So do you think you are going to constitute
hedging as swap dealing?
Mr. Gensler. No.
Mrs. Emerson. No, you do not. Okay. Is there any area in
which you might have hedging be some kind of swap dealing? Not
at all?
Mr. Gensler. Swap dealing, Congress said, is commonly known
as a swap dealer making markets or dealing as a regular
business. And we have gotten excellent comments from the market
to try to narrow a little bit more this making markets. And I
think to me, if I can say it, making a markets means routinely
holding yourself out to accommodate somebody else who might be
hedging, but it is not about----
Mrs. Emerson. I understand the difference.
Mr. Gensler. I think that by tightening up and clarifying
this making markets concept in the final rule, by tightening up
the regular business definition, by speaking--a lot of
commenters asked us to speak--to the hedging issue--and also by
raising something called the de minimis level will give, I
think a lot of comfort to the tens of thousands dependent on
these markets. After all these markets have to work for the
farmers and ranchers and producers and commercial companies in
all your districts. That is what this is about.
Mrs. Emerson. Yes. Because, for example, one of our larger
utility companies that serves part of my State and
congressional district tells me that they will have to spend
more than--probably 7 to 9 times more on collateral for swaps
if they weren't exempt in whatever new rule you all come up
with. And so that is concerning. But even more concerning to me
is that I assume much of the cost that they bury is going to
get passed on to the consumers, and that is just one more
expense that far exceeds what they are able to pay.
Mr. Gensler. This may be where I have a difference with
what the folks on Wall Street are saying, but this is a
business that makes them a lot of money. But if you bring
transparency to the marketplace, all those farmers and ranchers
and producers get a benefit. So I think again, the funding of
this agency and these rules are about shifting some of that
information advantage from Wall Street to all of the farmers
and ranchers and commercial interests in your districts. It may
well be that the pricing is even better. Of course, we have to
make sure those end users don't get caught up in the swap
dealer definition, and I am committed to that.

COMPLETION OF RULEMAKINGS

Mrs. Emerson. I look forward to working with you further as
you guys develop, get these rules finalized.
Speaking of which, when do you think the 10 rules--or 20,
is it, that you--10 that you are collectively working on with
SEC? Are you going to be done by the fall, do you think?
Mr. Gensler. Oh, absolutely. In terms of the two joint
rulemakings that are most center of your question. The entity
definition rule we have had in front of the 10 commissioners
now for over 2 months, almost 3 months. I think--we are ready
to vote at the CFTC. And the product definition rule, we sent
all the language from the CFTC to the SEC. They have a larger
task, they have more rules and more things to do. So it is just
capacity issues.
We are working hopefully to get that in front of our fellow
commissioners in the next couple of weeks or few weeks, and
then try to schedule a vote between the two Commissions.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you very much. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.

HEDGING V. DEALING

Mr. Kingston. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I want to continue
on that, because where I think there is to me a lot of common
ground, and I have talked to our Senate counterparts about
this, is in making sure that commercial hedgers do not get
caught up in the definition of swap dealer or major swap
dealers. And I know that there are some energy companies that
do commercial hedging and trading and the de minimis rule comes
in to try to make the firewall. But would you walk us through
that so we can send a signal to the markets that we understand
the distinction?
Mr. Gensler. Well, I think the distinction is with regard
to market making. If someone is entering into a hedge for their
oil or their farm product, that is not making a market,
particularly if they are going to take delivery of the oil and
so forth. There are others that actually hold themselves out on
a routine basis where they are accommodating others who were in
essence knocking on their door and calling them up and saying,
can you help me hedge something?
And I look, sir, to the International Swap and Derivatives
Association web site. They have over 800 members of that
association. Then they have another category called primary
member, self selected. In their bylaws they say they are market
making and not hedging, that is roughly what they say. If one
looks at the 200 members there, there are some very large
integrated oil companies. I doubt the energy company that
Congresswoman Emerson referred to is in that list, I can't
imagine.
Mrs. Emerson. It is a utility.
Mr. Gensler. It is a utility. I can't imagine. But there
are some, because they do so much they are basically similar to
the Wall Street shops, that they are accommodating demand on a
routine basis, many times a day, accommodating somebody else's
risk management, and it is a regular business. They actually
make money by providing liquidity, and this is an important
test.
Over at the SEC they have a distinction between traders and
dealers, and one of their distinctions is are you dealing to
make money by providing liquidity? It is another sort of aspect
of this. I think that the end users in your district or in all
of these, probably, districts, we don't have somebody from New
York, but they are not in a regular business, making markets on
a routine basis, with a goal to make money from providing
liquidity.
Mr. Kingston. The de minimus threshold that is $100
million?
Mr. Gensler. Correct.
Mr. Kingston. Are you going to change that?
Mr. Gensler. Up.
Mr. Kingston. Two billion?
Mr. Gensler. There are 10 commissioners.
Mr. Kingston. What would be the range though in your
meeting with your commissioners? It goes from 100 million.
Could it go up to 2 billion, 3 billion, or is it 1 billion?
Where do you think your range is in these discussions? I am
asking you to speculate.
Mr. Gensler. Do you have a cop on the beat watching me? I
think the press reports have suggested we might be considering
something in the 2 to 3 billion range, and I think the press
reports are good reports.
Mr. Kingston. Will it only apply to trading activities? Do
you feel good about that and not commercial hedging activities?
We are beating this around, but I think that is where our
biggest concern is.
Mr. Gensler. Chairman, I think it will, because even the de
minimis only applies to those dealing activities. So if over on
the side, somebody is entering into a trade and its purpose is
not dealing, it is not a dealing trade, it is really just to do
what Congress wanted us to do.
Mr. Kingston. So major swap participants and swap dealers
would be in a different category from commercial hedging?
Mr. Gensler. I think as a result of what we end up doing,
yes. I think they already are by Congress.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. Let me yield to Mr. Farr here. I have
20 seconds. Mrs. Emerson I wanted to kind of continue on that.
Do you have any other questions on that?
Mrs. Emerson. No. I had another question on MF Global but
Marcy handled most of that.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr.
Mr. Farr. Do you need to finish?
Mr. Kingston. I think we are okay on that.

PRIORITY SPENDING

Mr. Farr. I want to first comment on my colleague from
Georgia, yeah. What you tell your children, I don't think you
teach them borrowing is bad as long as you have a plan to pay
it back. And I think that we borrow all the time for mortgages
and for buying a car and for putting our kids through college.
It doesn't freak us out because we have a plan that we work out
in that borrowing.
And what freaks us out at the Federal level is we borrow
without a plan for paying it back by lowering taxes and not
having the revenue to come in to be able to pay the bills, and
that is what I think the big debate here in Congress is all
about.
Regardless of our internal debate about the deficit of the
United States, we have got to have the first responders. Nobody
argues about the need to have a fire department or police
department in local government. It is a question of size and
priority. And it seems to me you are the first responder for a
new law that came out because of an incredible financial crisis
where we didn't have the cops on the beat to do anything about
it. That was the complaint: Why didn't you stop this? Because
there was no law, there was nothing, they didn't do anything
illegal. And now that we have created the law, we have got to
have those cops. And if we are looking for things to cut, I
would point it out, if you go to Google and look at the cost of
an F-22, it is $200 million a plane, half of what you need to
do your job. So I could tell my children that we can get by
with one less F-22 if we can adequately regulate our markets.
I also want to follow up with several questions that Rosa
asked on Bernie Sanders' question. There was an article here by
Amy Harder on the Bernie Sanders bill in the Senate and some
dialog he had with you. His bill imposes a 14-day deadline for
the Commission to implement rules to stop speculation on oil
and gas prices, and pointing out the supply now is greater than
it was 3 years ago, and the demand for oil in the U.S.,
according to NPR radio this morning, is the lowest it has been
since April 1997--speaking of cops on the beat. Excuse me.
And we had legislation that passed this House back in 2008
where we had 170 Republicans vote for that bill. And I am not
sure that we got a good response on, you have the authority to
implement the rules to stop this gas speculation but haven't
used them for what reason?

OIL SPECULATION

Mr. Gensler. Well, hedgers and speculators meet in the
marketplace. They have since the 1930s when we were created and
they will continue after this because hedgers need speculators,
they need someone else in the marketplace to take a risk. A
wheat farmer needs somebody on the other side to lock in that
price at harvest time.
What we have is the authority to limit the size of any one
speculator so there is a diversity of views and no
concentration in that marketplace. We finalized those views
this past October. We do because Congress specifically told us
we shall. It was not a discretionary rulemaking, but a
mandatory rulemaking with the SEC to finalize, further define
the word ``swap.'' That was critical because some transactions
in the agriculture market, some transactions in the oil market
are what is known as ``forwards'' and they are not swaps. We
want to make sure we get that boundary correct because we
didn't want to limit forwards. I think Congress was right to
say we have to further define these terms.

FORWARD CONTRACTS

Mrs. Emerson [presiding]. Will you yield just a second?
Will you describe what a ``forward'' is specifically?
Mr. Gensler. I am sorry. Now, Madam Chair. A forward is
when somebody buys wheat or oil for forward delivery and they
have an intention to actually take the delivery of that
product. That is called a forward, and it is not regulated in
this law, and hasn't been regulated under the CEN since the
1930s. A swap is something that is financially settled and you
are really talking about differences of money.
Mrs. Emerson. If you don't mind just for a second, because
a lot of our producers will forward contract, whether it is
hogs or whether it is for their corn. And sometimes you win and
sometimes you lose, because if in fact corn prices are lower at
the time of delivery, you still get the higher price if you
forward-contracted it. But on the other hand, sometimes you
forward-contract and the price is way up, and you still get
paid the lower price. So I understand, I just wanted you to
explain it.

POSITION LIMITS

Mr. Farr. What I wanted to know was the answer to the
question. The question was: You have the authority, why haven't
you used it? Because the Bernie Sanders bill would require you
to do that in 14 days.
Mr. Gensler. Well with all respect, I think that we have
used the authority that Congress has granted us to set position
limits. We put a lot of effort into it, we put it out to public
comment twice. We got I think 17,000 comments the second time,
and 8,000 the first time.
I am very proud of the hardworking dedicated staff of the
CFTC. So I think we have done that. But yes, we need to do
something else. Very specifically, Congress said that we could
only set limits on the futures market when we set limits on the
swaps market. We have to do these aggregate and we are supposed
to do them at the same time.
Mr. Farr. If the rules were in place today would the oil
prices be what they are?
Mr. Gensler. I think if the rules were in place, we would
have greater integrity in the markets. We are not a price-
setting agency. I think we have done a lot of very good things
to make sure that the markets are more transparent.
Mr. Farr. And if there was more integrity it would affect
the price?
Mr. Gensler. I think that what you have in these
marketplaces with more integrity is you have more confidence in
that price-setting mechanism. Again, we are not the price-
setters. There may be some that wish we could bring down the
price of gas and maybe raise the price of, sometimes, wheat.
That is not our mission. That is not what Congress has asked us
to do. It is to make sure the markets are free of manipulation,
that no one has sort of an outsized concentrated position, and
that they are transparent and that the markets work in an
orderly way.
Mr. Farr. I think we are all up for election and this is
going to be a major election issue. And the question will be:
Can we trust our regulatory powers to do the things they are
doing? And it is going to come back to you. I think the point
is, yes, transparency is always the best thing to do, because
then if you suspect that there is wrongdoing, at least the
evidence, the facts are there. But I think we are going to have
to have a stronger response to this also, that if indeed you
believe transparency is effective, it has some effect on market
price----
Mr. Gensler. I do, sir. I think the transparency, I think
having it well-funded--I am coming back to this again, sir, but
a well-funded agency, to be a cop on the beat, and to make sure
we have effective limits on any individual speculator is the
right regime and it is putting that whole package together.
Would I have liked to finish all these rules earlier? Congress
only gave us a year to finish this, and here we are in the
second year. These are very complex matters, we have gotten
nearly 30,000 comments, and we have taken about 1,400 public
meetings, and done a bunch of roundtables. That is to get the
rules right, balanced, and also have them be sustained in the
courts. The position limit rule is now subject to a court
challenge from industry associations. So it is a bit of a
balancing act as well as we move forward.
Mrs. Emerson. Ms. Kaptur.

RECUSAL

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much. I hope this
is not our only hearing with the CFTC. I know Chairman Kingston
is not here right now, but I have to say I am a little bit
concerned that several of the questions that I asked could not
be answered by Mr. Gensler because he had worked for Goldman
Sachs and had worked with Mr. Corzine.
And I want these questions answered. And we need to bring
the proper people over from CFTC in order to do that. I wish to
place that on the record. I wish also to--yes, ma'am--I also
wish to place on the record several papers, including inserts,
along with Mr. Gensler's resume.
And I just have to say that with the largest bankruptcy in
American history under way, the fact that your testimony
doesn't mention it is astounding to me. And how CFTC failed to
regulate and protect commodities traders and the public
interest is not even addressed in the testimony is shocking.
And this is a very important hearing.
And what happened at CFTC? Who had enforcement authority
and didn't use it? What went wrong? We really need to know.
And Madam Chair, you understand these markets, all the
people that lost money and are losing money, I think we have a
tremendous public responsibility here. And if Chairman Gensler
can't answer the questions, we ought to get somebody from over
there who can, because he essentially recused himself this
morning and he can't answer the questions. And I would like to
have answers to my questions.
So I would just plead for consideration on the part of the
chair, and perhaps we could have follow-up hearings on this
extraordinarily important Commission, what it didn't do, what
it needs to do, and how we find the money to properly regulate.
My final question to Mr. Gensler would be from what you
know of these multitrillion-dollar global markets, where would
you place a fee in order to bring in revenue to the Treasury to
pay for the kind of regulation that is necessary in this
industry?

USER FEES

Mr. Gensler. I would look forward to working with this
committee and others, but I think it would be on both the
swaps--this $300 trillion swaps market, not just on the traded
futures market. I think you would have to make it so it is
spread across the whole markets in some--so it is the smallest
per transaction or something, if that is what this committee
and Congress wanted to do.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Emerson. Thank you. Mr. Graves.

NATIONAL DEBT

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair. I asked a question to
Mr. Farr's comments about having a plan to pay back the debt. I
think he is absolutely right, and he has had plenty of
opportunities to show that. So I imagine he would be like many
of us and say, you know what, there is no plan right now, and
so we can't accept this large increase or ask. In fact, we
should be supporting plans that direct us towards a balanced
budget, unlike the President who has no plan to do that. In
fact, with all the tax increases, it never balances in the
future.
Mr. Farr. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Graves. No, sir, in just a second. We had a plan last
year--cut, cap, and balance--which the Republicans put forward.
That was a bold proposal to bring government back within its
parameters it should be in, but I don't think Mr. Farr
supported that either.
So there have been some good proposals and plans to pay
down this debt, but unfortunately we are in our fourth year of
trillion-dollar deficits. There has been no plan to lead us out
of that, and this only adds to that. And so I will yield to the
gentleman for a second and then I do have a question.
Mr. Farr. Every year, regardless of party, the President
has to submit to Congress a plan to balance the budget, and he
has done that in his proposed budget to us, so there is a plan.

OIL SPECULATION

Mr. Graves. He is required by law to propose a budget. His
does not balance in perpetuity, and I will remind the gentleman
that the Senate voted 97 to zero against his proposal.
Mr. Chairman, I guess a couple of members of this committee
submitted a letter along with I guess 68 other Members, asking
about speculation, and was that responsible for high gas
prices, and asking you to impose strict position limits as a
solution. They cited a lot of things, including--I am going to
read--it was Exxon Mobil saying that speculation had driven up
the cost of a barrel of oil as much as 40 percent. Another
independent study said Americans would be paying $600 in
expenditures, the average family, an additional $600 a year
when it relates to gasoline. And I think you even commented
huge inflows of speculative money create a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
Have you responded to their letter that was from, I guess,
a few weeks ago; and what would your response be to the
speculative market?
Mr. Gensler. Still drafting a specific response. But let me
say these markets are made up of hedgers, producers and
merchants meeting financial actors and speculators, and the
statistics in the oil market and natural gas markets are about,
give or take, 15 percent producer merchants and 85 percent of
the others. And the corn and wheat markets are about 30
percent, 70 percent.
I think our agency is helping ensure that those producers
and merchants, whatever portion they are of the market, get the
benefit of a market that is free of manipulation, it is
transparent; and, yes, that we finish up the job and have some
limits on any one individual speculator just so there is
diversity out there in that marketplace.
We do not set the pricing of this commodity nor interest
rates for other commodities. And I think it is critical that we
get the job done also so that the end users have confidence in
the marketplace; that they feel that when they enter that
marketplace, they are entering into a marketplace that is fair
and orderly.
Mr. Graves. So is it your position that speculation has
driven up the cost of oil, or is it the fact that we don't have
an energy plan, or there is a political environment across the
world? Is it speculation solely, or is it other? Or is it not
speculation at all?
Mr. Gensler. I think it is a fact of our markets, whether
it is the interest rate, oil, or the price of any commodity,
that when speculators are part of a market--and that is not a
bad word, by the way, it is just that they are part of a
market--they affect the price.
I couldn't tell you on any given day whether they raise the
interest rates or lower the interest rates because there is so
much happening in a marketplace. Our critical job is to make
sure that they don't have an outside influence, any one of
them, they are not manipulating that market, and it is
transparent. I know that is sometimes disappointing to some
that may want us to influence a price, but that is not what our
job is.
Mr. Graves. So regardless of oil, corn, soybeans, if the
market sees that at some point in the future supply is not
going to meet demand, it is likely to up go today? And it is
not a manipulation of the marketplace, it is just a forecasting
of what they think supply and demand are going to be?
Mr. Gensler. Speculators can speculate on anything. It can
be even sunspots, right?
Mr. Graves. It is hard to regulate that, right?
Mr. Gensler. And we are not trying to, sir. We are trying
to have enough funding so that we can make sure that we root
out manipulation in the markets, that no one has an outside
concentrated position, and we have accomplished a lot. This
year, starting in October of this year, all the transactions in
the swaps market will have to be publicly reported. People will
see the pricing and the volume.
Mr. Kingston [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
We have about 3 minutes to vote. It is Mr. Farr's turn when
we get back. So the committee will suspend until votes are over
which should be in about 20 minutes.
[Recess.]

OTC MARKET SIZE

Mr. Kingston. We will go ahead and resume. I certainly
appreciate your patience.
I want to ask about the notional value versus market value
versus gross market value, and reference the Bank of
International Settlement statistics that say that the notional
value of swaps is $600 trillion, but they also state that the
gross market value of the swaps is $20 trillion. A big
difference. And I need you to walk me through the difference
and why you use those--you know, the higher number in terms of
what you are up against, because the notional value is more of
a paper entry than a real value.
Mr. Gensler. You are absolutely right. Just doing apples to
apples, the futures marketplace, using the gross notional range
is between 35 and 40 trillion, depending upon which month you
are in. But it is in that range. So the Bank of International
Settlement's actually newest figures are $708 trillion
worldwide.
Mr. Kingston. For notional?
Mr. Gensler. For notional, that is correct. But the U.S.
portion of that is thought to be about half of that. That is
why I just used the $300 trillion, which is a little less than
half of that 708. You are absolutely right, if you net it down
to a market value--and there are a lot of contracts that go
back and forth and there is netting between those--there is a
lower figure. I think you referenced $20 trillion in the swaps
area. But also then in the futures area, you can net that down
as well. I don't have that statistic. We would have to come
back and help you on that. You could also net down. So it is
just to be comparable, and apples to apples.
Mr. Kingston. Well, the reason why it is important is
because in terms of the real workload versus how it might look
from a notional standpoint, one of the things last year, I am
vaguely remembering your staff, you testified that your staff
was adequate to implement--excuse me, to pass the new rules in
front of you, but implementation would be difficult with that
current staff level, and I am thinking it was 37 FTEs. I am not
100 percent sure. But that as we look at what you do need for
implementation, using the notional value, there has been
criticism. And there also has been support of your position,
too. But I am trying to figure out, okay, what really is real
and what really is transactional.
Mr. Gensler. I think that is a very good question.
I think what is very real is--if I can focus on two areas--
we currently oversee 32 trading venues and clearinghouses, 16
of each, from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the Kansas City
Board of Trade and elsewhere, 16 of each. We estimate that that
32 will grow to approximately 100. Why is that? We think that
there will be some more clearinghouses, a handful, four or five
more, and some more specific designated contract markets. But,
in addition, there are three new categories--swap execution
facilities. We estimate 20 to 30 of these. There have already
been 16 or 17 that have contacted us. For an estimate of swap
data repositories there are already four that have sought to
register, and two more are actually in the works, so that would
be six more. Then there is this other category called foreign
boards of trade where we estimate there will be 28, if I recall
the number.
Now we might be off a bit, sir, but this 32 of trading
venues and clearinghouses, we think will triple. But if we are
off, maybe it is double to triple.
And then the other category that we talked about earlier--
the Futures Commission Merchants--that are overseen by the
self-regulatory organizations, we currently have 123 Futures
Commission Merchants. We think that we will have swap dealers
in a similar order of magnitude, somewhere between 100 and 150.
I think we have at least a doubling of these major financial
institutions, and maybe a doubling to a tripling of the trading
platforms and clearinghouses. That is the challenge for us.
Mr. Kingston. Of those SEFs and SDRs, how many of those are
sort of up-and-running entities, to the degree that you are
familiar with the players and it is not completely a new
invention?
Mr. Gensler. Well, in terms of swap data repositories, they
are all new within the last 6 or 12 months. The DTCC though
has, of course, been around doing other things. And on the swap
execution facilities, three to five of them we already regulate
for something else, like CME or Intercontinental Exchange--
ICE--but there are many that we have currently no regulatory
relationship with. The swap execution facilities, whether it is
Bloomberg or Tradeweb or Icap, or many others, those are really
going to be new to us.
Mr. Kingston. Because CME or ICE or the DTCC, they have a
track record of some nature, and that would be the model,
correct? Or is this such a new animal that we are in
unchartered waters?
Mr. Gensler. I think it is somewhere in the middle. I mean,
they are trading venues so there is some familiarity. But it
really is--did you say animal?
Mr. Kingston. Yes.
Mr. Gensler. All right, so new animal. So we have to
finalize the rules. And to register them, I frankly don't know
how we are going to do this because every registration has to
come to the Commission for these trading platforms. We have to
do it in a 180-day period. So I think starting later this year,
we will have a flood of these registrations in front of us to
consider.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr.

IMPLEMENTATION OF ENERGY MARKET RULES

Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In light of the discussion we had earlier regarding the
energy markets, I wondered if you could tell us what actions
you have taken related to implementation of regulations
regarding energy markets?
Mr. Gensler. I thank you for that question.
I am going to put it in three categories. One is expanding
the scope of oversight. Two is strengthening the integrity of
the market. And three is transparency, which of course will
relate to the other two.
But in terms of expanding the scope, we really worked--and
Congress, you all were as much a part of this, if not more than
we were--to close loopholes. There was something called the
London loophole. That was our oversight of markets that were
outside of this country but trading with the U.S. customer. The
largest trading platform in oil is both in New York, NYMEX; but
also in London, something called ICE Futures London. We have
closed the London loophole. They have to register as foreign
boards of trade and be under our jurisdiction.
There is something called the Enron loophole, you might
recall debate about this. Well, the farm bill helped close that
in 2008, but the Dodd-Frank helped completely close that.
Closing the broader loophole--what I will call the swaps
loophole--was bringing oversight to the swaps market--whether
it is 300 trillion notional or 20 trillion of risk. We are not
yet all of the way to closing. We have completed 29 rules but
we have about 20 to go.
In terms of market integrity, it was very critical to
broaden our anti-manipulation authority. We really had a hard
standard to meet. Congress helped us broaden our anti-
manipulation authority and close a gap. We finalized those
rules last year, and we can now go after reckless behavior,
fraud-based manipulation, in the energy swaps market as well as
in the futures market.
Also to enhance market integrity's position limits, we
completed them in October; but as we have discussed, we need to
complete some other rules to get them in effect. And that is
really critical to the integrity of the market.
And then if I can close on transparency, we have already
completed rules that in the energy swaps market we are going to
have starting this fall, in October, all of the transactions
will be reported publicly. There will be some time delay to
protect the anonymity of the transactions, but they will be all
reported, the price and volume in these markets. There is still
more to do, and there are some other features to what we have
done. Nevertheless, that gives you a sense of some of the
things that we have completed.

FUNDING

Mr. Farr. And if you didn't get the funding that was asked
for in the President's budget--you talked about you need to
complete some rules on this market integrity--what impact would
it have?
Mr. Gensler. Well, I think it has a number of effects. One
is we don't have as many people to do surveillance, and even
the technology to support surveillance. The Chairman has worked
so hard to get us technology money. So we have to take this
wealth of data in and actually look at it and review it, and we
want to use technology to do that best. So we wouldn't be able
to actually oversee the markets.
And if I can stretch the football analogy once more--and we
can go to basketball where there are three referees--but if we
only have one referee a game, rather than three in basketball
or seven in football, there are going to be more injuries on
the field. And I would say there probably would be mayhem on
the field, and we don't want injuries and mayhem in the energy
futures and swaps marketplace. We want everybody that wants to
hedge risk--legitimate hedgers, commercial end user--to have
confidence in the marketplace, and that the price in that
marketplace is set in a fair and orderly way.
Mr. Farr. What would it take? Do we need to statutorily
create these fees? Or do you have the authority in the law to
create the fees that were discussed earlier?
Mr. Gensler. That would be a matter of Congress to take up
and consider.
Mr. Farr. Because it seems to me that you have laid out the
case of the necessity for this funding level. We don't have the
luxury, at least I don't have the luxury, and neither does the
chairman because he gets given a number, which is probably
going to be lower than the President's ask, I think it is going
to be like last year all over again, and then we make the best
of it. And the Senate, has the Senate finished this segment of
their budget yet?
Mr. Kingston. I think they had a hearing yesterday, right?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. I was honored to testify yesterday, but I
was the first in that subcommittee to testify.
Mr. Farr. So we will have to reconcile the two, the
differences between the House and Senate versions, and
hopefully they come as close as possible to the President's
request. But if they don't, we ought to know. As I said, it is
election year for us. This year, I think there is going to be
more, particularly with the oil crisis, there is going to be
more focus and debate as to what your role is. And obviously,
if we haven't given you enough resources to do it, we have to
hold ourselves accountable for that, too.
Mr. Gensler. And I know that this is a bold request. But I
think, if I might say, it is not as bold as thinking about the
millions of Americans that are still out of work, because the
swaps marketplace had an effect on the calamitous situation in
2008, where American taxpayers had to foot the bill on so much
they really shouldn't have had to foot the bill on, and that is
Wall Street.
Mr. Farr. So if we spend this money, this big amount you
are asking for, we are going to put all of those people back to
work?

VALUE OF TRANSPARENCY

Mr. Gensler. Well, I can't say that. But I do think that
these markets will work more for the American public and the
farmers and ranchers and merchants and commercial end users in
your districts; better for them because they will actually get
a better look and see transparent markets.
Market transparency shifts some information advantage from
Wall Street to those commercial end users. When they can lock
in a price, when they can manage their risk, then they are far
better able to focus on job creation and the economy.
Mr. Farr. Well, it is very interesting. What we always
argue is that in order to have a competitive marketplace, you
have to have a level playing field. A level playing field means
that everybody has access to the same information, rules and
regulations, and then makes the best of it.
It seems to me you are making that same argument. Once we
have the transparency, the rules and regulations, and a level
playing field, if history is any indicator, it ought to be
better for the areas that you are regulating. I mean, there
ought to be more certainty, if that is a word to use in swaps
and speculative market, but it seems to me that we have
professionalized, in a business sense, that business. Before,
to now, it has been unregulated.
Mr. Gensler. That is correct. It has been unregulated.
Looking back now, knowing what we know, I think we ought to
have brought this oversight earlier. But the challenge in this
great challenge is to find $100 million more when you are
trying to cut, trim, and control the budget everywhere you can.
And I deeply respect that I am asking for something that is
very difficult.
Mr. Farr. A smaller F-22. If we just build half the plane,
a smaller plane, like smaller cars, we can save $100 million,
and that is your cost.
Mr. Gensler. Yes, I am not about to suggest where to find
it.

OIL SPECULATION

Mr. Kingston. Mr. Chairman, I do want to continue on that
line because I know on March 5, a number of Members of Congress
sent a letter to you about oil speculators. They referenced a
June 2011 hearing with Rex Tillerson, the CEO of Exxon, who
said that 40 percent of the price of oil is because of
speculation. They also referenced that the St. Louis Federal
Reserve recommended that the CFTC do more to stop speculators
from driving up the price of oil, and said it contributed to
about 15 percent of the price. Now there is concern about if
you have higher position limits by energy companies, it is just
going to be passed on to consumers. You have those statements,
and then you have the concern that higher position limits will
just be passed on to consumers.
And then also the CFTC chaired the Interagency Task Force
on Commodity Markets in July of 2008 and said that the analysis
to date does not support the position that speculative activity
has driven up changes in the oil prices. And then the
International Energy Agency released a report in 2008 saying
that there is little evidence that large investment flows into
the futures markets are causing an imbalance in supply and
demand, therefore contributing to higher oil prices.
Then President Obama reinstituted the Oil and Gas Price
Fraud Working Group, in which CFTC is a member, in 2010, and
that did not produce any positive statement on it that there
was a problem.
And then you had the CFTC commissioner who retired in 2011,
Michael Dunn, who says that the CFTC staff has been unable to
find any reliable economic analysis to support the contention
that excessive speculation is affecting the markets we
regulate.
Now, here is where I am heading to ask the question in a
balanced way. You have people with authority, serious people on
both sides, coming up with two different conclusions. So I
wanted to invite you to respond to that, because I think
Members of Congress are jumping on everything from tapping into
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to drilling in Alaska to saying
we need to double-down on wind power, whatever. So speculators
are just one more discussion item. So the floor is yours.

ROLE OF SPECULATION

Mr. Gensler. Mr. Chairman, I think you have framed it as
best as I have heard it. And I really mean that.
These markets, the energy futures markets, have producers
and merchants meeting financial actors and speculators in the
market, and that has been true for decades. And it is true in
the corn and wheat markets and interest rate markets. In the
energy markets, it is about 15 percent, give or take, versus 85
percent, give or take. We publish these figures every Friday.
They are on our Web site.
We are not a price-setting agency, but I do think it is
inarguable that speculators have a role in the setting of
prices of energy, of natural gas, of corn, wheat. When they are
70 to 85 percent of the markets, it is a little hard to argue
that they don't have a role in that.
The studies, as you say, are somewhat split. When we went
forward on position limits, commenters sent in about 50
different studies. And along with the St. Louis Fed and others
that you mentioned, about half were on one side, that they said
speculators either raised the price or raised volatility or
something; and about, give or take, half were on the other
side, as you mentioned. I could give you a list of all of the
studies on one side and the other.
We went forward on position limits, and I believe that they
help the integrity of the marketplace, assuring that no one
speculator has a concentrated position. In essence, it is
spread out amongst these speculators, so that no one person can
kind of press their point of view one way or the other more
than another. Again, we are not a price-setting agency, even
though some would wish us to be.
Coupled with my answer to Congressman Farr that we bring
transparency to the markets, we now have stronger anti-
manipulation authority in the markets, I think that is what we
can best assure the American public. Of course we need to be
well funded as well.
Mr. Kingston. Not to try to lead you, but if Iran jacks
around on the Strait of Hormuz, it would appear to me that that
is what we are seeing at the gas pump right now more than
speculators. Would you say yea or nay?
Mr. Gensler. I would say at any given time, both hedgers
and speculators look to news like that. So in the energy
markets, whether it is the actual supply and demand sitting in
Oklahoma, or news about the possibility of a default in Greece,
or economic news coming out on any given Friday from the
Department of Commerce, or yes, issues of Iran, all of these
are taken into a marketplace. Our role is to make sure that
everybody can compete in that marketplace and have the
protection against manipulation and so forth.
Mr. Kingston. Let me invite Mr. Farr to jump in, if you
want. Let me understand this. China gets oil from the Sudan,
and there are some issues, some glitch that they have stopped
that pipeline, so then China has to go elsewhere to get oil.
And so there is a market disruption. Speculators go out and bet
one way or the other, and then does that become a frenzy in
itself? You have real events, and then you have speculators who
speculate on the speculation or the rumor of the rumor, does
that drive up the price? Or does that stabilize the price?
Somebody told me, and I have not found the source on this,
but that the high-frequency trading--a different issue--but
that that was one of the suggested reforms in terms of market
stabilization when it was first allowed or started.
So sometimes speculation, you know, you have people who bet
on horses all different ways. It might not necessarily make the
horse run faster, it just means that somebody on the sideline
is cashing in. So that is my question. I am not saying it is a
direct question. It is open-ended.
Mr. Gensler. I don't spend much time at the track.
Mr. Kingston. Yeah, you are too busy with NFL analogies.
Mr. Gensler. I know, but I am going to try because Pimlico
race track is in Baltimore.
Mr. Farr. The race track analogy would be a disadvantage if
the horse then gets drugged. You would be the cop to make sure
that didn't happen.
Mr. Gensler. Yes.
Mr. Farr. You don't know who is going to win the race or
how much they are going to bet, but at least the game is played
fairly.
Mr. Gensler. Yes. I think to both of your questions it is
critical--because you are absolutely right--sir, hedgers and
speculators are both looking at economic news. They are looking
at their supply-and-demand factors, and speculators are
speculating on speculators; that is correct. That is why it is
so critical for the 15 percent of the market that is producers
and merchants, and more importantly, that the 300 million
Americans that are relying on these markets and are buying gas
at the pump and buying their food--because corn and wheat
markets are as critical--that they know that there is a
marketplace that is really free of fraud and manipulation. It
is orderly. There is, yes, an effective cop on the beat. I
think that builds confidence in the marketplace.
If people don't have confidence, whether they don't have
confidence in the NFL, or don't have confidence that the horse
wasn't drugged at the track, they are less likely to feel that
they even want to participate in the marketplace. We have to
ensure that the utility companies and the energy companies have
confidence in these markets as well.
Mr. Kingston. Sam, I know I am out of time.

ROLE OF REGULATION

Mr. Farr. I just want to say it is interesting, this whole
issue. The argument of a lot of my friends is let the industry
regulate themselves. And I have a copy of a note here that was
given to me that the argument should be made that the
government role is unnecessary, burdensome, and the financial
crisis of 2008 highlighted how this argument just doesn't hold
water.
But there was a study done by KPMG, a major consulting
firm, about corporate integrity, published around the time of
the collapse. A survey was taken across the board of a segment
of industries, and its findings reinforced the role of
government as watchdog. The study found that 74 percent of the
employees had personally witnessed or had firsthand knowledge
of wrongdoing during the previous 12 months, and nearly half of
all employees said that misconduct was serious and would cause
significant loss of public trust if discovered. This number was
highest in the banking and financial sector, with 60 percent
reporting serious wrongdoing.
So it seems to me that people know that there is wrongdoing
out there, and our job here in Congress was to figure out how
to stop that, to regulate it. And now the question is how do
we--what is the critical mass of rules and regulations and
employees that you need to do that? And that is what your
question is.
But it is very interesting because this committee is the Ag
Committee, and we don't think that these are the kinds of
issues that we would be talking about. And I don't think many
of us, I am certainly not very knowledgeable about this
industry, if I can call it that, but in my district we had a
breakout of E. coli, and what happened is the government asked
everybody who grew spinach, everybody who had spinach on the
shelves, everything, to pull it out. And industry volunteered
to do it. What happened is we couldn't get spinach eaten again.
It took over a year to get recovery. And I don't even think we
are back to where we were prior to the E. coli breakout.
What was interesting is that the industry--and at this time
the government wasn't even figuring out what to do--but
industry came in and said, please regulate us. They were way
ahead in California. So I think there are times when industry
sees the problem and jumps forward and says, my God, we need to
be regulated, and others, who have been playing the game
without the rules, who don't want to be regulated. And this is
where Congress gets caught in this battle right now, between
people saying oh, no, let them regulate themselves.
This committee, at least, head of the Food and Drug
Administration, would never suggest that we just ought to let
the pharmaceutical companies regulate themselves. We would
never suggest that we not ought to have meat inspection and
poultry inspection and so on. It is a much more esoteric issue.
But, indeed, I am a believer that when government is really
good and professional and does things well, that you have a
much fairer system for people. And the markets ought to
survive.
Frankly, and I guess this is your question, don't you think
that there will be more confidence in the market through
government's, what you are doing in carrying out the law and
creating a regulatory format, than allowing it to continue
unregulated?
Mr. Gensler. I do. I think one of the great innovations in
this Nation is that we have regulated markets. It was the 1930s
when President Roosevelt came to Congress and asked for
regulators to oversee both the commodities and securities
markets, and I think that is part of our great economic success
these last 70 or 80 years.
Innovation in markets will be promoted if there are
transparent markets, if people feel they are getting fair and
orderly markets. All of the commercial end users and their
customers behind them in the agriculture markets and the energy
markets and the interest rate markets will benefit from this
transparency, I believe.
I think that is what the core of this part of Dodd-Frank
was about. It is why we will keep debating probably for several
years the funding levels. But I think it is why this agency
will need, whether it is 50 percent more to deal with twice to
three times the number of registrants, is why we are here. It
is to make sure that people have confidence in these markets
and can use them.

INTERNATIONAL JURISDICTION

Mr. Kingston. I think one of the concerns that we have,
kind of getting back to Mr. Graves' questions earlier in terms
of the budget, it is my understanding that a U.S. clearinghouse
has never failed. And I may be wrong about that, but I
understand that. And I know that the SROs are doing a lot of
this work, and that the National Futures Associations registers
new entities. And so I think to the degree you have confidence
in that system and there is some oversight, then we might not
need a duplication of efforts, and I think that is part, but I
actually had a different question.
As part of Dodd-Frank, CFTC is required to regulate any
overseas activities of U.S. companies, and it states that there
must be a direct and significant connection with activities
that affect U.S. commerce. But we don't know what the
definition of that is. What is the litmus test as to what
affects U.S. commerce? Many, many companies now are
international, and if you are going to regulate their overseas
offices, it would be useful to know at what point that they
have a direct or significant connection with commerce in the
U.S., because I would think that would be a pretty high
threshold.
Mr. Gensler. Congress provided the CFTC with that provision
which is now called 2(i) of our statute, and we anticipate
seeking public comment on the application of that section. What
does it mean to have, as you said, direct and significant
effect on the commerce or activity of the United States?
Beyond that we also hope to seek public comment on is where
should we recognize foreign regulatory regimes? Particularly
for a swap dealer that might be active in the U.S. and have
enough activity, well above a de minimis level, but have enough
activity here in the U.S., where and when might we rely on some
foreign regulatory regime and what might be called substituted
compliance? We have a lot on our agenda. We haven't gotten this
out to public comment yet, but we plan to do so in the spring.
Mr. Kingston. And I don't know if this is a fair example,
but it was actually AIG London products that caused AIG's
problems. And so I would assume in the future, a situation like
this, you would know that they could have significant impact on
the U.S. market. But had AIG or some other future company have
a lesser office, I think that what we really need is some
threshold so that people know, okay, here is where you cross
the line and become significant.
The other part we hear a lot from the markets about is
okay, there may be oversight from the Fed, the CFTC, the OCC,
and then an appropriate foreign regulator. And one of the
things that Ms. DeLauro always talks about in food safety is
equivalency. If you have a foreign regulatory agency, making
sure that their food safety standards are up to U.S. standards,
it would appear to me that in cases like that, you may not need
what could potentially be overlap.
Mr. Gensler. Right. You are absolutely right that AIG,
headquartered in both Connecticut and London, that cost the
U.S. taxpayers most of $180 billion, $600 for each American--
Mr. Graves, if he is married, that would be $3,000 for a family
of five. AIG was run out of London.
We have to make sure we cover those things that will have a
direct and significant effect on U.S. activities and commerce.
But I do believe that, just as you mentioned about equivalence,
we are going to seek some public comment on where could we have
an equivalence or substituted compliance around these
transparency initiatives, around these various responsibilities
of the dealers.
Mr. Kingston. But right now, there is no definition as to
when it becomes significant or has a direct effect?
Mr. Gensler. That is what we are going to put out to public
comment.

FOREIGN REGULATORS

Mr. Kingston. Another thing, I know that the G-20 kind of
signed off on let's all jump in the water at the same time. And
yet one of the criticisms is that CFTC got ahead of the G-20
with some of the rulemaking. So will that put American
companies at an international disadvantage because they have to
play by a different set of rules than the Europeans or the
Asian markets?
Mr. Gensler. Let me say that the G-20 came together in 2009
and agreed to have everything in place by December 2012. So I
think we are just living with the commitment our President
made, and 19 other heads of state made.
Mr. Kingston. But they are not living up to their
commitment.
Mr. Gensler. We are not jumping ahead. We are living with a
very important commitment, and a commitment I would say is to
the American public. We share all of our internal drafts and
work papers at the right level with the Europeans and the
Asians, and we have made tremendous progress. The European
Parliament did pass--it was not identical--similar law that now
has to get conferenced like a Senate and House conference, and
they are about to finalize that, I am told, on March 29.
So we are different political systems, different cultures,
but I think we are pretty close on the clearing
responsibilities and on the data reporting. They are taking up
some of the transparency initiatives later than us, but they
have a pretty strong proposal in front of their Parliament
right now that they hope to complete later this year or early
in 2013.
Mr. Kingston. Okay. As you know, having come from Wall
Street, the financial leadership of America is significant,
just as our biotech inventions are. There are some areas where
we really are dominant in terms of the marketplace, and we
don't want to lose that. I know you don't want to lose that.
But that is why it is important that as American companies move
out globally, they are not at a disadvantage.
Mr. Farr, I know you have a tight schedule here.
Mr. Farr. I have no further questions.
Again, I want to thank the chairman for being here and
thank him for his public service. I guess growing up, it is not
that we imagined that the people who have access to
understanding Wall Street and can be successful on it want to
leave it and come into public service, and I was really
impressed when you were telling us the reasons last year,
because of your daughters, and that is why I am going home. I
am going to get on a plane and go home to see my grandchildren.
Mr. Gensler. Good for you. One day I hope to have some
grandchildren. But right now, it is still daughters at home.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr, I have one more question. I have
others I will submit for the record.
Mr. Farr. I will sit here for a while. You can ask them
all.
Mr. Kingston. In terms of the market, one thing that we
asked for last year was an implementation schedule. We would
like to do that. Are you prepared to give that to us?
Mr. Gensler. Well, it was at your suggestion and others
that we put out in the spring of last year an implementation
plan. I first did it in a speech, then we did the concepts
release on implementation phasing, and we got 60 days of public
comment and finally we got very good comments based on
roundtables. So based on that, and then later in September, we
actually put out four rules that have implementation phasing
included in the rules. The biggest of those are about the
mandate for clearing and the mandate for trading.
So we have actually, I believe, followed your direction on
this, Mr. Chairman, to seek public comment both through that
60-day public comment period and those two roundtables, but
also then on the four rules we put out in the fall. What we
heard loudly is to try to do the swap data repositories and the
clearinghouses early, and do this thing called swap execution
facilities later. And we have done that.
Also, we heard that when we do things we should give a lot
of time. So a lot of the rules that we have put in place give
upwards to a year after they have been in the Federal Register
before they have to go into effect. Now we are hearing from
some people that is not fast enough. But I think we are trying
to give people time.
Mr. Kingston. We would like to not necessarily tie your
hands, but we want to make sure that it is as close to binding
as possible, so people in the market know, okay, this is what
is going to happen next. Under that transparency culture.
Mr. Gensler. Right, right. I understand. So the
transparency on our agency is we have put out on a regular
basis, here is our schedule of when we will take up rules. Now
we are human. Sometimes we think we will take up a rule like
these definitions, and then when we are working with the SEC to
finalize it we find it will take longer.
Where we stand right now is that we firmly believe that we
will complete the bulk of these rules through this summer; that
we will put out to public comment the clearing mandate this
spring, so that if we were to have a mandate, that would come
during the summer and that would first go into place in the
fall.
But we constantly update this thing because one thing that
I believe strongly is we should not do this against a clock. We
should get each of these rules right in a balanced way, do the
cost-benefit considerations thoroughly, give our fellow
commissioners time to weigh in. And so it has actually been
evolving as to when we will finish the rules.
Mr. Kingston. I guess what we want to do is be engaged with
you in that process so we know where they stand, because we get
a lot of people saying well, they are not doing this or that.
So if we can say here is what we have, here is what is going
on; and if it is not directly like clockwork, that is okay, but
as long as we have the working document and it is transparent.
Mr. Gensler. I would like to do that. And if you would just
tell me which of your staff to constantly be in touch with, we
will try to make that fairly regular.

HIGH FREQUENCY TRADING

Mr. Kingston. We will do that.
On the issue of high-frequency trading, if you have a
definition of that I would like to know, because it is
certainly a fascinating event in high technology, and I think
that we do need to be on top of that as a committee.
Mr. Gensler. Commissioner O'Malia, through a technology
advisory committee, has actually asked the industry how to
define that. But if I can, in my own words--because what has
changed in the marketplace is that people have gone from
trading on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange or on the
floor of the Chicago Mercantile, where you have all these
people trading and screaming at each other, to computers. And
that has been a big change in the last 10 years. So now
computers meet computers often in nanoseconds, and the high-
frequency world are people using algorithms, using a computer
to make markets sometimes, or just to purchase securities for
their own account or purchase futures for their own account.
There are various estimates as to how much algorithmic
trading is part of our markets. It is anywhere from 40 percent
to 60 percent by different estimates. But I will use a number
that we did research and we put on our Web site last summer. We
looked at 20 or so of our markets over a 3-month period, and in
how many of those transactions on any given day in those 3
months was there somebody that still owned the position at the
end of the day. Did they buy it and at the end of the day, as
the economists called it, did it persist? I don't remember each
of the ratios, but I know the oil market was one. I think, 88
percent of the transactions were day trading or what is called
spread trading, and only 12 percent persisted at the end of the
day.
So we are looking at how we update our rules to take a
count. It is just like when the telephone came or the telegraph
came or the ticker tape came, that is a good thing for America.
But we always have to constantly update our rules around new,
emerging technologies. And that is what Commissioner O'Malia
and all of us are trying to do.
Mr. Kingston. Just in your estimation, in the New York
Stock Exchange how much of that trade is algorithmic trading?
Mr. Gensler. These various algorithms----
Mr. Kingston. But really it is computer to computer.
Mr. Gensler. That is correct.
Mr. Kingston. It is computer to computer program, and that
trips the sell?
Mr. Gensler. That is correct. And I have visited many. Some
of these organizations are 20 or 30 people. Some are 300
people.
Mr. Kingston. These are quants, right?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. In fact, I visited one where the way they
do their interviewing is they bring people in and they put them
at poker tables, literally. That is how they do their
interviewing. So it is an emerging trend that computers meet
computers, and the algorithms transact sometimes in
nanoseconds. I have seen estimates of 50 to 60 percent, but I
am sure the Securities and Exchange Commission could give you a
better estimate on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr. Kingston. Sam, I would suspect that most Members have
no idea.
Mr. Farr. No.

COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS

Mr. Kingston. My last question, and I can put it on the
record if you want. And it just has to do with the cost-benefit
analysis guidelines. We have talked about this in the past,
making sure that they are stringent and transparent, again, but
to know what the cost-benefit analysis is.
Mr. Gensler. I think we are doing a very good job. Last
year I think you directed in your committee or conference
report to put out some new guidance. We actually did that. And
then there was a critical case last summer that the SEC, a case
in proxy access, and after that we went back and looked again.
Though our cost-benefit considerations are under the
Commodities and Exchange Act, section 15(a), we do take a very
close look at OMB guidance as well as what happens in the
Securities and Exchange Commission cases.
Just to give you an example, in the last two rules that we
considered, I think our internal business conduct rules that we
did a few weeks ago, it was 110 pages of economic analysis and
cost-benefit considerations. Our chief economist signs off on
every rule. If he doesn't, it doesn't get to the commissioners.
Mr. Kingston. Sam.
Mr. Farr. Yes. I wasn't going to say anything until you
mentioned that last part. My first job working for government
was working in the analyst's office, financial analyst's office
of the State of California. The legislature directed the office
to do a cost-benefit analysis. I had never even heard the term.
I mean, I have a background in the Peace Corps and biology.
They needed people to go out in the field, and I was pretty
good at doing field analysis.
But boy, just trying to answer cost-benefit analysis, it is
an easy word to say, sounds like it has a lot of--but to
measure benefit, what, until it is well defined. So every time
I hear that word now, I mean, I remember we never could do that
for the legislature. They wanted to know of all of the
categorical programs, which one was more beneficial than the
other. Is it better to teach kids to read or do math or to take
teachers out of class and give them teacher preparation? They
wanted us to compare all of these with a cost-benefit analysis.
All I remember, because they never described what they felt was
the benefit in the first place, so how do you measure it as to
effectiveness versus cost? But it struck me, and I think it has
been said, and it is so obvious, that we don't always use cost-
benefit analysis. If we applied it to the military, we would
never have lawns on military bases. Nor would we necessarily
for the mission of the military invest in military bands. So
not everything just works out on a cost-benefit analysis.
Sometimes it is just the public good.
Mr. Gensler. I have found it to be a very beneficial part
of what we are doing. I think it has helped in considering
comments, but I think you are correct. It is often qualitative
as contrasted to quantitative numbers. What has been a real
exercise is asking the public to give us numbers and
quantification of these costs and benefits. Sometimes we get
it, but often we don't. Often we just don't hear from the
market on the quantifications.

TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr, I am finished with my questions
except for some for the record. I will just make sure that you
know where we are probably going to be focusing in the next
couple of weeks. Only 9 percent of your budget is in new
technology. We are concerned about that.
The other thing is at your highwater level in staff in
1989, or whenever it was, the trading was in that pit-type
situation of everybody yelling and screaming. And with new
technology, it would appear to me it is easier to monitor
without necessarily the human, the level; so that analogy I
don't think is quite accurate because there has been a change
in the market.
The other thing, we started out with in terms of the 62,000
versus the 65,000 in terms of the number of registrants we will
want to talk about, and then the notional value versus the
market value.
We will continue to be engaged with you on that because I
think that is where there is going to be pushback on your $308
million. But the more information you give us, the better we
are. Often when we are writing you guys, we don't get the
response back as quickly as we would like to have. But I would
say open-ended and continuous conversation for both sides is
very helpful.

BENEFITS

Mr. Farr. And it would be helpful to me and other members
of the committee if we can put this in another context rather
than just analysis, sort of a fiscal analysis of the necessity
for your budget. You know, you are in a new field, and it is
very difficult to measure the benefit when you are going into a
new field.
But it seems to me what would also help is if we don't do
it. What happens if we don't have the money, you don't have the
staff, you don't have the technology, you can't do what the law
carries? What are the foreseen consequences of that?
I mean, it is sort of like, I was just talking to a doctor
down on the floor on a prescription. And it says, you know, if
you take this, this is what happens. What happens if you don't
take it? I often think we sometimes don't ask that question:
What happens if we don't give you the money to do the job?
Mr. Gensler. I think, and you have heard me, I think the
American public is unprotected. I think anybody who profits
from this marketplace ought to understand that their branding
is lower. Wall Street's brand is lower if they can't say it is
a well-regulated market. And the commercial end users in all of
your districts want to have confidence in these marketplaces.
I do agree we can use technology. A third, roughly 96
million, 70 million of outside services, and about 26 or 27
million people inside the agency who are in this budget are
technology. I think that it is critical that we use technology
and balance. We have asked to increase technology 56 percent,
while staff 44 percent.
But just as in football, the instant replay has to be
watched by somebody. Some referee actually has to watch it.
Computers meet computers in high-frequency trading. We need
real people to actually watch the video replay and to answer
questions in the market and to register these entities.
Mr. Kingston. With that, this hearing stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.319

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.320

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.321

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.322

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.323

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.324

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.325

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.326

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.327

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.328

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.329

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.330

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.332

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.335

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.338

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.339

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.340

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.341

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.342

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.343

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.344

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.345

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.346

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.347

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.348

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.349

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.350

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.352

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.353

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.354

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.355

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.356

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.357

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.358

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.359

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.360

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.361

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.362

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.363

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.364

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.365

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.366

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.367

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.368

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.369

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.370

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.371

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.372

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.373

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.374

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.375

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.376

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.377

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.378

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.379

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.380

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.381

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.382

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.383

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.384

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.385

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.386

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5803A.387

I N D E X

----------                              --
--------

Commodity Futures Trading Commission

Page
Accumulations of Notional Value..................................    67
Appeals and Denials Process......................................   321
Benefits.........................................................    51
CFTC Pay Scale and Peak Staffing Levels..........................    72
Completion of Rulemakings........................................    30
Cost Benefit Analysis............................................    50
Cost Savings.....................................................    90
Cost-Benefit Analysis/Position Limits............................   159
Curbing Speculation in Oil.......................................    26
DCM Core Principle 9.............................................    91
Dual Registration................................................   161
Emergency Authority..............................................    27
Emergency Speculation Authority..................................   320
Floor Trading/Electronic Trading.................................    86
Foreign Regulators...............................................    47
Form PF..........................................................   318
Forward Contracts................................................    33
Funding..........................................................23, 40
Futures and Swaps Transactions...................................    67
FY 2013 Budget Request Justification.............................    65
Ground Passenger Transportation Services.........................   319
Hedging V. Dealing...............................................    30
High Frequency Trading...........................................48, 92
Implementation of Energy Market Rules............................    39
Increased Responsibility.........................................    21
Information Technology...........................................   323
Infrastructure and Management (IT)...............................   332
International Jurisdiction.......................................    45
Legislative Proposal for User Fees...............................   319
Management of Resources/Implementation Schedule..................    89
Market Size......................................................    20
MF Global........................................................    24
National Debt....................................................    36
Notional Value...................................................    66
Oil Speculation..............................................33, 36, 42
Opening Statement, Mr. Gensler...................................     7
Opening Statement, Mr. Kingston..................................     2
Opening Statement, Mr. Farr......................................     5
OTC Market Size..................................................    37
Other Revenue....................................................   315
Performance Reviews and Bonuses..................................   230
Position Limits..................................................29, 34
Prepared Statement, Mr. Gensler..................................     8
Priority Spending................................................    32
Purchase Cards, Gift Certificates, and Employee Choice Awards....   233
Questions for the Record, Mr. Aderholt...........................   394
Questions for the Record, Mr. Kingston...........................    53
Questions for the Record, Mr. Latham.............................   393
Recusal..........................................................    35
Registrants......................................................    20
Role of Regulation...............................................    44
Role of Speculation..............................................    42
Seriatim.........................................................   302
SIPA Bankruptcy Action...........................................    26
Staff Hiring.....................................................   316
Staff Hiring and RIFs............................................   162
Statement on Gas Prices, Mr. Aderholt............................   396
Surveillance (IT)................................................   326
Swap Data Repositories...........................................   211
Swaps and Swaps Dealers..........................................29, 53
Technology.......................................................    51
Travel Costs.....................................................   213
User Fees........................................................28, 35
Value of Transparency............................................    41
West Coast.......................................................   315
Whistleblower....................................................   333
Working Group....................................................   318

Farm Credit Administration.......................................   399


