- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia, Chairman
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas               CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama               ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio                       JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Mike Ringler, Stephanie Myers, Leslie Albright,
Diana Simpson, and Colin Samples,
Subcommittee Staff
________
PART 9

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND OTHER
INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS

S

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 9--COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
FOR 2012

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia, Chairman
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas               CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama               ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio                       JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Mike Ringler, Stephanie Myers, Leslie Albright,
Diana Simpson, and Colin Samples,
Subcommittee Staff
________
PART 9

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND OTHER
INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS

S

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-563                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\        NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\          MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia              PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia               NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama          JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri             JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                   ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho            DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida              LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana               SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana          CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                   SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio           BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                  MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida           BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

----------

TESTIMONY OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND OTHER INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND
ORGANIZATIONS

----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

REGIONAL INFORMATION SHARING SYSTEMS (RISS)

WITNESS

GERALD P. LYNCH, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, REGIONAL INFORMATION SHARING
SYSTEMS (RISS)
Mr. Wolf. So many people from around the country and people
have plans. And so if you really can, when the light comes on,
please, please, you know, if you can.
All the statements will appear in the record and all the
statements will be read, so I would just say that.
With regard to that, let me just say the first witness,
Regional Information Sharing Systems, chief executive officer,
Gerald Lynch.
Mr. Lynch, or, Mr. Fattah, do you have any comments?
Mr. Fattah. I yield my time to help us move through the
witness list.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Thank you.
Go ahead, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, Members of
the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before
you to discuss the Regional Information Sharing System or the
RISS Program.
RISS is a nationwide program consisting of six regional
centers that provide services to local, state, federal, and
tribal law enforcement agencies and criminal justice agencies
in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Australia, Canada,
England, U.S. Territories, and New Zealand.
More than 8,700 agencies and hundreds of thousands of
offices utilize the RISS resources and services. RISS enhances
the ability of criminal justice agencies to identify a target
and remove criminal conspiracies and activities while promoting
officer safety.
RISS offers access to a multiple intelligence database,
connects disparate systems, and provides essential
investigative services including analytical, investigative
research equipment, training, field support, and technical
assistance.
There are more than 600 resources available via the RISS
secure intranet known as RISSNET. The owners of these resources
rely on RISSNET for its proven and secure infrastructure. RISS
enhances officer safety through its RISS Safe Program and
offers extensive gang resources. In many cases, these are
services that agencies would not otherwise receive.
Utilizing RISSNET's existing infrastructure as a connection
backbone eliminates develop costs for new systems. Almost 100
systems are connected or pending connection to RISSNET
including 31 HIDTAS, 38 state agencies, and 22 federal and
other systems.
The Interagency Policy Committee which was formed within
the jurisdiction of the executive office of the President
identified RISSNET as one of the four SBU/CUI networks
necessary to be involved in the SBU Interoperability
Initiative.
RISS represents the voice of local and state law
enforcement in this initiative which will enable a simplified
sign-on capability. RISS also supports the National Nationwide
StAR Initiative, the National Virtual Pointer System, the
National White Collar Crime Center, and the National Gang
Intelligence Center.
The 2012 President's budget addresses the need to support
state, local, and law enforcement efforts and national
security, yet the budget includes RISS, a central component to
support these initiatives at $17 and a half million, a
reduction of $27 and a half million from 2010.
If a reduction of this magnitude occurs, it will have
profound effects on our criminal justice community and will
cripple RISS' ability to provide its vital services. A
reduction would result in the inability to maintain RISSNET and
its applications such as RISSIntel and RISSafe, RISSGang, RISS
ATIX.
It would revert back to the pre-9/11 days. Cases that would
have been resolved effectively and efficiently using RISS
services may not be solved timely if at all. It is imperative
that RISS' funding for 2012 be restored to its 2010 level of
$45 million.
RISS is an outstanding investment in our Nation's security.
Since 2000, Congress has invested $353 million in RISS. In
return, RISS gave back $857 million in narcotics, currency, and
property seized. This is a 142 percent increase on the return
on the investment.
Over the last ten years, RISS trained more than 600,000
officers and produced more than 250,000 analytical products
which are essential in identifying and prosecuting offenders.
Since 2000, there were 42,000 individuals arrested using RISS
services. RISS also has 300,000 operations entered into the
Officers Safety Event Deconfliction System resulting in 100
conflicts.
So we are just asking the committee if they would just fund
us at the $45 million level.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you for your testimony.
I have visited the RISS center up in Bucks County a while
back. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah. It is a great program and I intend to work with
the chairman in trying to be responsive to your request.
Mr. Lynch. That would be greatly appreciated and we do
appreciate all this committee has done in the past.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
The next witness is SEARCH, Kelly Harbitter.
And let me thank you, too, for keeping to the time. I
appreciate that too.
Mr. Fattah. That bodes well for your request too.
Ms. Harbitter. I am going to talk fast.
Mr. Wolf. Go ahead.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

SEARCH

WITNESS

KELLY J. HARBITTER, PROGRAM AND POLICY ADVISOR, SEARCH
Ms. Harbitter. Good morning. I am Kelly Harbitter, programs
and policy advisor for SEARCH.
Thank you, Chairman Wolf and Members of the subcommittee,
for the opportunity to appear before you today.
SEARCH is a state justice support organization comprised of
one gubernatorial appointee from each of the 50 states and
territories. Its mission is to promote the effective use of
information and identification technology by justice agencies
nationwide.
The organization has a long-standing partnership, over 40
years, with the Department of Justice to promote information
sharing while protecting the privacy of the individuals that
are subject to such information sharing.
On behalf of SEARCH, I am here to support some of the
important DoJ programs that facilitate nationwide justice
information sharing efforts.
As Attorney General Eric Holder testified before this
subcommittee just last week, DoJ recognizes its responsibility
to offer financial assistance to its state and local partners
to enhance the Nation's criminal justice capabilities. One such
critical program is the National Criminal History Improvement
Program, the NCHIP Program, administered by BJS at Department
of Justice.
Criminal History records provide key information to
federal, state, and local decision-makers regarding law
enforcement investigations, sentencing, reentry, homeland
security, and anti-terrorism, non-criminal justice purposes
such as security clearances and employment suitability and many
others.
NCHIP funds state governments to improve the accuracy,
completeness, and timeliness of criminal history records. These
state records provide key information to the federal record
systems including the FBI criminal history files. Without
adequate funding to improve the state records, the quality and
quantity of records submitted to the FBI will be compromised.
Aging infrastructure must be updated and new technologies
that improve information sharing must be implemented. Basically
without funding, the information sharing roads are not
maintained and we're not leveraging the latest and greatest
technology to help us do our jobs better.
In recent years, NCHIP has been significantly under-funded.
Some states no longer receive any allocation from the NCHIP
grants.
The President's budget provides $12 million for NCHIP.
While this is one of the few increases in the budget over
fiscal year 2010, when this amount is divided among the 50
states, it is not enough.
Second, I would like to talk about the National Instant
Criminal Background Check System or NICBCS. The system allows
retailers to determine whether a prospective buyer is eligible
to buy firearms or explosives. Again, the states supply the
records to be searched during the NICBCS criminal background
check.
NICBCS funding has enhanced the ability of states to
contribute these records, but there is still much more work to
be done. States see the clear value of improving their records
and are willing to do so. That is why funding is so important
to the end game. Without a comprehensive, complete, and
accurate background check, dangerous individuals could be
allowed to purchase firearms and put the public at risk.
In light of recent and high-profile tragedies at Virginia
Tech and Arizona, NCHIP and NICBCS help keep weapons out of the
hands of people who should not have them.
The proposed budget funds NICBCS at $12 million, a
reduction from fiscal year 2010 and far below the authorized
appropriations level of $200 million. States need at least $200
million annually to effectively participate in NICBCS.
I would also quickly like to share SEARCH's support for the
Byrne Discretionary and the Competitive Grant programs. Both of
these programs have helped state and local justice agencies
implement mission critical information sharing systems over the
years.
The Byrne Discretionary Program is not funded in the
current budget. We urge Congress to restore the program. The
Competitive Program has been reduced to $25 million. We believe
$65 million is an appropriate amount to allow for these
programs that help leverage federal funding to the states and
locals by funding programs to prevent crime, improve the
administration of justice, and assist victims of crime.
So in closing, congressional support for the state criminal
history repositories and justice information sharing is vital.
By strengthening a state criminal history record, we improve
critical decisions such as those about handgun purchases across
the country.
And on behalf of SEARCH, I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to testify here today.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you.
And it might be helpful if you could have the 50 governors
send the chairman a letter asking that we, even though there is
an increase, that we still need to do more because a lot of
these governors out there are telling the public that the
Federal Government needs to be cutting spending.
Ms. Harbitter. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. So it is somewhat inconsistent.
Ms. Harbitter. Yes.
Mr. Fattah. And so if we could hear from the appointees----
Ms. Harbitter. Right.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. In these 50 states that this is a
program that they find to be vitally important and that would
be helpful. Thank you.
Ms. Harbitter. Yes, sir. That is an excellent point and
actually one that we want to put together some metrics to share
with you all as well. So I will take that back for us to do.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Next witness, Independent Review Team, Elbridge Coochise,
the chief justice retired.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

FUNDING OF TRIBAL COURTS

WITNESS

ELBRIDGE COOCHISE, CHIEF JUSTICE RETIRED, INDEPENDENT REVIEW TEAM
Mr. Coochise. Thank you, Chairman.
Good morning, Chairman Wolf, and thanks for the opportunity
to come before this subcommittee regarding funding of Tribal
Courts.
First of all, we do want to thank you very much for the $10
million additional funding in fiscal year 2010 that went out
for Tribal Courts. It was very welcome news for the court
systems.
As I mentioned before, there are about 300 Tribal Court
systems including CFR courts run by the BIA in the Lower 48 and
then in Alaska about another 45 that are developing.
And our request is an additional $10 million. One of the
main reasons is the New Law and Order Act that was passed by
Congress. If the tribes are going to do the extended sentencing
beyond the one year and $5,000, it requires attorneys who are
barred both as judges, prosecutors, and public defenders. And
there is no money with the Tribal Law and Order Act as of
today.
So our team has been reviewing a number of courts, and I
gave a report last year, so you can have it. On the last two
pages, there is a list of 79 courts that we have reviewed thus
far and also the breakdown of what courts we reviewed last year
in 2010.
And OMB's specification to look at speedy trial issues are
all in there and the statutes and whether there is violations
or not.
So with the courts, also are funding, there are currently
184 that get federal funding out of the 300. And the federal
funding amounts to about 26 percent of the total court budgets
in Indian Country. So our request is again to appropriate
dollars on the Indian Tribal Justice Act Congress passed a
number of years ago that has not been funded yet with the
additional things as listed in the first pages, the salaries
and trying to get technology in the court systems.
We were in Oklahoma last week and found out that one tribe
got $6,500 out of that $10 million, so now they can get a
recording system instead of using those cassette recorders that
they have been using in court.
And so our courts need assistance in Indian Country and we
appreciate what you can do to add more money into the budget
for the court systems.
And the reports in front of you have the listing and the
charts and the coloring that we couldn't put in the testimony.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, sir. Chief Justice, thank you for your
testimony. We appreciate it very much.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you.
And we want to work and see how we can be even more helpful
than we have been to date.
Thank you.
Mr. Coochise. Well, thank you very much for this
opportunity.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Next witness will be National Crime Prevention Council, Ann
Harkins.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL CRIME PREVENTION COUNCIL

WITNESS

ANN M. HARKINS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL CRIME PREVENTION
COUNCIL
Ms. Harkins. Thank you, Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member
Fattah, and Members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to
testify this morning and for holding these public hearings.
I am Ann Harkins, President of the National Crime
Prevention Council, home of McGruff the Crime Dog.
For more than 28 years NCPC has provided practical
research-based information on proven and cost-effective crime
prevention practices to citizens, law enforcement, and
community leaders across the country.
NCPC strongly supports the Byrne Competitive Grant Program
and encourages the subcommittee to appropriate $40 million for
it in fiscal year 2012, the same as fiscal year 2010, although
we would be delighted to support our colleagues from SEARCH in
their request for an increase to $65 million.
We respectfully urge you to sustain funding for the
successful program even in tough economic times because it is a
solid investment in the safety of all Americans.
Importantly, the Byrne Competitive Program supports Byrne
JAG and state and local law enforcement. They provide training
and evidence-based practices to the field, thus enhancing and
leveraging grant funding.
The National Crime Prevention Council respectfully requests
that the subcommittee also fund two essential crime prevention
functions in fiscal year 2012. The first is an independent
nongovernmental national repository and clearinghouse on best
practices. Local law enforcement deserves the best materials on
effective crime prevention practices to get the best possible
outcomes from your substantial investments in Byrne JAG and
other local and state assistance programs.
The second essential function is a strong national
advertising campaign to reach citizens with evidence-based
crime prevention messages. It has tremendous impact in changing
individual and collective behavior to prevent crime which is
the most cost-effective way to address criminal justice issues.
In the early 1980s, the Department of Justice and others
formed the National Crime Prevention Council, a public/private
partnership to establish a crime prevention public education
campaign. The most visible portion of the campaign features
McGruff and his signature message that inspires all Americans
to take a bite out of crime.
Prior to that campaign, Americans thought that crime
prevention was the sole responsibility of law enforcement. Then
we focused on encouraging people to utilize lights, locks, and
alarms to help keep themselves safe.
Over 30 years, the campaign generated $1.5 billion in
donated media at extremely low cost. I am proud to report that
today citizens and community groups realize that crime
prevention is everyone's business and we at the National Crime
Prevention Council are addressing problems from cyber bullying
to intellectual property theft while still encouraging people
to keep themselves safe at home and in their communities.
NCPC is proud of the work we did with you, Mr. Chairman, to
address anti-gang issues and prevention and also the Safer
Cities Project which we worked on in Philadelphia.
Let me share two quick ideas. The crime prevention
techniques of watching out and helping out, keeping alert and
becoming engaged in your community work equally well for
homeland security and we hope that the subcommittee will
support us in our effort to use those techniques that are
proven to help us protect the Nation as well.
We also have a new program for 18 to 24-year-olds, the
largest cohort of victims of crime. We call it First Timers.
The first time you rent an apartment, the first time you buy a
car, the first time you perhaps go to a party on your own, we
want to help these young people make that first time not the
first time they become a victim of crime.
In closing, an ongoing crime prevention campaign is
essential to maintaining years of progress and commitment from
this subcommittee and the Congress. We hope you will work with
us to continue that effort.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Great. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. No, thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Next witness will be Fight Crime: Invest in
Kids, Gabriel A. Morgan.
Welcome.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

FIGHT CRIME: INVEST IN KIDS

WITNESS

GABRIEL A. MORGAN, SR., SHERIFF, NEWPORT NEWS CITY SHERIFF'S OFFICE,
FIGHT CRIME: INVEST IN KIDS
Mr. Morgan. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today.
I have more than 35 years in law enforcement at the
federal, state, and local level. I currently serve on the board
of directors of a number of professional organizations
including Alternatives, Girls, Inc., Boys and Girls Club, Big
Brothers, Big Sisters. And I do not just talk about youth
development. I live it.
I speak before you today as a member of Fight Crime: Invest
in Kids, a national organization of more than 5,000 law
enforcement leaders who have come together to take a hard-nosed
look at research about what really works to keep kids from
becoming criminals including interventions on how to get them
back on the right track.
It is interesting to note that Fight Crime: Invest in Kids
takes no federal, state, or local money and does not run any of
the programs we advocate for.
Tough law enforcement will always be necessary to keep the
streets safe. However, the numbers tell us that punishment
alone is not always enough. Take, for example, that among
second-time offenders age 14 or younger, a shocking 77 percent
will come back for a third court appearance.
I know from my experience and from the research that
targeted investment can help reduce recidivism, increase public
safety, and save valuable taxpayers' dollars.
I am not talking about feel-good social programs or hug a
thug. I am talking about scientifically tested approaches that
help keep kids away from crime and reduce recidivism and which
makes fiscal sense in these difficult times.
The Federal Government is an instrumental player in
advancing a proactive crime reduction approach through
evidence-based approaches. Title 2 and 5 of the Juvenile
Justice Delinquency Prevention Act and the Juvenile
Accountability Block Grant, juvenile mentoring programs, and
funding on the Second Chance Act all provide needed support for
evidence-based prevention and intervention strategy.
How do we keep kids away from crime? The Title 5 Local
Delinquency Prevention Grants are the only federally-funded
source dedicated solely to the prevention of youth crime and
violence.
Fourteen million children lack proper adult supervision
between the hours of three and six p.m., commonly referred to
as prime time for juvenile crime. Research shows that these are
the hours children are most likely to become a victim of crime,
smoke tobacco, drink alcohol, or use drugs. Programs such as
the Boys and Girls clubs connect children to caring adults and
constructive activities during these hours.
I say this not as a member of the board of directors but as
a law enforcement professional who has seen the research. We
know that these programs work. One study found housing projects
without Boys and Girls Club had 50 percent more vandalism and
scored 27 percent worse on drug activities than those served by
this program.
A number of funding streams can help reduce crime,
therapeutic intervention for kids who have already gotten into
trouble. One such intervention is multi-systemic therapy. I
will not go deeply into that because that is in the packet.
Just this program alone, multi-systemic therapy, saved the
public an average of $17,000 for every juvenile treated.
The new proposed Byrne Criminal----
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you. These are all important issues
and they all will be read. And I appreciate it very much, but
thank you, Sheriff, for taking the time and coming here.
Mr. Morgan. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. The chairman and I will read the full statement
and our staff will read it. And we appreciate the fact that
these are not programs that you operate through your program
but for which you are advocating.
Thank you.
Mr. Morgan. Absolutely. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
Next will be The Safer Foundation, Diane Williams.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

THE SAFER FOUNDATION

WITNESS

B. DIANE WILLIAMS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE SAFER FOUNDATION
Ms. Williams. Good morning, Chairman Wolf, Mr. Fattah, Mr.
Austria. Thank you for this opportunity for The Safer
Foundation to present fiscal year 2012 public witness
testimony.
Safer Foundation is a not-for-profit organization
headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, but operating through the
State of Illinois and parts of Iowa.
Our work focuses on reducing the number of crime victims
and improving public and community safety. We do this by
supporting the efforts of people with criminal records to
become productive, law-abiding members of their communities. We
provide a full spectrum of services including education,
employment, and retention-focused case management.
My written testimony offers information on the achievements
of Safer Foundation and the Illinois Department of Corrections.
In my oral remarks, I want to speak to the importance of your
funding the Second Chance Act and initiatives like the Council
of State Government's National Reentry Resource Center where I
serve as the chairman of the Education and Employment
Committee, as well as the justice reinvestment process.
In supporting crime reduction strategies through the Second
Chance Act, you are reducing both the short and long-term costs
to the American people of incarceration while also reducing the
number of citizens who become victims. For that, we thank you.
The data-driven approach taken by CSG's justice
reinvestment efforts to serve as a strong blueprint for
policymakers tasked with determining how to spend limited funds
on strategies and interventions that work, we can reduce
recidivism and corrections spending without compromising public
safety by reinvesting in high-risk communities and supporting
community-based organizations that implement holistic
strategies and best practices.
I think it is also important to note when we talk about
justice reinvestment, though, that as those dollars are shifted
to the community to ensure that people who are sent home, in
fact, have an opportunity for success, that we make those
dollars stay in the community.
A big fear does exist today that we will start that way but
not end that way. And so to send people home in a justice
reinvestment model without the resources in the community to
support their efforts simply means that we will repeat what we
have already experienced. We do not want to see that happen.
As chair of the National Institute of Corrections Advisory
Board, I would be remiss if I did not also make note of NIC's
work to build the capacity of state correctional systems. In
these tough economic times, NIC provides the training and
technical assistance necessary to ensure that federal, state,
and local corrections agencies are using evidence-based
practices that are sure to have an impact.
Working with Safer's career services personnel, 2,700
clients were able to find unsubsidized employment and stay out
of prison last year. This success demonstrates the strong link
between employment and recidivism reduction and I urge the
subcommittee to encourage collaboration between the Departments
of Justice and Labor.
Efforts like the Cabinet-level Reentry Council convened by
the attorney general focused on identifying and advancing
effective public safety and prisoner reentry strategies are
right on target. Reentry impacts not only those being released
from prison but also their families and communities. This is
especially troubling given that these communities are
disproportionately home to low-income minority families, high
rates of crime, and have few of the needed social services and
support.
Communities, particularly families, need the tools and
resources that help their loved ones succeed. Though the
decisions that lead to success or failure fall most heavily on
the returning individual, these individuals must be empowered
to make the right decisions through clear pathways to success.
The critical funding authorized by the Second Chance Act
and appropriated by this subcommittee provides assistance to
states, local governments, and community-based organizations
concerned with prisoner reentry.
On behalf of our clients, Safer Foundation sincerely thanks
the subcommittee for its past leadership, strongly supports the
President's request for $100 million in fiscal year 2012, and
hopes that Congress will provide the most robust funding level
possible for fiscal year 2012.
In closing, I would like to take a moment to share a
message we received from one of our employers. This actually
came from the general manager of the south Chicago Dodge, Jeep,
Chrysler Company last Friday.
He wrote us to thank us for offering high-caliber employees
such as Lyndon Weir, and that is a quote. Lyndon has
consistently been the best of the best in sales and recently
when the dealership hired another employee through our program,
that is the Safer Program, Lyndon took it upon himself to train
him and to assist him in his professional development.
This employer like many of those that we work with is very
pleased with the people that we give him to meet his labor
needs.
Again, I want to thank and commend you, Chairman Wolf and
Ranking Member Fattah, for your efforts to address the needs of
the Lyndons of the world as they return to our communities and
become nothing short of outstanding.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, I know they are very important programs and
the committee has been doing a lot in that area. We thank you
for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Ms. Williams. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah. You should know that the chairman and I both
worked with Danny Davis on getting the Second Chance Act, and
the committee over the last couple of years has ramped up
considerably our support for it. And we appreciate the work
that you are doing.
Ms. Williams. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Our next witness will be Big Brothers and Big Sisters, and
I think Mr. Fattah would like to introduce them.
Mr. Fattah. I do. And I need to preface it with the fact
that I have to run to the floor and speak for two minutes and I
will be right back, Mr. Chairman.
But I am just proud that Big Brothers, Big Sisters is
headquartered, unlike all of these other great organizations,
this one is actually headquartered in my district and they do
great work.
And I wanted to just introduce Paul Bliss, who heads the
National Capitol Area affiliate. And I am going to let him
testify. I need to run to the floor and speak and I will be
rejoining you.
Thank you.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

BIG BROTHERS BIG SISTERS OF AMERICA, NATIONAL CAPITOL AREA

WITNESS

PAUL BLISS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, BIG BROTHERS BIG SISTERS OF AMERICA,
NATIONAL CAPITOL AREA
Mr. Bliss. Thank you, Congressman.
And a very special thanks to Chairman Wolf. It is great to
see you once again.
As you know, my name is Paul Bliss, President and CEO of
Big Brothers and Big Sisters, and I have worked in Washington,
D.C. in the juvenile and adult correctional system for over 20
years prior to leading Big Brothers and Big Sisters.
Big Brothers Big Sisters is the most effective strategy to
combat juvenile delinquency in the Nation. Thanks to an army of
volunteer mentors, we are also the most cost effective.
Big Brothers Big Sisters is the Nation's only evidence-
based mentoring program. Our mission is to help children
achieve their full potential. Nearly 400 local agencies serve
at-risk children in over 5,000 communities nationwide.
Founded over a century ago, our mission is to help change
the odds for American youth one child at a time. In the past
year, our national network has united over 240,000 high-risk
youngsters in one-to-one mentoring relationships. Our Nation's
youth face greater obstacles today than ever before. However,
we have strong evidence that our program works.
With the support of Congress and the Department of Justice,
we have achieved tremendous growth while maintaining our high
standards of quality service. We are data driven. Independent
research shows that we achieve positive and measurable results.
Federal funds appropriated or granted to Big Brothers and
Big Sisters are used to: one, support the development of our
service delivery model; two, evaluate our service delivery
model with cutting-edge technology to measure youth impact;
three, develop, train, and retain quality staff, but most
importantly to reach hundreds of thousands of children in our
Nation.
Big Brothers Big Sisters must express our concern with the
President's proposed fiscal year 2012 budget. We know all too
well the pressures our Nation is facing, but across-the-board
reductions in juvenile justice funding will only produce short-
term savings. We cannot afford the devastating impact such cuts
will have on our country's at-risk youth.
We ask this subcommittee and your colleagues in Congress to
prioritize investments in juvenile justice programs, in
particular federal youth mentoring grants. Your investment will
help divert at-risk children away from the criminal justice
system. It may take $80,000 a year to incarcerate a juvenile
offender, but Big Brothers Big Sisters needs only $1,200 to
mentor a child in need.
We are leveraging hundreds of millions of dollars of public
and private foundation investments multiplying your public
investment. The private sector, nonprofit, and nonpartisan
organization estimated that the hourly rate for a volunteer
mentor's time is $20.80. With over 240,000 mentors volunteering
roughly four hours per week for 50 weeks, their estimated in-
kind contribution to youth is well over $700 million per year.
We urge the subcommittee to review mentoring as a cost-
saving measure for investing in our Nation's economic social
future. Big Brothers' brand of volunteer mentoring is cost
effective and proven to break the cycle of crime and
incarceration.
Thank you, Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Let me just comment. One, and I think this applies to all
the testimony, one, I learned to swim in a Big Brothers
swimming pool in inner city Philadelphia. And so I know it is a
great program.
I think all of you ought to hear this other thing though.
This Administration has failed to address the fundamental issue
of entitlements and all the concerns. And I support literally
every one of your programs, but they are going to be under
great pressure until this Administration comes forward and
works with the Congress in a bipartisan way, putting everything
on the table, Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security.
Willy Sutton, the bank robber who was in prison, I think in
Philadelphia, said he robbed banks because that is where the
money is. The money is in the entitlements. Until you deal with
this issue, all these good programs are all going to be
squeezed and squeezed and squeezed and squeezed.
Unfortunately, if the President does not come forward by
the end of this year, it will not be done next year and we will
kick this can down the road until 2013 and all of your programs
are going to be squeezed.
It is a great program. All these programs are. But until
the Administration deals with the entitlement issue--the
President appointed the Erskine Bowles-Simpson Commission and
then literally walked away from it.
So with regard to that, I thank you for your testimony and
we will go to----
Mr. Austria. Mr. Chairman, can I just say I agree with you
just really briefly, but I also want to thank you for the work
you are doing in Ohio. I have seen it firsthand. Our office is
part of that mentoring program. And I thank you for being here
and testifying, but I also agree with what you are saying.
Mr. Bliss. Terrific. And, Congressman Wolf, I am glad to
see that you are a world-class swimmer today.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I am sure that pool is closed.
And the next testimony will be Joseph Summerill, National
Sheriffs' Association.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

HOUSING OF FEDERAL PRISONERS IN LOCAL JAILS

WITNESS

JOSEPH SUMMERILL, PRO-BONO COUNSEL, NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION
Mr. Summerill. Good morning, Chairman Wolf and Members of
the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to speak and
appear before you today to discuss the housing of federal
prisoners in local jails.
My name is Joseph Summerill and I have represented sheriffs
who contract with the U.S. Marshals Service for housing federal
prisoners in local jails. And I am also pro-bono counsel for
the National Sheriff Association and a former commercial law
attorney for the Federal Bureau of Prisons.
During fiscal year 2010, the U.S. Marshals Service housed
federal prisoners in more than a thousand different facilities
located throughout the United States. More than half of these
U.S. Marshal prisoners were housed in a local jail operated by
a local sheriff.
Historically sheriffs were reimbursed by the U.S. Marshals
Service for the actual cost of housing a federal prisoner in a
local jail under an intergovernmental agreement between the
sheriff and the United States Government.
Each intergovernmental agreement listed a per diem rate
which reimbursed the sheriff for the cost of housing one
federal prisoner per day. These per diem rates could only
include actual and allowable jail operating costs from the
previous fiscal year. The process of calculating a per diem
rate under this old system was complicated and sheriffs were
susceptible to audits in which the Federal Government could
retroactively demand reimbursement of monies already paid to
the sheriff.
As a result, sheriffs erred on the side of under-counting
and in turn resulted in inaccurately low per diem rates for
housing federal prisoners.
In 2006, the Department of Justice Office of the Federal
Detention Trustee revised the process by which U.S. Marshals
contract with local sheriffs. OFDT created the Detention
Services Network.
By November 2007, U.S. Marshals retired all the old system
of negotiating IGAs and requested that sheriffs replace their
old IGAs with electronic intergovernmental agreements or EIGAs.
Under this new system, U.S. Marshals can now enter into a
firm fixed-price contract with the local government where the
federal prisoner is being housed in their jail.
However, prior to the negotiations, sheriffs are required
to submit jail operating expense information which includes
information regarding the personnel, salaries and benefits,
costs associated with feeding federal prisoners and medical
expenses, facility expenses and the utilities and insurance and
vehicle expenses such as maintenance and insurance.
The new Detention Network Services Program has improved the
complexity and cumbersome process by which sheriffs were
compensated for housing federal prisoners. However, the new
process is not without obstacles.
As background, when United States Marshals negotiates with
a local sheriff for a new per diem rate, the Federal Government
now considers four factors: comparison of the proposed rate
offered by the sheriff with a core rate established by the
United States Marshals Service; comparison of the proposed rate
with other state and local facilities; and a comparison of the
proposed per diem rate with commercial contracts.
Unfortunately, each of these factors has problems. For
example, the core rate used by the U.S. Marshals is never
adequately defined for the sheriffs. Therefore, the local
sheriffs are required to provide cost data to the United States
Marshals and a proposed per diem rate for housing prisoners,
but the U.S. Marshals is never required to reveal what the
government believes is a fair and reasonable price for housing
prisoners.
This represents an unprecedented inequality in the
negotiation of intergovernmental agreement between two
governmental bodies.
However, the largest problem or the most disturbing
problem, I mean, is the length in which it takes to negotiate
an EIGA. U.S. Marshal grants officers purport to negotiate
these in 90 days. However, it is my experience that it takes 12
to 14 months from the time that the sheriff collects his data
to the time that the EIGA is executed.
This subcommittee should encourage the OFDT and U.S.
Marshals to reexamine how the Federal Government contracts with
local sheriffs. A shorter application process, less cumbersome
means of submitting data, and a more fair methodology for
negotiating the IGAs would greatly improve how the local
sheriffs are paid by the Federal Government.
Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you for your testimony.
Are you here in town?
Mr. Summerill. I am.
Mr. Wolf. Maybe what you can do is get in touch with the
staff and we will try to get you with the Marshals Service. I
mean, 12 and 14 months is ridiculous.
Mr. Summerill. It is and it is not retroactive, so the
longer----
Mr. Wolf. Why don't you call the staff and we will get the
Marshals Service up here and get you guys together.
Mr. Summerill. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
Our next witness is the Animal Welfare Institute, Nancy
Blaney.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

ANIMAL WELFARE INSTITUTE

WITNESS

NANCY BLANEY, SENIOR FEDERAL POLICY ADVISOR, ANIMAL WELFARE INSTITUTE
Ms. Blaney. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Austria, thank you for allowing me to
testify today on behalf of the Animal Welfare Institute with
regard to fiscal year 2012 funding for the Justice Department.
Specifically I will be addressing activities under the
Office of Justice programs of DoJ. And I want to clarify that
we do not receive funding under this program in DoJ under the
Bureau of Justice Assistance, but we are supportive of a grant
recipient, the Association of Prosecuting Attorneys, who has
instituted a training program or a program of training,
technical assistance, and other assistance for prosecutors, law
enforcement, mental health professionals, and others who are
involved in prosecuting animal crimes and prosecuting animal
crimes also as a preventive measure for other crimes.
So we wish to commend the Office of Justice Programs for
awarding through BJA with a grant to the Association of
Prosecuting Attorneys for this program. This is a very exciting
development and we are proud to have been a participant in the
training programs that APA has offered so far.
And we respectfully urge the subcommittee to continue
funding the National Animal Cruelty and Fighting Initiative
under BJA and to encourage the department's ongoing interest in
addressing animal-related crimes both because they are crimes
in and of themselves, but they also offer an additional and
creative tool for addressing other forms of violence against
humans.
It will come as no surprise to anybody in this room that
people who abuse animals will abuse people. And people who are
violent towards others, particularly spouses and children who
engage in spouse abuse and child abuse, will use pet abuse as a
means of controlling and manipulating their victims.
Up to 71 percent of the victims who go to domestic violence
shelters report that their abusers have abused the companion
animals in their homes. Batterers will use threats of pet abuse
against children whom they are abusing in order to silence
them. Batterers who also abuse animals are far more likely than
batterers who do not to use more violence against their
domestic violence victims.
I want to go off script a little bit to introduce you to
the poster child for why animal abuse needs to be taken more
seriously. This was a case in Kentucky, a gentleman named
Russell Swigart who was up for parole. He had killed two cats
owned by a former colleague and partner of his, a dating
partner, and had e-mailed her tormenting her as he was killing
the cats.
She was out of town. He went there presumably to kill her.
And when she was not there, he killed her two cats. He had
previously killed cats of previous partners and had also broken
into someone's home using a duplicate key to abuse their
animals as well.
The prosecuting attorney in that case said it is pretty
well known that people who commit violence against animals end
up committing violence against people. And I think it is very
possible that Russell Swigart could be a serial killer.
The other connection that will not come as any surprise is
the connection between animal fighting and gangs and all that
goes along with gangs and drugs and illegal arms and gambling.
Dog fighting and cock fighting are very big problems in the
country.
In fact, in Virginia, Mr. Chairman, because Virginia has
recently upgraded its penalties for cock fighting, the
assistant, one of the assistant attorneys general has reported
that she is seeing more cases and more requests from
prosecutors for assistance.
So as we pursue more cases against dog fighters, cock
fighters, and animal abusers in general, prosecutors are in
need of more training for handling these cases.
And I thank you for your time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Great. Well, thank you very much. I appreciate
your testimony. I think you make a very powerful point and I do
appreciate it.
Ms. Blaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fattah. I concur with the chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Blaney. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. The next witness is National Council of EEOC
Locals, Gabrielle Martin.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION BUDGET

WITNESS

GABRIELLE MARTIN, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EEOC LOCALS NO. 215
Ms. Martin. Good morning. I would like to thank the chair
and the committee for allowing us this opportunity once again
to testify before you regarding the budget of the EEOC.
As everyone knows, the EEOC investigates employment
discrimination cases. That means pretty much EEOC will testify
for every family at some point in their life.
EEOC has chronically been underfunded, but that trend was
recently reversed when in 2009 at the behest of former
President Bush the agency finally received an increase in
funding and was able to hire some additional staff.
I provided you with a chart on page five of the testimony
which demonstrates the trend of what happens when we are
underfunded.
In fiscal year 2010, we ended the year with almost 87,000
cases. We took in almost 100,000 cases. People waited more than
ten months to hear from the EEOC about a resolution to their
claims.
So clearly additional funding is necessary. The President
has requested $385 million and we are asking the committee to
support that.
We think that the agency, however, needs to look at what it
does with its funding. We are appreciative of all the funding
this committee has recommended and has come out of
appropriations, but I think one parallel needs to be looked at.
The agency tends to ask for an increase in the number of
investigators. And while over the past three years we have that
responsibility for three additional laws, we have seen a 17
percent increase in our disability claims as a result.
Last year, in part due to the economy, in part due to the
wait time, we had more than 33 percent of our total charge base
was retaliation charges, meaning while all people were waiting,
a number of them were subjected to additional or they claim
they were subjected to additional instances of discrimination.
That is not helpful to the claimants. That is not helpful to
the employers who have this problem sort of percolating in
their workplace and which they are trying to address.
So over a year ago, the union said to the agency we are
willing to help fight get additional funding, but we have to
use it wisely. And we think instead of just adding additional
investigators, we need to look at a plan where we have a right
sized group of staff typically at lower levels to do the entry
level work.
And what I would like to say is think about this committee.
If all of the Members of this committee were responsible for
fending the calls about when this hearing will take place,
writing all the letters about this is the process, this is what
you need to do, if you were responsible for greeting us at the
door, I think, although you have planned today and you have
given us a short time frame, this hearing would take probably
weeks. But that is the way EEOC has traditionally managed its
work.
Our plea is to support the funding request at $385 million
and to do a lot of oversight and ask the commission why they
refuse to change processes and use that money more cost
effectively and more cost efficiently.
We free up the investigators who are now spending upwards
sometimes of 50 percent of their time on administrative and
clerical tasks. We think the public, the employers, everyone
would get a better job because the investigators could
investigate cases and work on reducing the backlog.
It does not make a lot of sense to just say we are going to
keep hiring the chiefs and nobody is really getting the work
done and no one is served.
I would like to thank you again for the time for listening
to us, for your past support, and, again, our number one ask is
that the money be there because this Administration has said
jobs are critical for this Nation.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Maybe what we will do is have the staff talk to the EEOC.
Maybe we should ask that the National Academy of Public
Administration do an in-depth analysis. We have used NAPA for
reforming the FBI, for reforming a number of agencies. They are
nonpartisan, nonpolitical, you know, they are not involved in
politics, but can come in with fresh eyes on the target, if you
will. So maybe we will ask them to take a look at it and meet
with EEOC and NAPA to see if that may be appropriate.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I want to thank you.
I know that you testified before and you made this point.
And I think that it is incumbent upon us to try to follow-up.
And I agree with the chairman that we may want to have a review
done so that to the degree the dollars are being added pursuant
to the President's request that it does cover support staff and
not just investigators.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Martin. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
The next witness will be Trimble Navigation Limited. We are
going to ask Mr. Austria to introduce them.
Mr. Austria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to introduce Mr. Kirkland from Trimble. And I
think they do good work and they have a very good case they are
going to make today as far as the navigation GPS systems.
So with that, I would like to introduce----
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM

WITNESS

JIM KIRKLAND, VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNCIL, TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
LIMITED
Mr. Kirkland. Thank you, Congressman Austria.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Fattah, Congressman Austria, I
am before the committee to discuss an issue of importance not
from a funding standpoint but one which potentially may have
major budgetary implications due to the Federal Government's
multibillion dollar investment in GPS over the last 30 years.
GPS, I think, is very similar to the internet and that a
relatively modest investment by government was ultimately made
available to the commercial sector and that investment now has
produced economic benefits and jobs many, many times over the
Federal Government investment. And I think GPS is one of the
great technology success stories in this country.
Mr. Fattah. I know it has helped my golf game.
Mr. Kirkland. It has probably helped your golf game and
saved you from getting lost many times among other things.
So the issue comes up because of a decision by the Federal
Communications Commission a month ago to grant a waiver to a
company called LightSquared to invest in broadband wireless
facilities that operate at extremely high power in the spectrum
band that is immediately adjacent to the GPS band. And they did
this by granting a waiver of their normal rules.
Now, I think this was in pursuit of laudable goals. The FCC
has a long-standing priority to create new broadband
competition to drive down prices and also to free up more
spectrum for wireless data uses for things like iPads. And that
is a very good thing to do, but it needs to be done as part of
a rational long-term spectrum planning process. And by long
term, I do not mean delay. I mean judicious and doing your
homework.
So the FCC's action has caused serious concern within the
GPS industry. Initial technical analyses show that these very
high-powered wireless database stations will cause significant
interference to GPS receivers within a significant radius of
the base station. And the consequences of this disruption, you
know, are potentially far reaching.
If you think of their proposal to build 40,000 base
stations throughout metro areas in the United States, think of
40,000 GPS dead spots miles in diameter where your GPS receiver
loses its fix. And I think just from normal consumer uses, you
can see the implications.
The reason I am here is that the National
Telecommunications Information Administration is under the
jurisdiction of this committee and they play a major role. They
represent the interests of federal spectrum users and they
filed a letter with the FCC while it was considering this
waiver on an extremely fast track on behalf of DoD, NASA, DoT,
Department of Interior, FAA, the manager of the National
Communications System raising concerns with the LightSquared
proposal.
So LightSquared's proposal to build 40,000 terrestrial base
stations in this band represents a tectonic change in the use
of the spectrum band. This band was reserved for satellite
uses. I would suggest spectrum. Spectrum is an important public
asset and cannot be handed over at the behest of a private
party.
I would also suggest that the FCC cannot waive the laws of
physics that make this extremely problematic to have such high-
powered uses sitting next to receivers that are trying to
listen to satellite signals in the sky.
So what we are asking this committee from an oversight
standpoint and appropriations standpoint is to ensure that the
FCC fully considers these issues, that the FCC make clear to
LightSquared that it should not be investing in facilities
until the interference issues are resolved.
The FCC has created an interference study process and the
GPS industry is committed to full participation in this
process. And once that process is complete, we expect that the
FCC will do a full inquiry and a full public comment period on
this application.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you for your testimony.
We do not have jurisdiction over the FCC. We do over the
NTIA.
Are they in your district, this group?
Mr. Austria. No.
Mr. Wolf. Because I was going to make a suggestion that,
maybe you could take the lead here working with the staff. We
can bring NTIA in with the FCC, we used to the fund the FCC out
of this committee, and see if there is something that can be
worked out.
Are you in Ohio?
Mr. Kirkland. We have facilities in Ohio. We have them
throughout the country including Chantilly, Virginia.
Mr. Wolf. Where are you located?
Mr. Kirkland. We are based in Sunnyvale. I am in the
Sunnyvale headquarters.
Mr. Wolf. In California?
Mr. Kirkland. California.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Mr. Austria. Mr. Chairman, I will be glad to work----
Mr. Wolf. Yeah, why don't you do that and we will get the
staff to work with you and bring NTIA up here. We do not want
to hurt Mr. Fattah's golf game.
Mr. Kirkland. Or his iPad.
Mr. Austria. One other thing I wanted to do is, some of the
references you made, I have got two letters here from the
secretary of Defense and also the secretary of Commerce that I
would like to submit for the record that show that they have
concerns about this as well----
Mr. Wolf. Sure.
Mr. Austria [continuing]. And interfering with the GPS. You
know, we all use, I mean, whether it be iPad, the iPhone, or
the Smartphone or in my car when I am navigating or just the
hand-held GPSs, I mean, it impacts all of us. And I think it is
important.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. No. I agree with you. And we will try to do
something and see if we can get working with Mr. Fattah and get
everybody together.
Mr. Fattah. Let me assure the chairman that I would love to
work with my colleague on this matter because GPS is critically
important.
And, you know, this gets to your earlier point at a
different hearing. We have various agencies with satellites and
operations and part of that is the GPS. And then you come down
to the spectrum distribution issues that affect law enforcement
and on a variety of points under our bill in the Commerce
Department. And so I think that even though we do not have
direct jurisdiction over the FCC, I think that it is
appropriate for us to intervene----
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. And to try to be helpful.
Mr. Kirkland. Mr. Chairman, if I could comment, you know,
the obvious uses of GPS by consumers, that is what everyone
knows, but this is deeply embedded in Department of Defense
systems, in first responder systems, in all elements of law
enforcement as I am sure you can imagine. So----
Mr. Wolf. Well, Steve, if you can do that and we will see
what we can do. You should be in touch with Mr. Austria. Do you
have somebody here in town so you do not have to fly back and
forth from Sunnyvale?
Mr. Kirkland. Yes, we do. We have been here for a couple
days and we----
Mr. Wolf. Why don't you have somebody contact Steve's
office.
Mr. Kirkland. Definitely. We have been in touch.
Mr. Wolf. Great.
Mr. Fattah. And I love the point that you made about the
fact that with a small government investment, the private
sector has taken something and made a lot of it because it is
an important point to make that we do need to invest in new
technology and innovation, which is a point we have been making
throughout these hearings.
Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Well, it came up yesterday at the National
Science Foundation hearing.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Kirkland. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Sea Grant College Association, Dr. Jonathan
Pennock.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL SEA GRANT COLLEGE PROGRAM

WITNESS

JONATHAN PENNOCK, PRESIDENT, SEA GRANT COLLEGE ASSOCIATION
Mr. Pennock. Good morning, Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member
Fattah, and Representative Austria. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the National Oceanographic
and Atmospheric Administration and particularly the National
Sea Grant College Program.
My name is Jonathan Pennock. I am director of the New
Hampshire Sea Grant Program and also president of the Sea Grant
Association.
On behalf of my own institution and the 31 other
institutions that make up the National Sea Grant College
Program, I want to express our appreciation to the subcommittee
for its long-standing support of Sea Grant.
Going forward, to be fully responsive to the increasing
challenges faced by our coastal communities, the Sea Grant
Association is recommending a funding level for Sea Grant of
$70 million in fiscal year 2012.
We certainly recognize the extreme economic challenges that
the country faces and the difficult decisions that this
committee faces at this time, but we note that this request is
nearly $14 million below the authorized level for fiscal year
2012 and it is consistent with previous views expressed by this
subcommittee about adequate funding for the program.
During the past year, the subcommittee's support of Sea
Grant has been validated through numerous examples of the value
of Sea Grant's place-based partnership between federal, state,
and university communities.
For example, this past Wednesday, agency leaders who led
the Nation's response to the Deepwater Horizon disaster
espoused both the value of Sea Grant itself in connecting Gulf
Coast stakeholders to the federal response to the disaster and
the importance of existing in-place federal university
partnerships such as Sea Grant to successful responses such as
the Deepwater Horizon.
During the year, other Sea Grant led research and extension
efforts developed new and efficient technologies for the
fishing industry, contributed sound science to the restoration
of the degraded coastal ecosystems, stimulated private sector
jobs in aqua culture and marine-based industries, and
facilitated the adoption of hazard resilient policy and
investment by private community and state entities.
By continuing a significant national demographic shift that
started in the 1970s, America's coastal population continues to
grow and with it nurture much of the Nation's economic growth.
Today a wide range of opportunities exist along our coasts
including those in Ohio and the Great Lakes for fuller economic
development of the Nation's energy resources, seafood-based
businesses, marine biotechnology enterprises, maritime
commerce, and coastal tourism.
At the same time, human degradation of these environments,
impacts that truly challenge the long-term sustainability and
value of these systems must be addressed. Sea Grant is one of
the entities that really remains uniquely positioned to address
these issues.
The particular example, the response activities in the Gulf
once again showcases a Sea Grant model that is adaptive and
nimble by design. Although working as a programmatic entity of
NOAA, Sea Grant has a number of unique advantages over many
federal programs with regard to how quickly and how well it can
respond to pressing coastal resource and community needs at
regional, state, and local scales.
Sea Grant employs a research-based and non-advocacy
approach that is neither confined to one scientific discipline
nor charged with specific regulatory or resource management
responsibilities. Thus, Sea Grant is seen as a valued and
neutral partner by community and private sector leaders. It is
also notable that the federal appropriation for Sea Grant is
leveraged significantly by additional non-federal resources
from state university and private partners.
All of these key organizational mission attributes provide
Sea Grant with significant national program flexibility and
thus great responsiveness to existing and emerging coastal
issues wherever they might occur.
Thank you for your consideration of this request and again
for your past support of the Sea Grant Program.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I want to thank you for your work and even
though we are not going to spend a lot of time on it today, I
want to find ways that we can even enhance what you are doing.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Pennock. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
The next witness, National Marine Sanctuary Foundation,
Jason Patlis.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARY FOUNDATION

WITNESS

JASON PATLIS, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARY FOUNDATION
Mr. Patlis. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
Mr. Austria.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
in support of a robust and capable National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration and National Marine Sanctuary System
both so that they could serve the American people and continue
contributing to the recovery of the American economy.
My name is Jason Patlis. I am here today as the president
and CEO for the National Marine Sanctuary Foundation. I am also
speaking on behalf of the national network of community level
organizations across the country that support the sanctuary
system. They run across from the pacific northwest to New
England, the Great Lakes, Florida, and the West Coast.
Together our eight organizations are dedicated to advancing
national marine sanctuaries as critical tools for a healthy
ocean and for restoring and revitalizing coastal communities
and economies across the Nation.
In addition, I am appearing as a member of the Friends of
NOAA Coalition. The Friends of NOAA are supporters,
stakeholders, and partners of NOAA that educate and inform
interested audiences about the full range of NOAA activities
including those that contribute to the economic growth and job
creation in this country so that NOAA can carry out its
responsibilities relating to our oceans and coasts, fisheries
research, and weather and climate including satellites.
The National Marine Sanctuary Foundation strongly supports
the Administration's request for NOAA and the Sanctuary Program
in fiscal year 2012, although we believe they fall far short of
what is required.
The Sanctuary Program needs to be funded at the fiscal year
2010 enacted level of $62 million in order to fulfill its
responsibilities to the American people.
Recognizing the difficulties of the current budget climate,
this Administration has consistently failed to follow Congress'
lead and provide sufficient funding for the Sanctuary Program.
Time and again, Congress has recognized the value of this
program and provided increases over the Administration's
request and we are asking to do so again this year
notwithstanding the budget climate.
NOAA is one of the premier science agencies of the Federal
Government and provides decision-makers with critically
important data, products, services that promote and enhance the
Nation's economy, security, environment, and quality of life.
Just this morning with the tsunami sweeping across the
Pacific, NOAA's mission and services were on full display in
terms of saving America's lives and property and providing
services for citizens across the world.
Many of NOAA's activities come together in its system of 14
national marine sanctuary sites where researchers collect
important data, educators work to advance ocean literacy, law
enforcement officers ensure sustainability of public access and
recreational opportunities, and even archeologists seek to
preserve America's rich history at sea.
Further, national marine sanctuaries play a crucial role as
the public face of an agency that few Americans know about
despite the fact that we depend on their data and services
every day.
My written testimony includes many examples of the benefits
of the sanctuary system.
In southern Florida, marine tourism and recreation in two
counties adjacent to the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary
employ more than 70,000 people and contribute $4.5 billion per
year to the State GDP.
On the shores of Lake Heron, visitors in three counties
adjacent to Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary spend $110
million per year on recreational activities.
And in California, in the Monterey Bay National Marine
Sanctuary, education and science facilities spend over $200
million per year and employ roughly 1,800 people.
On the flip side, failure to provide sufficient funding
will result in significant impacts in all of the sanctuaries
across the country. My testimony offers examples of the impacts
of those cuts that will only diminish the economic activity and
job creation that is beginning to revitalize our coastal
communities.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you for the opportunity
to testify before you today on behalf of the foundation and the
Friends of NOAA Coalition and the partners of the Sanctuary
Program across the country.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I thank the witness.
Mr. Wolf. The next witness, Lummi Indian Nation, Merle
Jefferson.
There are going to be votes, too, we understand now maybe
about 11:30. So I do not know how long you are going to go, but
go ahead, sir.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

LUMMI INDIAN NATION

WITNESS

MERLE JEFFERSON, MEMBER, LUMMI INDIAN BUSINESS COUNCIL, LUMMI INDIAN
NATION
Mr. Jefferson. I thank the committee today for hearing
Lummi Nation here, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Merle Jefferson. I am the natural resource
director for Lummi Nation and I am also elected councilman for
the nation in the northwest and Washington State.
And I want to summarize our testimony for today. First of
all, Lummi Nation's total request is for $11,650,000 to be used
as in the following, $750,000 for ESA monitoring and
assessments; $6.7 million for salmon hatchery improvements to
comply with ESA and to help rebuild threatened stocks; $4.2
million for shellfish hatchery improvements to increase
production to support displaced fishers.
The Lummi Nation is the third largest tribe and the biggest
fishing tribe in Washington State. Today our treaty rights are
at risk and we need help.
The Lummi Nation currently operates two salmon hatcheries
and one shellfish hatchery that support tribal and non-tribal
fisheries.
The Federal Indian Species Act of 1973 mandates
contribution and recovery of stocks. The Indian Species Act is
also a double-edge sword whereas it should help rebuild
threatened stocks, but at the same time, it impacts and reduces
our treaty rights.
The hatcheries were originally intended to restore the
habitat, but the reality is we need to restore and protect the
habitat to get the most out of our hatcheries.
The salmon hatchery production has been reduced over 70
percent in our watersheds due to ESA and state budget cuts.
We also cannot harvest wild stocks because they are
protected. The reduction in hatchery fish and no harvest of
wild stock present another due impact to our treaty fishers.
Hatchery improvements could triple the current value to
tribal and non-tribal fisheries from about two million to about
six million per year to the fishers.
Another example is the killer whale which are endangered
and protected. Killer whales feed on chinook salmon that are
also protected. Scientists want tribal fishers to limit the
chinook harvest to protect the killer whales, yet this is
another impact on treaty fishing rights.
The Lummi Nation is actively involved in recovery plans in
the Nooksack Basin that includes management, monitoring,
frequent policy level meetings. The ESA activities have more
than tripled our responsibilities and the costs are beyond our
control.
The Lummi Nation needs help in the following to maintain
our livelihood as fishermen: To improve the conditions of the
hatcheries; continue policy discussions and partnership with
all parties in the development of recovery plans and protecting
our treaty rights.
The Lummi Nation is requesting federal assistance from the
Department of Commerce for fiscal year 2012. The Lummi Nation
also supports the request for a Northwest Fish Commission.
Finally, the Lummi Nation also supports fiscal year request
for a National Congress of American Indians.
And I want to thank you for hearing us today. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I know you traveled a long way and I heard your
request and the fact that you need help. And I want to offer
you whatever help that we can provide in relationship to your
request and we will work with the chairman to do all that can
be done.
Thank you.
Mr. Jefferson. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Next, Board on Oceans, Atmosphere, and Climate,
Association of Public and Land-Grant College, Dr. Tony
Busalacchi.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, NATIONAL AERONAUTIC
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION, NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION 2012 BUDGETS

WITNESS

TONY BUSALACCHI, PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND--COLLEGE PARK, BOARD
ON OCEANS, ATMOSPHERE, AND CLIMATE, ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC AND LAND-
GRANT UNIVERSITIES
Mr. Busalacchi. Good morning, Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member
Fattah.
On behalf of the Association of Public and Land-Grant
Universities, Board on Oceans, Atmosphere, and Climate and its
218 institutions of higher learning, I thank you for the
opportunity to provide support of the proposed fiscal year 2012
budgets for NOAA, NASA, and NSF.
These three agencies support research at our member
institutions that provides critical information to decision-
makers and communities across the country. That is why we
strongly support the Administration's request of $5.5 billion
for NOAA, $7.8 billion for the NSF, and $5 billion for NASA
science account.
While recognizing that difficult budget decisions must be
made for the Nation's fiscal health, the President's proposed
budget for these three agencies advances the country's
scientific knowledge agenda and will subsequently undergird the
economy, secure the well-being of the Nation.
The natural and earth system sciences and technology
programs, NOAA, NSF, and NASA, make the Nation's surface, air,
and marine transportation safer and more efficient, advance
energy technology, provide the science support to the defense
industry, and create the knowledge based upon which society can
make wise environmental management decisions.
Environmental data collected and distributed by NASA, NSF,
and NOAA represent a national resource and are used by
universities for research, education, and outreach, and
especially by private industry to produce products and
services.
Time and again, we have heard how research is the seed corn
that drives innovation in this country. I am involved in the
coordination of a number of international research initiatives
and I must tell you in no uncertain terms that our
competitiveness in the international arena is in serious
jeopardy.
Ensuring homeland security, maintaining global
communications, and informing the public of atmospheric and
marine ecological health threats depend upon reliable science.
For example, NOAA provides important services to all
Americans such as already mentioned tsunami warnings that are
vital to our economy, national security, transportation, and
human safety.
Extreme weather events like tornadoes, hurricanes,
oppressive heat and drought or heavy precipitation demonstrate
both the immediate and sustained impacts that weather and
seasonal climate can have on the region.
About $3 trillion or one-third of the U.S. economy is
highly weather and seasonally climate sensitive. We support the
establishment of the NOAA Climate Service as an economic
imperative as private enterprise, public agencies, decision-
makers, and society require seasonal and annual climate
outlooks based on solid science.
To draw a parallel to the provision of weather services,
with the advent of numerical weather prediction post-World War
II, the private sector weather enterprise has grown to a $2
billion annual industry.
With respect to NASA in 2007, the National Academies Earth
Science Decadel Survey found that between 2000 and 2009,
funding for earth sciences at NASA had fallen substantially.
Earth science research is absolutely critical to understanding
how the earth operates as a coupled system.
We are encouraged by the Administration's request to
restore some of NASA's science mission funding. Past
investments in NASA science mission have funded university
research that has led to new instruments and views of our
planet, valuable advances in weather and climate forecasting,
and better understanding of earth's ecosystems as depicted in
that gloss behind you.
Lastly but very importantly, we support funding of the NSF
which is critical to U.S. basic research. NSF supplies almost
two-thirds of all federal funding for university-based
fundamental research in the geosciences. NSF GEO-supported
research increases our ability to understand, forecast, and
respond to environmental events and changes. Through facilities
such as the National Center for Atmospheric Research and its
Wyoming super computer, NSF provides the academic community
with advanced capabilities that it would not be able to afford
if conducted through individual institutions.
In closing, NOAA, NASA, and the NSF provide critical earth
observations and research funding to scientists, engineers, and
mathematicians working to increase understanding of natural
phenomena of economic and human significance.
The Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
thanks you for continued support of these critical agencies. I
am more than happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. I have no questions. But I want to say for the
record and for the universities to hear I support everything
you said, everything. I go farther than you. You do not go far
enough. You do not do enough.
Mr. Busalacchi. What can we do?
Mr. Wolf. Simon and Garfunkel in the song The Boxer sung in
Central Park, said ``man hears what he wants to hear and
disregards the rest.'' We are fundamentally disregarding.
Last month, the shortest month in the year, we had the
biggest deficit we have ever had, $228 billion. Forty cents of
every dollar we spend is a debt. UVA put out a thing
criticizing some of the budget cuts. Tell the President of UVA
and all your presidents to call the President of the United
States, the President of the United States that says come to
the table with a speaker and deal with this issue of deficits.
If we do not deal with the entitlements, Medicare,
Medicaid, and Social Security, all these programs will be cut.
They are good programs. They are programs that we desperately
need. I do not want to see China become the number one country.
I want to see America continue. The 21st century should be the
American century. But until we deal with the entitlement issue,
these programs will be cut no matter if it is a republican
Congress or a democratic Congress.
There was a report put out yesterday by a group called
PIMCO that is saying that they are willing to buy the Spanish
bonds more than they are the American bonds because Spain has
now put together a program to deal with the deficit.
So I agree with you. I want to plus up. When I was chairman
of this subcommittee before, we reversed the spending. But in
order to plus up so we can have a renaissance in math and
science and physics and chemistry and biology, we have got to
deal with these entitlements.
So I agree with you. The Washington Post did an editorial
by Ruth Marcus and she said we are waiting for Waldo. We are
waiting for the President of the United States and this
Administration to come up here and we have got to do it in a
bipartisan way.
If they do, we can have a renaissance and fund not only
this program but the previous programs that we were talking
about.
Mr. Fattah.
And thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah. Let me thank you for your testimony. You are
one of the most distinguished academic and intellectual minds
in the country on these subjects and appreciate you taking the
time to come.
I wish it were so simple as if we had a different President
somehow we would not be in this circumstance. Our decline as a
Nation in these issues, in our lack of investment in technology
and science could not possibly be the responsibility of one
party or one President. And we are going to have to rise above
our partisan inclinations to focus on these issues.
I agree with the chairman that we need to deal with the
funding. I am going to be offering a bill next week to deal
with the debt and the deficit. But I think that on the
substance of this, I agree with you and the chairman said he
agrees with you. And, in fact, we should be doing more as a
country.
And, in fact, over the last two years, there has been a
much more significant investment in these issues of technology
and science and innovation than at any time of the country's
history. I think the President would like to do more. However,
we do have fiscal concerns that cannot be addressed unless we
deal with the question of entitlements, unless we deal with the
question of whether or not we want to be a leading country in
this world, which will require us to pay for it in some form or
fashion.
Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Let me just chime in with Mr. Fattah. And we will
put in the record here I sent numerous letters to the Bush
administration, to Paulson. At a hearing before the
Appropriations Committee, I told Secretary Paulson years from
now when he is sitting in his rocking chair, he will feel like
a failure for having not addressed this issue.
So my end is not against any particular issue. The previous
Administration ignored the issue too. But I think we have got
to provide the leadership to come together and, again, come
together in a bipartisan way. If we do not do it--and he
happens to be the President of the United States at this time.
I did not vote for him.
But let me say for the record I will so submit if we can
get from my office all of the letters to follow this little
colloquy here, all of the letters, each and every letter that I
sent to Secretary Paulson with the P.S.s that I put on there.
They failed. They failed to provide the leadership.
Now it is an opportunity for this Administration and this
President to provide it. And if he does provide it by the end
of the year, we can reverse all this and I think have a
renaissance for all of us and for my children and my
grandchildren.
But I appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Busalacchi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf [continuing]. The next witness will be Pacific
Salmon Commission, Dr. Jeffrey Koenings, Commissioner for
Washington and Oregon.
And next we will have a Member of Congress, David Cicilline
from the great State of Rhode Island.
Yes, sir.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

PACIFIC SALMON COMMISSION

WITNESS

JEFFREY KOENINGS, COMMISSIONER FOR WASHINGTON AND OREGON, PACIFIC
SALMON COMMISSION
Mr. Koenings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
committee.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to testify here
today on behalf of the U.S. section of the Pacific Salmon
Commission.
You have my detailed written testimony in front of you and
I would like to summarize several of the salient points made in
that document.
We are requesting your consideration of an increase in
funding through NOAA Fisheries for implementation of the
Federal U.S.-Canada Salmon Treaty for fisheries management
activities by the member states from $5.6 million to $9.708
million.
In addition, we are recommending the funding of the Pacific
Salmon Treaty, Chinook Salmon Agreement line item within, NOAA
Fisheries' budget for fiscal year 2012 at $1.844 million which
is current funding.
The Pacific Salmon Commission is the implementation arm of
the federal U.S.-Canada International Salmon Treaty ratified by
the U.S. Senate in 1985. The U.S. section of the commission
consists of the member states of Washington, Oregon, Alaska,
Idaho, the Federal Treaty Tribes, and you will be hearing from
some representatives of them later on, and the federal
representatives.
Upon ratification of the treaty in 1985, along with its
fishery management arrangements, the states and tribes received
federal funding support for their fishery management and
administrative activities through the federal Departments of
State, Commerce, and Interior.
NOAA Fisheries provides funding for treaty implementation
to the member states. That funding has remained constant since
1985. That is, the dollar amount has remained at around $5.6
million since 1985 or for more than 25 years. You can imagine
the decreased buying power of counts and dollar amounts over
that time period.
Since 1985, many challenges have also surfaced for the
management of sustainable salmon fisheries on both sides of the
border, each of which has required improvements to the science
underlying the tools for the conservation of each nation's fish
stocks.
At a meeting last week of commissioners representing
international, regional fishery management organizations held
in Silver Springs, Margaret Spring, NOAA chief of staff,
emphasized NOAA's need for coordinated and cohesive management
internationally as an opportunity to complement national
fisheries management.
The Pacific Salmon Commission fulfills that need in the
northwest coast from Alaska through Canada, Washington State,
to Oregon's coast.
Since 1985, the growing complexity of conservation-based
fishing regimes has required vastly more stock assessment,
fishing compliance monitoring, and technical support activities
across multiple stocks and fisheries spread across thousands of
miles of coastline.
In order to continue to implement the requirements of the
Federal Pacific Salmon Treaty, the states over time have had to
augment federal funding through the treaty with other federal
and state support. Unfortunately, a lot of that support has now
disappeared due to the initial actions of Congress eliminating
federal programs like Anadromous Fish grants or by the fact
that the states are simply broke.
Consequently we are asking the Federal Government to
increase our funding support to replace the states and other
funding that we have had to backfill this federal treaty
implementation and would like to have you increase the funding
from again $5.6 million to $9.708 million to represent the
fishery management activities of the member states of this
commission.
This concludes my statement on behalf of the U.S. section
of the Pacific Salmon Commission and I would like to answer any
questions if you have them.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I assume that the increase would cover the
states' portion, not Canada's portion?
Mr. Koenings. It would cover the states' portions,
absolutely.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
Mr. Koenings. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Our next witness will be Congressman David
Cicilline from Rhode Island.
Welcome. Your full testimony will be in the record and if
you could just give my best to Patrick Kennedy when you see
him.
Mr. Cicilline. I certainly will, Mr. Chairman.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BUDGET

WITNESS

HON. DAVID CICILLINE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
RHODE ISLAND
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Fattah and Members of the committee, for the opportunity to
appear before this subcommittee to provide testimony today.
While there are many vital programs that this committee has
jurisdiction of that keep our communities safe and advance the
growth of our economy, I am here today to speak on three
programs that I think are particularly vital to creating jobs
and growing the economy in my state and in our Nation.
Within the Department of Commerce budget, the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget proposes $143 million for the Hollings
Manufacturing Extension Partnership, $526 million for the
International Trade Administration, and $325 million for the
Economic Development Administration, all to support programs
authorized by the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act.
These are critically important investments to sustain our
economic recovery, particularly for the State of Rhode Island
where our recovery remains very fragile.
Today in Rhode Island, there are 40,400 individuals
employed in the manufacturing industry. A decade earlier in
2000, the ocean state's manufacturing employment level was
about 71,000.
Rhode Island was the first state in the northeast to enter
the recession and over the course of this three-year downturn
almost 12,000 manufacturing jobs were lost, the largest
employment decline among all industries in our State.
Despite these losses, manufacturing currently represents
the third largest share of private employment in Rhode Island
and the average wage for an individual employed in
manufacturing is $47,000. Now, when one considers in addition
to that the multiplier impact of manufacturing on Rhode Island,
it becomes all the more evident how vital this industry is to
our State.
By some accounts, the manufacturing multiplier is 2.4 which
means manufacturing in Rhode Island accounts for more than 33
percent of employment and more than $6 billion in wages in
Rhode Island.
Industry outlooks through 2018 in the State of Rhode Island
indicate that certain sectors of the manufacturing industry are
projected to experience growth including manufacturing of
computer and electronic products, food, chemicals, and
transportation equipment.
The Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership provides
small and medium size manufacturing firms the tools and
expertise they need to improve productivity and
competitiveness.
Since 1996, 750 manufacturers have worked along with some
partners and experts at Rhode Island Manufacturing Extension
Services. We call it RIMES. That is more than 40 percent of all
the manufacturers in our State have benefitted from this
program.
Partnering with state economic development and workforce
agencies as well as private sector entities, RIMES has produced
incredible economic benefits for our state and for the
manufacturing sector in general.
And during a time when Congress is being asked to make some
very tough decisions focused on lowering our deficit as the
chairman just mentioned and cutting spending, I think it is
important that we make the right decisions and at the same time
sustain investments that help create jobs, innovate for the
future, and ensure that we can remain competitive in the global
marketplace. Hollings Manufacturing Extension has done that.
In addition to that, there is a huge initiative by the
President to increase our exports and it is particularly
important that in that role, that we support the Export
Assistance Center which has provided tremendous assistance as
businesses, particularly manufacturers, try to increase their
exports.
For Rhode Island, they have had a direct impact and led to
the creation of 5,400 additional jobs as a result of the
services that they have provided.
And, again, as we work to cut spending, I think we have to
do it in a way that is smart and not at the expense of
initiatives that create jobs, bolster our economy, and allow
manufacturers and businesses to innovate and compete.
The economic recovery of my district and of our state and
certainly our Nation as a whole demands that we work
collaboratively, that we focus our energy and resources on
those initiatives that will help spur job growth now while
providing our workers, our entrepreneurs, and our businesses,
particularly small enterprises and manufacturers, with the
tools they need to compete in the global economy.
I respectfully urge this committee, this subcommittee to
fully fund these critically important economic development
initiatives and for the levels requested in the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Let me thank you. I had a chance to meet you in
your great area of Providence. I want to thank you for your
testimony. There is no more important priority in this bill,
and I say that notwithstanding everything else in this
manufacturing initiative.
I heard from similar programs in Michigan and I have met
with the ones in Philadelphia who are doing great work with
manufacturers. So it is my highest priority.
Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
We are expecting a vote momentarily. What we are going to
try to do is just keep this, because of people having
airplanes, keep this thing moving.
So, Mr. Fattah, there might be a time that you will chair a
minute and Mr. Culberson and we will just keep moving around.
Marine Conservation Biology Institute, Bill Chandler, vice
president, Government Affairs.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION CONSERVATION PROGRAMS'
FUNDING

WITNESS

BILL CHANDLER, VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, MARINE CONSERVATION
BIOLOGY INSTITUTE
Mr. Chandler. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Fattah, and
Members of the committee. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify.
Chairman Wolf, you and I have crossed paths in the past in
my capacity as representative of the Nature Conservancy and the
National Parks Conservation Association on a number of
conservation issues. And I know of your interest in them.
Today, however, I am representing Marine Conservation
Biology Institute of Seattle Washington whose mission it is to
protect our marine ecosystems.
My testimony is going to focus on the need to sustain
funding for the conservation oriented programs of NOAA. And my
point is simple. Without a living ocean, we are not going to
have healthy economies because a good deal of our large coastal
economy depends on things that live in the ocean. Whether it is
people going to beaches, fishermen, commercial, recreational,
people want a living ocean.
It may not matter to the maritime industry who can just ply
a ship on any body of water, but living oceans are critically
important to the American people.
In my statement, I have outlined nine such programs within
NOAA that we would like to call to your attention that focus on
conserving and managing marine ecosystems and sea life.
We understand the pressures that you are under and I 100
percent agree with statements you made about getting control of
the entitlement programs. As a citizen, I would vote for that
and I support that. But in terms of these programs, we have
recommendations, some of which would support the request as is
for 2012, some of them we are requesting slightly more than is
in the budget because we think they are very important. And I
would like to focus on three of these programs.
First of all, I think you may have heard that our oceans
are becoming more acidic. This is a huge problem and may be a
real sleeper in terms of its effect on America and America's
economy as the oceans absorb more and more carbon dioxide and
become more acidic. Marine resources are already being damaged.
Let me give you one example. A private shellfish hatchery
on the West Coast suffered a 75 percent reduction in its
ability to put out larvae that would set and produce shellfish
that could then be harvested. And this was all due to the
acidity of the water killing the larvae. They finally figured
that out and now they are trying to take some mitigation steps
to correct that problem, but that is a real-world example about
why ocean acidification needs to be studied, monitored, and we
need to come up with mitigation measures.
Congress did pass the Ocean Acidification Act a couple of
years ago and they authorized $20 million for this activity
today. The President has requested $11.6 million. We are
comfortable with that recommendation in the budget as it
stands.
Secondly, the national ocean policy. The Administration has
issued a new policy to significantly improve the way we manage
our oceans. The problem in the past has been that we have too
many agencies managing separate sectors without communicating
with each other or effectively planning where these uses occur
and how they affect the environment.
The policy calls for regional planning bodies to be set up
who will try to sort all of these uses and needs out within a
region with stakeholder input. We think that is a vital program
to change the failed way we have managed the oceans and we are
recommending $10 million to NOAA for its share. That is
slightly higher than what they are getting in the request.
Finally, I want to thank the committee for its support in
the past of the recovery of the Hawaiian monk seal. This is one
of the most critically endangered marine mammals in the world
and it is all ours. It does not live anywhere else except in
American waters. The Seal Recovery Program has benefitted
greatly from your plussing up that budget to a decent size in
the last couple of years. We would just urge you to keep it
steady as she goes. They are making tremendous progress with
the money that they have gotten from this subcommittee in the
past.
That concludes my testimony, Mr. Chairman, and thank you so
much again for having us in.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Great. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much for your work in this area.
Mr. Chandler. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Our next witness, Gulf of Mexico Reef Fish Shareholders'
Alliance, David Krebs.
Mr. Krebs, welcome.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION BUDGET

WITNESS

DAVID KREBS, PRESIDENT, GULF OF MEXICO REEF FISH SHAREHOLDERS' ALLIANCE
Mr. Krebs. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Wolf and
Ranking Member Fattah.
My name is David Krebs and I am honored to be invited to
testify today on NOAA's budget, specifically in support of the
$54 million in funding for the National Catch Share Program in
fiscal year 2012, and in opposition to any provisions that
would prohibit funding for Catch Share programs in the U.S.
Before the option of a catch share, the early strategy by
the government was to issue permits, yet there was no
restriction on how many permits were issued. In fact, it was
several years before any permit moratorium started to go into
place to try to govern a fleet that was not wearing out, a
fleet that had been growing for nearly 15 years.
To address the fact that there were too many vessels and
too few fish, there were calls for government buyouts to reduce
this oversized fleet, but then that did not happen and the
fleet just kept growing.
To explain the benefits of a catch share, let me tell you
the story about gulf red snapper, a fishery that has
historically been over-fished. The commercial management plan
for red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico began in 1991. It started
as a pure derby fishery with an overall catch limit and a
season that opened and closed when that quota was met.
Under this system, each individual fisherman would race to
catch as many fish as possible during the season. This was
similar to the old halibut and salmon derbies in the northwest
and had about the same outcome, a season as short as 53 days,
low prices, and a market void of domestic red snapper the
remainder of the year.
The next attempt was a 14-day mini season with a 2,000
pound trip limit that began the beginning of each month. This
method later changed to a 10-day mini season which included
size limits. The boats would try to make a trip every day
regardless of weather or price to get their share. The result
was always the same, too much fish at the beginning of the
month and none in the last two weeks. And we still only had 66
to 95 red snapper fishing days per year.
Fishermen were increasingly discarding small fish that did
not meet the size limits. It was an unsafe, inefficient, and
uneconomic way to manage the fishery and it did little to
improve the conservation of the resource.
As early as 2001, the increasing number of discarded fish
associated with the size limits and closed seasons from both
the recreational and commercial fleets began to take its toll
on the fishery. Consumers could not depend on a stable supply
of fresh gulf red snapper. We had to have a better system.
The commercial stakeholders and the fishery at the council
level began the process of developing a red snapper individual
fishing quota or IFQ which is a form of catch share or limited
access privilege program. The stakeholders voted on the program
by referendum and it was implemented in January 2007. For the
first time in 16 years, the consumer would have year-round
access to fresh gulf red snapper.
The red snapper IFQ and other catch share programs have
proven to improve the management and conservation which was the
intended result of such programs when Congress authorized them
in 2007. Both the Bush administration and the Obama
administration have recognized the value of catch share
programs and increasingly provided funding to NOAA so that the
stakeholders in the fishery can develop and implement such
programs.
In fiscal years 2011 and 2012, $54 million in funding has
been requested for the National Catch Share Program. That
funding is not only crucial to programs that are already on the
water such as the red snapper IFQ but also to the development
of new programs to further improve the management of our
Nation's fisheries.
Well-designed catch share programs feature improved
monitoring systems and an improved collaborative science. Catch
shares quickly outperform traditional approaches both
scientifically and in terms of access to fish for fishermen.
As discussed in the President's budget request, an
investment in the National Catch Share Program represents an
investment in improvements in fishery dependent data collection
systems, fishery data management, social and economic data
collection, or analysis and stock assessments. These help
improve the scientific data necessary to analyze and better
manager fisheries.
I urge the committee to oppose provisions that would limit
the ability of the regional fishery management councils to
consider the use of catch share programs and to support funding
for the National Catch Share Program.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fattah [presiding]. Thank you very much.
I do not want anyone to think that this is an exercise in
futility. It is important that we build a record for the
actions that the committee is going to take. So even though we
are running in and out and voting, what you are saying is
important so that we can justify when we fund the things that
you want us to fund that there is a congressional record to
support this.
So thank you for your testimony.
And let us invite the next witness, Paul Lumley,
representing the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission.
Welcome.
Mr. Lumley. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah. And your complete statement will be part of the
record and you are invited to make whatever comments you would
like to make between the green light and the red light.
Thank you.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

COLUMBIA RIVER INTER-TRIBAL FISH COMMISSION

WITNESS

PAUL LUMLEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COLUMBIA RIVER INTER-TRIBAL FISH
COMMISSION
Mr. Lumley. It is a great pleasure to be here. Thank you,
Mr. Fattah. This is a very distinguished committee and it is a
great honor to be here.
I do represent the views and recommendations of the
Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission. It is made up of
four tribes. Yakama, Umatilla, Warms Springs, and Nez Perce are
the tribes in the pacific northwest.
Each of those four tribes have the same treaty rights
language, that is to fish and hunt at all usual and accustomed
fishing places. And that treaty rights language has been
litigated in numerous courts and eventually to the United
States Supreme Court where it has been accepted.
I am here to talk about three important programs, the
Columbia River Mitchell Act, the Pacific Coastal Salmon
Recovery Fund, and the Pacific Salmon Treaty.
Regarding the Mitchell Act, we support an increase to $26.6
million with $6.7 million directed to the Tribes for Hatchery
Reform Practices.
I would like to take a moment to talk about those hatchery
reform practices. The tribes have a philosophy on how
hatcheries should be managed and that is to use natural fish in
the hatchery and then out-plant the fish from the hatchery into
the natural environment and to keep the fish biologically the
same. In that way, we can increase naturally-spawning runs and
mitigate for all the dams that were built along the Columbia
River.
We have shown that we have made some success. I am going to
give you one example. In my testimony, there are other
examples. But one in particular is the Snake River fall chinook
which are listed under the Endangered Species Act.
Fifteen years ago, the tribes were allowed to experiment
with their program and we increased the naturally-spawning fish
from just a few hundred fish near extinction to over 10,000
last year and we are expecting double that next year.
Last year's return alone was three times the ESA delisting
level. So we have shown that this kind of a philosophy and the
way these hatchery programs can be used works.
Now, the Mitchell Act Program is largely not managed that
way. It is managed for the benefit of non-Indian fisheries.
They employ a practice of marking the salmon much like cattle
and, therefore, they can keep the hatchery fish and when they
catch the wild fish, they throw them back. But in the process
of doing that, a lot of wild fish are killed. So this is not a
wild stock recovery program.
What we want to see are reforms to that program so that we
can see delisting in our future. And we have seen that with
great success with the Snake River Fall Chinook Program.
I want to commend this committee for their conference
report language that they entered into the record in 1991. In
1991, the conference report language stated Mitchell Act
hatcheries be operated in a manner so as to implement a program
to release fish in the upper Columbia River basin, above
Bonneville Dam to assist in rebuilding of naturally-spawning
salmon runs.
That language was very important to us. We have tried very
hard to convince the state and federal agencies to use that
language seriously to reform hatcheries. We have made some
success, but the success has been very slow. And I request that
you also repeat this language into the current conference
report if possible. Your support for this kind of hatchery
reform is extremely important to the tribes.
In addition to our request for Mitchell Act, we request
$110 million for the Pacific Salmon Recovery Program. This is a
program that is vitally important to all the tribes along the
West Coast including the states of Oregon, Washington,
California, and Alaska.
We need this program level to be increased because these
are the funds that we use for increasing naturally-spawning
fish that are not necessarily listed but are really important
to exercising our treaty rights.
I support the recommendations made earlier by Jeff Koenings
on the Pacific Salmon Treaty. He recommended a total of $11.6
million. We support that as well as the $9.8 million for the
states that he recommended and the $1.9 million for necessary
research and management activities.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fattah. Well, I want to thank you and the tribes
involved for the great work that you are doing. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Wolf [presiding]. Thank you very much for your
testimony.
Next witness will be Cowboy Charters, Michael Jennings.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL CATCH SHARE PROGRAM

WITNESS

MICHAEL W. JENNINGS, OWNER, COWBOY CHARTERS
Mr. Jennings. Hello, Chairman Wolf. Good morning to the
committee.
My name is Michael Jennings. I am a charter boat owner and
operator. I operate two federally permitted charter boats in
the Gulf of Mexico.
And I have been in the charter industry for a little over
25 years and we provide a service in the Gulf to a little over
a million anglers a year to provide access to the Gulf
fisheries.
As you may know, several of the species critical to the
recreational fishery had become depleted over time and even
today under the recovery of these species, we are still subject
to increasingly restrictive management measures that have
caused shorter and shorter bag limits, shorter seasons, and
causing a lot of strain on our fisheries and our fishing
communities.
Fortunately there is a solution that can simultaneously
provide increased access to the fishing resource while
providing long-term conservation of those resources. That
solution is catch shares. And I am in support of the $54
million in the President's fiscal year 2012 budget for the
National Catch Share Program.
The catch shares are a bottoms-up management process. They
meet the biological goals and the management goals set forth by
the Magnuson-Stevens Act and they also meet the economic goals
of our industry and the much needed monies that come in through
direct recreational fisheries for our coastal communities.
The one thing that I want to point out, I am going to make
this short, I know you all have my full statement, is that all
Catch Share programs have cost recovery measures. This is not a
subsidy for an industry. This is an investment in an industry
moving forward into the 21st century to use a management
practice that fits the Magnuson-Stevens Act, not an antiquated
practice that does not meet what Congress mandated that we do
with these fisheries.
Under the Magnuson-Stevens Act, the Recreational Fishery
Management Councils now have the option to implement Catch
Share programs where the stakeholders and the fisheries want a
program. Where I am at, it requires a 50 percent referendum to
implement any kind of a Catch Share Program. That is the
bottoms-up management process that I am talking about.
Unfortunately, a recent amendment passed by the House would
strip the ability of the fishermen to implement any Catch Share
Program even if the majority of the industry wanted this
program.
I just would like to urge the subcommittee to support the
$54 million in the National Catch Share Program in fiscal year
2012 and to oppose any provisions that would prevent the
Regional Councils from implementing these new programs or going
forth with the current programs and pilot programs that are
currently in place.
And I appreciate you all's time and the ability to speak in
front of you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Sure. Thank you very much.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I appreciate what you do.
Did you say you had two boats and you did over a million--
--
Mr. Jennings. No. Our industry does.
Mr. Fattah. Oh, industry.
Mr. Jennings. Right. Our industry. I apologize if I
confused you.
Mr. Fattah. I was thinking this was a biblical proportion.
You know what I mean?
Thank you very much.
Mr. Jennings. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Culberson, yes.
Mr. Culberson. Very quickly, Mr. Jennings----
Mr. Jennings. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. I wanted to ask what, if any,
has been the impact on the quality of the fish. Was there any
damage to the fishing stocks as a result of the blowout?
Mr. Jennings. Not really. Actually, where I am at, I am
located 40 miles south of Galveston, Texas, so I was not
directly impacted by the oil spill, but I am fairly, yes, sir,
I am fairly active throughout the----
Mr. Culberson. Oh, excuse me. So you are Galveston?
Mr. Jennings. Yes, sir. I am south of Galveston, 40 miles
south of Galveston. Where I am at, I am also pretty active with
the councils and through the management processes, a couple of
advisory panels for our Gulf Council. So I have been active in
that. And, actually, the science so far and the sampling that
has been taken has been very encouraging. Very little has been
found within our fish and our fisheries.
Mr. Culberson. Throughout the entire Gulf?
Mr. Jennings. Throughout the entire Gulf, it has been
excellent.
Mr. Culberson. So it is fair to say there is virtually no
impact on fishing stocks from the oil spill?
Mr. Jennings. I think that----
Mr. Fattah. But there was an impact on the industry.
Mr. Jennings. There was a huge impact on the industry,
yeah, yeah.
Mr. Culberson. But the fish themselves----
Mr. Jennings. I think it is too early to say if there is
going to be any long-term impacts. We saw some cobia migration
pattern changes due to the lack of fishing effort and the
closures up north.
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Jennings. There was no one fishing for them, so we do
not know if it hurt the fish or they just did not migrate that
year.
Mr. Culberson. For the record, there appears to be no
impact on the fish----
Mr. Jennings. Correct, yes.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. The ecosystem? Mother nature
absorbed whatever oil there was rather rapidly and----
Mr. Jennings. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. They are thriving?
Mr. Jennings. Very correct, yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Mr. Jennings. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Next witness will be Vaisala, Incorporated, Scott
Sternberg.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION 2012 BUDGET

WITNESS

SCOTT STERNBERG, PRESIDENT, VAISALA, INCORPORATED
Mr. Sternberg. Mr. Chairman, Members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My comments will focus primarily on a strong and vibrant
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration budget for
fiscal 2012.
My name is Scott Sternberg and I am president of Vaisala,
Incorporated. Vaisala is a global leader in environmental and
industrial management systems specifically focused on weather
and climate observation equipment.
In 1998, the National Academy of Sciences provided a report
entitled the Fair Weather Report which identified and brought
to the attention of the general public the importance of a
three-tiered weather enterprise system comprised of the public
sector, the private sector, and academia.
Vaisala strongly represents as does many other companies
here in a $2 billion industry that third arm in the private
sector.
I am appearing today both as president of Vaisala,
Incorporated as well as a member of the Friends of the NOAA
Coalition, the Friends of NOAA Coalition. The Friends of NOAA
are supporters, stakeholders, and partners of NOAA that educate
and inform interested audiences about the full range of NOAA
activities so that the agency can carry out its
responsibilities relative to our oceans, coasts, fisheries,
weather, and climate.
Vaisala strongly supports the funding requested by the
Administration for NOAA in fiscal 2012. The $5.5 billion budget
requested by NOAA falls short of what truly is needed by NOAA
to carry out its important missions, but we also appreciate
that federal spending must be restrained as part of a broader
effort to put this Nation's fiscal house in order.
Referencing yet another National Academy report that was
released late last year entitled When Weather Matters, the
report predicts that there is approximately $31 and a half
billion of societal impacts due to weather-related incidents.
Compared to the $5.1 billion it costs from a business
perspective, a six-to-one return on investment is quite a good
investment for anyone involved.
This information does not include, however, the benefits to
both government and industry which would be compounded on top
of that figure.
To list a couple of facts, between 1980 and 2009, 96
weather disasters in the United States caused at least $1
billion in damages with total losses exceeding $700 billion.
Between 1999 and 2008, there was an average of 629 direct
weather fatalities per year. The annual impact of adverse
weather on our Nation's highway systems are staggering, 1.5
million related crashes, 7,500 fatalities, and over 700,000
injuries are experienced on our roadways.
This in total adds up to $42 billion in economic losses. In
addition, in our airspace, $4.2 billion annually is lost due to
weather-related air traffic delays. Better forecasts and
warnings can and do reduce these numbers, but much more can be
done.
In the last 15 years, we have seen a marked increase in the
progress of understanding and observing and predicting the
weather. At the same time, the U.S. has failed to match or
surpass progress in numerical weather prediction achieved by
other nations and failed to realize our own production
potential.
As a result, the Nation is not mitigating the cost of
weather impacts to the fullest extent possible. Such mitigation
costs are but a fraction of the cost of the weather impacts
themselves.
I offer the savings society may accrue by reducing the cost
of weather impacts as one rationale for making a strong
investment in NOAA and making this a high priority for the
subcommittee.
Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah is not there, so do you have anything?
Mr. Culberson. No thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Great.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Sternberg. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. We are going to go by the order, but if you would
kind of come in, we will bounce back and forth. Since there are
votes and there are people who have airplanes, we do not want
to waste any time.
Geological Society of America, director for geoscience
policy, Dr. Schiffries; is that correct?
Mr. Schiffries. That is correct.
Mr. Wolf. Go ahead.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION APPROPRIATIONS

WITNESS

CRAIG M. SCHIFFRIES, DIRECTOR FOR GEOSCIENCE POLICY, GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
OF AMERICA
Mr. Schiffries. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
committee, for this opportunity to testify today in support of
increased appropriations for the National Science Foundation.
My name is Craig Schiffries and I serve as director of
Geoscience Policy for the Geological Society of America.
Today's historic earthquake in Japan emphatically
demonstrates the need for increased NSF investments in
fundamental earth science research that stimulates innovations
and natural hazards monitoring and warning systems that will
reduce losses from future natural hazards.
The Geological Society of America supports strong and
growing investments in earth science research and education at
NSF and other federal agencies. Substantial increases in
federal funding for earth science research and education are
needed to ensure the health, vitality, and security of society
and for stewardship of earth.
Science and technology are engines of economic prosperity,
environmental quality, and national security. Federal
investments in scientific research pay substantial dividends.
According to the National Academies' report Rising Above
the Gathering Storm, economic studies have shown that as much
as 85 percent of measured growth in U.S. per capita income were
due to technological change. And, of course, technological
change is driven by science and technology.
However, the Academies issued a new report saying it would
be impossible not to recognize the great difficulty of carrying
out the Gathering Storm recommendations such as doubling the
research budget in today's fiscal environment.
However, it is emphasized that actions such as doubling the
research budget are investments that will need to be made if
the Nation is to maintain the economic strength to provide for
its citizens' healthcare, Social Security, national security,
and more.
One seemingly relevant analogy is that a non-solution to
making an overweight aircraft flight worthy is to remove an
engine. Likewise, the National Commission on Fiscal
Responsibility and Reform headed by Erskine Bowles and Alan
Simpson said we must invest in high-value research and
development to help our economy grow, keep us globally
competitive, and make it easier for businesses to create jobs.
I would like to focus on just two examples of earth science
research. Natural hazards such as earthquakes, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions remain a major cause of fatalities and
economic losses worldwide and improved scientific understanding
of geologic hazards will reduce future losses through better
forecasts of their occurrence and magnitude.
The historic earthquake in Japan this morning, the
devastating earthquake in Haiti last year that killed more than
200,000 people and the small volcanic eruptions in Iceland that
disrupted global air travel in April 2010 emphatically
demonstrate the need for increased NSF investments in
fundamental earth science research that stimulate innovations
in natural hazards monitoring and warning systems.
Secondly, energy and mineral resources are critical to the
function of society and to national security and have positive
impacts on local, national, and international economies and
quality of life.
I would like to focus on important linkages between mineral
and energy resources. For example, widespread deployment of new
energy technologies can reduce our dependence on foreign oil,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and mitigate climate change.
However, many emerging technologies such as wind turbines,
solar cells, and electric vehicles depend on rare earth
elements and other care elements that currently lack
diversified sources of supply.
China accounts for 95 percent of world production of rare
earth elements, although it has only 36 percent of identified
world resources.
Mr. Culberson. Good point. I want to make sure the chairman
heard that. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Schiffries. Absolutely. China accounts for 95 percent
of world production of rare earth elements, although it has
only 36 percent of identified world reserves. A renewed federal
commitment to innovative research and education on minerals is
needed to address these issues.
The America COMPETES Act set the stage to double the NSF
budget over seven years. Despite overwhelming bipartisan
support for the initial passage of the America COMPETES Act,
appropriations fell short of the doubling path during the
regular appropriations bills for fiscal years 2007 to 2011.
The Geological Society of America recommends an
appropriation of $7.76 billion for NSF in fiscal year 2012.
This funding level would uphold the President's budget request
and is consistent with the authorized funding level under the
newly-reauthorized America COMPETES Act.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Doctor, thank you very much.
Before we go to Mr. Fattah, we agree with you. I cannot
speak for everyone here, but on this issue, we agree with you.
Mr. Fattah. We speak for me, Mr. Chairman, and my side.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. We agree with you. I may see something that
maybe they do not agree with, but----
Mr. Fattah. We do agree with you.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. I would plus it up more. I have
heard the first panel. Is UVA here? UVA put out a thing kind of
criticizing the committee for cutting some programs.
The universities and all of your associations are going to
have to urge the President to come forward and adopt the
Erskine Bowles-Simpson Commission which I will vote for if it
comes up or what Senator Mark Warner, a Democrat, and Tom
Coburn, a Republican, and Saxby Chambliss, and Dick Durbin are
doing.
If this is not done by the end of this year, all of your
programs will be drastically cut. I do not want to see them
cut. This committee is given an allocation and it is painful to
reach it.
So I agree with you. China is buying up all over Africa
doing certain things. I completely agree. You do not have to
convince me--and if I agree, he triply agrees. He is the
science guy for the committee. But we must deal with the
entitlements this year so that we can then free up the
resources to do what we have to do.
So we are with you. I would urge all of your associations
to do a letter, say that we would urge the White House to come
forward with Erskine, with Bowles, with Simpson, with Mark
Warner, with Saxby Chambliss, and Tom Coburn to come together
to deal with this. We must deal with it.
The stock market dropped the other day, dropping again
today. People are beginning to see what is taking place. Math,
science, physics, chemistry, biology, investing in the sciences
is the way to get us out of this and create a renaissance, but
we have got to get control of the entitlements.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I agree with the chairman and I also agree that
the President of the United States needs to be at the very
forefront position in our country for continued world
leadership. And this is an important area. Notwithstanding how
we got ourselves into this mess, for which I think both parties
share----
Mr. Wolf. I agree.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Equal blame, we have to lead now,
not just the President, but the Congress. And I would add the
fact that what we are dealing with now is the one and a half
percent cut, if we would take the majority's viewpoint,
Democrats are somewhere around one percent. Neither of them
address the trillion and a half deficit that we have this year
or the $14 trillion debt.
The President's Commission, and I would vote for Erskine
Bowles and Simpson's plan, but that plan does not balance the
budget in ten years. It takes us to $350 billion in deficit. We
need an aggressive plan to get on the right fiscal footing
because we have to make these investments or we are going to be
stewards of a country in decline. That is not the country that
I want to be a steward or have any responsibilities for. We
want to lead and, therefore, we have to make these investments.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Culberson.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. If I may very quickly, and we
are all arm in arm in this in our support for the sciences, and
I think if I may, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Fattah, it looks like we
have got a lot of scientific organizations in the room,
National Ecological Observatory is next, I think they are here,
I hope.
Mr. Schimel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Culberson. The Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology, are they here? We have got the
Federation. It is the University of California Berkeley,
American Mathematical Society, plant biologists, science,
Mathematical Association of America.
Scientists as a general rule have not ever been active in
pushing for support for the sciences and we all love you guys.
We are devoted to you, but traditionally you--and we love you,
but you come down and make the request and then there is no
follow-up with Members of Congress. There are no visits. There
are no letters. There are no e-mails. There is no organized
effort.
You are going to have to do that now more than ever to
protect not just the National Science Foundation but, frankly,
the NASA and the NOAA funding for the sciences because of the
entitlement problem Mr. Wolf is correctly focused on is so bad.
The way to think about it, very quickly, is if we in our
private lives set aside our mortgage payment, just
automatically made sure that whatever your income is, you set
aside the mortgage before you even budget for anything else,
everybody does that.
If you consider America's entitlement programs, Social
Security, Medicare, Medicaid, interest on the national debt, or
veterans as America's mortgage payment, the mortgage payment
consumes a hundred percent of our income.
In fact, at midnight, Mr. Chairman, we calculated--a UVA
graduate who is about to get married, I am going to lose her,
she does a spectacular job--but my brilliant UVA graduate
calculates that at midnight on the first day of the fiscal
year--Kristin--we have already borrowed $105 billion? At
midnight on the first day of the fiscal year, America is
already $105 billion in debt because the entitlement programs
are consuming a hundred percent. Every penny that comes into
the Treasury, Mr. Chairman, goes right out the back door to pay
for the entitlement programs.
So if we do not, as the chairman said, deal with it
immediately, aggressively, begin to rein in the growth of the
entitlement programs, there is nothing left. I mean, America
really is--we could become Spain or Greece. It is very scary.
So we are with you. We love you. We support you, but please
get active. There is a reason the Jewish community is so strong
in America. They are a hundred percent registered to vote and
they are a hundred percent of them out there all the time. Pick
any really successful group of people that make a big impact
politically based on their numbers, it is because they are all
organized, they all register to vote, and they all make it real
clear what is going to happen on election day. And you need to
do the same thing. Essentially pretend you are the Jewish
community.
Mr. Schiffries. We will be sure to do more as a scientific
community. I will send you invitations to the 16th annual
science, engineering, technology congressional visits days
coming up in April and there will be about 250 scientists from
across the country making visits to their congressional
delegation. And then in May, we have the Coalition for National
Science Funding's 17th annual reception, I think it is, and we
will hope to get a good turnout there.
Mr. Culberson. There are two messages, though, and forgive
me. And I will not do this to the other witnesses, Mr.
Chairman, because I know we have got a lot of folks to come in.
Number one, of course advocate for increases in science
funding, but, number two, please follow the chairman's advice
and Mr. Fattah's advice; that is, you are also advocating that
we have simply got to get the debt under control and that means
getting the entitlements under control.
Mr. Schiffries. Absolutely.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
Mr. Schiffries. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thanks, Mr. Culberson.
Thank you, sir.
Next witness, the National Ecological Observatory Network,
Dr. David Schimel.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION 2012 BUDGET

WITNESS

DAVID SCHIMEL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL ECOLOGICAL OBSERVATORY
NETWORK, INC.
Mr. Schimel. Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify.
My name is Dr. David Schimel. I am CEO of NEON, Inc., the
National Ecological Observatory, Incorporated, which is an
implementing organization supported by the National Science
Foundation.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss funding for the NSF
and the National Ecological Observatory which is part of NSF's
fiscal year 2012 budget request and deeply appreciative of the
support this subcommittee has provided NSF and NEON in previous
years and certainly hope that that will continue.
The funding in this year will continue the construction of
the National Ecological Observatory consistent with the
schedule developed by the NSF over the previous five years
including the full major research equipment and facilities
construction account review cycle leading to National Science
Board approval last year.
The NSF is charting an exciting course, broadening the
scope of science with enhanced observational capabilities,
managing the extremely large amounts of data produced by these
new observational tools and transforming this data into
knowledge that provides both basic science and important
applications for the growth of our society.
The new NSF director describes this journey as entering
into an era of observation and data and information. And at
NEON, we applaud NSF for taking proactive steps towards a
vision where the creative capacities of private industry,
academia, and government have unfettered access to data and
information generated through targeted investments at the
frontiers of science.
This vision also recognizes the growing the marketplace for
access to environmental and scientific information to aid those
with resource management responsibilities at local, state,
regional, and national levels.
NEON belongs to a class of NSF observatories that
contribute to that vision. NEON provides advanced
infrastructure for the study and the analysis of living systems
at regional to continental scales. These living systems that we
depend on are experiencing some of the greatest rates of change
caused by multiple changes in the environment both human driven
and natural. These changes affect ecosystems, air quality,
water resources, agriculture, and other goods and services that
living organisms provide.
Understanding how these changes impact our natural
resources requires an integrated, multi-scaled system to
detect, understand, and forecast changes so that citizens and
managers of national resources can act on those forecast
changes.
NEON will be an advanced network system of 60 sites plus
airborne assets across the continent to monitor the pulse of
our Nation's ecosystems and it represents the first scientific
enterprise to measure a suite of hundreds of variables in the
same manner across an entire continent.
Data provided by the observatory will be available freely
for science, education, and decision support purposes.
Environmental observatories like NEON represent targeted
investments in research infrastructure that will maintain U.S.
leadership in linking research to national challenges in
managing natural resources.
There is great synergism between this program and other
major NSF initiatives such as the science, engineering, and
education for sustainability and the cyber infrastructure
framework for 21st century science.
I recognize the severe budget constraints facing the
Congress and that you all have just spoken so eloquently on and
I ask you to think of NEON as a key part of the investment
strategy in research and education that will fuel the Nation's
long-term competitiveness and innovation strategy.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
and, of course, I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I agree with the witness and thank you for your
testimony.
Mr. Schimel. Thank you very much, Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Wolf. Next witness will be Federation of American
Societies for Experimental Biology, Dr. William Talman.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION 2012 BUDGET

WITNESS

WILLIAM T. TALMAN, M.D., PRESIDENT, FEDERATION OF AMERICAN SOCIETIES
FOR EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Dr. Talman. Chairman Wolf, Mr. Fattah, Members of the
committee and staff, first of all, thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify.
My name is Bill Talman. I am a biomedical scientist and
neurologist who practices at the University of Iowa.
I come before you to propose that the budget for the
National Science Foundation or NSF for 2012 be set at $7.8
billion. That particular figure is consistent with the
President's budget as well as that from the bipartisan America
COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010.
There is a general agreement that our Nation's future is
inextricably linked to its capacity for innovation. That
capacity demands that we have an educated populous, a cadre of
world-class scientists and engineers, a well-developed research
infrastructure capable of supporting competitive research
projects, and indeed federal funding for those projects.
There has been broad bipartisan support which we applaud
for this increased investment in science and technology
including a consensus for the proposal to double the NSF budget
by 2016. Cutting investments in research on the other hand to
balance the budget in Iowa terms and in terms of farmers from
my native State of Virginia would be akin to one's eating his
seed corn. It might taste good at first, but it damages the
future.
A recent investment in NSF has already paid tremendous
dividends in new projects, increased graduate training, and
expanded capacity for innovation. A reduction of that effort
would mean that fewer university researchers would do critical
research in education projects and our capacity for innovation
would be substantially diminished.
A strong and sustained investment in NSF will enable
transformational research and training essential to future
success and competitiveness for the United States.
Furthermore, the interdisciplinary nature of the scientific
research makes the entire federal research and development
portfolio of which NSF is a part more important than ever to
our Nation's prosperity.
NSF-funded research creates the foundation for new
technologies and therapeutics. With just four percent of the
federal research and development budget, NSF funds over 60
percent of non-biomedical-like science research in fields such
as mathematics, geosciences, computer science, and social
sciences. NSF also plays a significant role in advancing
biological research.
Through rigorous peer review in which experts identify the
best and most promising research to be funded, NSF has a
history of identifying scientific talent early and funding
ground-breaking discoveries.
Forty-two Nobel Prizes have been awarded to NSF-funded
scientists for contributions in physiology or medicine. One of
those Nobel Prizes was awarded for work that led to the
development of magnetic resonance imaging or MRI which, as you
probably know, has improved diagnosis of many diseases and done
so with greater safety and without the need for
hospitalization.
Recently researchers led by an NSF-funded synthetic
biologist to genetically engineer yeast to produce a precursor
of artemisinin, an anti-malaria drug.
Other NSF-funded research into advanced robotics,
information technology, and biomedicine has led to devices that
improve surgical procedures, lessen the risk of those
procedures to patients, and shorten recovery time after
surgery.
But NSF does not just contribute to scientific discovery.
The agency is also committed to achieving excellence in science
technology, engineering, and math education at all levels. It
is the only federal agency that promotes the full range of
science as well as science education.
Thank you for the opportunity to offer FASEB's support for
NSF. I give that support with confidence that NSF itself and
funding for it is in our country's best interest. And I would
be pleased to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much, Doctor.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Well, I am very interested in your field of
work in neuroscience and I see that you are one of the best
doctors in the country over the last eight years as at least
documented by your peers.
Thank you for your testimony.
Dr. Talman. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Next witness will be the University of California,
Berkeley, Dr. Graham Fleming.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY

WITNESS

GRAHAM FLEMING, VICE CHANCELLOR OF RESEARCH, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,
BERKELEY
Mr. Fleming. Chairman Wolf, Mr. Fattah, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
As vice chancellor for research at the University of
California, Berkeley and on behalf of the university I urge the
subcommittee to support the President's proposed increases for
the federal science agencies in fiscal year 2012, including the
$7.8 million for the National Science Foundation.
In particular I want to address the importance of NSF's
contribution and future role in the development of a deep
underground science and engineering laboratory in South Dakota
known as DUSEL.
For the past four years the University of California in
partnership with NSF and the Department of Energy has led a
nationwide team of scientists and engineers designing DUSEL at
Homestake Mine in Lead, South Dakota. This collaboration
involves over 1,000 scientists and engineers from universities
and labs in 33 states as well as international partners from
Europe, Asia, and Canada.
Consistent with the principles of the NSF and as
recommended by numerous expert studies, DUSEL would be a
national resource to be open on a peer reviewed competitive
basis to projects sponsored by U.S. federal agencies and to
cooperative national activities.
The Homestake Gold Mine operated for 125 years, but it was
also home to pioneering physics research for which Dr. Raymond
Davis, Jr. received the Nobel prize in physics in 2002. Dr.
Davis built his lab deep underground at Homestake to shield his
experiments from cosmic radiation.
The scientific questions to be addressed in DUSEL are
intimately connected to the NSF's fundamental purpose of
supporting cutting edge research in physics, biology, geology,
and engineering. The envisioned DUSEL program in physics and
astrophysics will address fundamental questions about the
universe and its fundamental laws such as why the universe
contains matter but no antimatter, the nature of dark matter,
the origin of neutrino mass, and the genesis of chemical
elements. Biological, geoscience, and engineering fields have
projects of equal significance.
The flagship program is in the area of fundamental
subatomic physics with four ambitious experimental programs
that will be at the international forefront in the research
area.
I am not here to explain the concepts like neutrinoless
double-beta decay to you, but be assured that in each of these
areas of science the DUSEL science program will be a leading
edge in a worldwide scientific campaign putting our country at
the forefront of subatomic physics for decades to come.
The knowledge generated by underground science at DUSEL,
the largest and deepest underground laboratory in the world,
will benefit the nation's environment, safety, and national
security. For example, studies conducted at DUSEL will help
scientists improve methods for waste isolation, better
understand earthquakes, and develop radiation detection methods
used for national security purposes.
We are currently completing the DUSEL preliminary design
report that will inform future federal plans with its facility.
This spring and summer the DOE and the National Research
Council are each completing reviews of options and further
evaluating the scientific capabilities of such a facility, one
in which I believe future Nobel prizes will be won.
NSF should leverage the ongoing DOE investment in fiscal
year 2012 and beyond and insure that the broadest array of
scientific questions is addressed with its truly one of a kind
opportunity.
Why should the National Science Foundation continue to
support the development of this project? DUSEL's impact goes
way beyond the science discoveries themselves. Education
outreach programs will inspire young investigators and as many
as 10,000 scientists will benefit each year. Further DUSEL's
location in an economically disadvantaged region with a Native
American population of 8 to 10 percent gives DUSEL a unique
opportunity to effect change in this area, bringing world
leading experts from around the globe to a state which
participates in NSF's experimental program to stimulate
competitive research, EPSCoR.
In these times of fiscal austerity NSF must be a reliable
and responsible partner with other federal agencies if U.S.
leadership in science is to be maintained. It is more important
than ever for the U.S. and the NSF to be leveraging financial
commitments made by other partners demonstrating a sustainable
development process to keep facilities costs down.
With more than $250 million invested to date from federal,
state, and private sources and hundreds of jobs already
created, DUSEL is the type of leveraged investment which
Congress should be encouraging.
NSF must successfully construct the large interagency
facilities needed for national leadership in science in a
timely, efficient, and cost effective manner.
I have been and remain significantly concerned at the
manner in which the NSF and the National Science Board are
working together to insure NSF, in concert with other federal
agencies, can play a key role in developing these critical
national facilities.
In conclusion, the University of California, Berkeley
remains solidly committed to working with all agency partners
to develop this cutting edge scientific program, but it is
essential that the NSF coordinate with and contribute to the
Department of Energy's efforts in order to create a facility
that will provide unique capabilities at the frontiers of
science and engineering in support of the missions of both
agencies.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah, any questions on this?
Mr. Fattah. No questions, but let me thank you for your
service. I note that you work at one of our premier national
labs. I was able to visit two of our labs last weekend, Sandia
and Los Alamos, and I want to note for the record that there is
some disagreement with the NSF's viewpoint about how to proceed
on DUSEL, and the committee will have to factor that in.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Culberson. If I may, I wanted to ask if I could, has
anybody detected a neutrino yet? As I recall no one has done it
yet.
Mr. Fleming. Oh, yes.
Mr. Culberson. They have detected neutrinos.
Mr. Fleming. They have detected neutrinos. We do not know
how much they weigh, but we know that they have some mass.
Mr. Culberson. They do not interact with anything.
Mr. Fleming. Very weakly, yes.
Mr. Culberson. Right.
Mr. Fleming. They go right through the earth.
Mr. Culberson. Before many of you all came in the room
Chairman Wolf pointed out quite correctly how urgent it is that
the scientific community get active politically, visible, out
in support with members of Congress for obviously maintaining
and strengthening investment in the National Science
Foundation, but also to press for entitlement reform, that we
get a handle on the growth of the entitlements.
Before you came in I mentioned that if you think of the
entitlement payments and interest on the national debt as
America's mortgage payment, our mortgage payment as a country
consumes 100 percent of our income. Interest on the debt,
Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and veterans benefits
consume the entire--all revenue goes right out the back door to
pay for them, therefore all the money we spend all year long,
all the money this committee spends is borrowed, 100 percent of
it is borrowed, so it is an urgent problem that has got to be
dealt with immediately, so I urge all of you that are here in
the room to please speak to your members, communicate with
members of Congress and encourage them to get entitlement
funding and the deficit and the debt under control, or we are
just going to be out of money.
Thank you.
Dr. Andrews, the committee welcomes you on behalf of the
American Mathematical Society, thank you very much, sir, and we
look forward to your testimony.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY

WITNESS

GEORGE ANDREWS, PhD, PAST-PRESIDENT, AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
Mr. Andrews. Thank you, Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member
Fattah, and members of the committee, I am George Andrews,
past-president of the American Mathematical Society, I am a
professor at Penn State University.
The American Mathematical Society is an organization of
over 30,000 professional mathematicians, and I am here today to
request support for the fiscal year 2012 budget of $7.767
billion for the NSF. This budget level is consistent with the
administration's fiscal year 2012 budget request, and with the
budget authorized in the bipartisan America COMPETES Act signed
into law on January 4 of this year.
I would like to thank the committee for its past support of
the NSF, this support has been very important for maintaining
our nation's scientific enterprise, which as you have remarked
is critical for innovation and technological development.
I recognize that Congress faces the difficult and
unenviable challenge of reducing the federal budget deficit.
This task is made especially problematic in troubled economic
times. I sympathize fully with how hard it is, you have my
admiration for your dedication to protecting our future and
your eloquent remarks this morning make it clear that this is
topmost in your mind. I do hope that you will be able to wield
the budget cutting ax judiciously.
The National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform
made the point that even when it was necessary to make budget
cuts at the same time we must invest in education
infrastructure and high value research and development to help
our economy grow and to keep us globally competitive and make
it easier for businesses to create jobs. The NSF is the perfect
agency through which investments in education and high value
research can be made and it is the only federal agency that
supports research in education across all fields of science,
engineering, and mathematics, and at all educational levels.
Research in education programs supported by the NSF are
fundamental for increasing and developing the knowledge base
needed for pushing forward the frontiers of science,
mathematics, and engineering disciplines, developing new fields
of inquiry, and supporting technological innovations.
Society has benefited from the many products, procedures,
and methods resulting from NSF supported research, research
performed over many years, and not always predetermined per its
specific applications. These benefits include well-known
innovations and surprises such as Google, magnetic resonants
imaging and bar code technology.
Today the NSF portfolio includes research that contributes
to finding cures for certain types of cancer, aids the
improvement and development of arterial stints and artificial
heart valves, increases the possibility of fabricating 3-D
computer memory chips, and promotes understanding of how atoms
and molecules interact with surfaces thereby aiding the
development of nanoscale devices.
In fiscal year 2010 over 70 percent of the NSF's budget
went to support research and education projects in colleges and
universities in all 50 states. The agency evaluated over 50,000
proposals through its merit review progress funding 13,000 of
these. This is a success rate of 23 percent and indicates how
competitive it is to receive an NSF grant. If NSF had more
funds the agency could support many more highly rated
proposals. In fact each year on average over $1.7 billion is
requested for declined proposals that receive ratings at least
as high as the average rating for all awarded proposals. These
declined proposals have the potential to produce substantial
research in education results.
The U.S. must maintain its leadership in high level
research in education, and NSF is an agency that contributes
substantially to this endeavor. Even under tight budget
constraints it is important to make adequate yearly investments
in the NSF a predictable pattern of funding facilitates a
continuous stream of high level research and researchers.
I ask the committee to give strong consideration to
providing the fiscal year 2012 budget of $7.767 billion for the
NSF and I thank you for this opportunity to speak to you for
your support of the NSF.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Dr. Andrews, thank you. And I hope each one
of you when you come up and talk to us will also add to your
testimony that you are going to communicate to your members
that you are going to urge them to get up here on the hill and
get to work to protect the NSF and to deal with entitlements,
because there is no money. Critical. Absolutely critical.
Mr. Andrews. It is quite clear that is the elephant in the
room.
Mr. Culberson. The other thing I would ask very quickly is
if one of you could be thinking about whether it is in your
testimony which is I know brief, you may do it separately, is
to communicate to each one of us, Chairman Wolf, Mr. Fattah,
and me as well, because the sciences are--one of my greatest
joys in life is the support that we can give to the sciences,
so talk to us about also how would you reform the NSF.
The inspector general for NSF came in and gave us some
distressing testimony that NSF is not adequately, for example,
Dr. Fleming, I am sorry I did not ask you about this because
you will know, on big capital projects that NSF is building
these giant observatories, for examples, the neutrinos which I
gather I missed the first part, but I think it is deep in a
mine under the earth and using big tanks of water and watching
for flashes of light I think as the neutrinos allegedly
interact with water molecules or some heavy something that you
are injecting into the water, I forget the details, very
expensive, big, big capital projects that apparently NSF is not
managing very well, so we would appreciate suggestions, advice,
and guidance from you on the outside talking to us privately
and let us know how can we improve NSF's management of those
big projects following up and making sure the grants that they
award are actually being--the grant research is being done in a
way that the money is not being wasted and it is actually being
used properly, because the inspector general was concerned
about frankly NSF's oversight over all these areas, and because
money is so critical we really need your input as outside
objective people who work with NSF to give Chairman Wolf and
all of us suggestions on how to make sure NSF's precious
dollars go further.
Mr. Chairman, I was just asking to make sure they
communicate to their members to get active and talk about not
just increasing funding but to deal with entitlements, and also
to give us ideas on how to improve NSF management, as the
inspector general pointed out the flaws and the oversight of
big capital construction projects, grant programs; these are
the folks that will be able to tell us directly where the
problems lie and how to fix them.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Culberson. And I did not have a chance for Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Wolf. Okay, Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you. I spent a number of years on the
board of trustees of Penn State University and I want thank you
for your fine work.
I want to note for the record since your focus is
mathematics that the federal budget has two sides to it, income
and spending, and both are discretionary. The one thing that is
not discretionary is the question of where we want to end up in
this competition in the world and we want to be number one, and
that will require the political will to do both, have the
necessary revenue and make the correct spending decisions.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Andrews. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Did Mr. Fattah say you went to Penn State?
Mr. Andrews. I am a professor at Penn State.
Mr. Fattah. No, the professor is at Penn State, I said I
served on the board of trustees of his great university for a
number of years.
Mr. Wolf. What is the name of your football coach?
Mr. Andrews. Let me think. He is a national icon, Joe
Paterno.
Mr. Wolf. Yeah, I am a graduate of Penn State and when I
was there----
Mr. Andrews. Actually I knew that, yes.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. The assistant coach had the same
name as the current coach.
Mr. Andrews. That is right.
Mr. Wolf. And it is the same coach.
Mr. Andrews. That is right.
Mr. Wolf. And he is a great man and he has made a great
contribution not only to football but to the university.
Mr. Andrews. To the university and to the state and to the
nation.
Mr. Wolf. If you see him tell him that Congressman Wolf
said hello.
Mr. Andrews. I will do that.
Mr. Fattah. The creamery is still the best known treasure
of the university. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Okay. The next witness is American
Society of Plant Biologists, Dr. Elizabeth Hood.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN SOCIETY OF PLANT BIOLOGISTS

WITNESS

DR. ELIZABETH HOOD, MEMBER, PUBLIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE, AMERICAN SOCIETY
OF PLANT BIOLOGISTS
Ms. Hood. Good afternoon and thank you for giving me this
opportunity to testify on behalf of the National Science
Foundation fiscal year 2012. I am hearing lots of things that
are very similar from all of us in our presentation to you.
I am Elizabeth Hood, I am a distinguished professor of
agriculture at Arkansas State University and I am here today
representing the American Society of Plant Biologists, we call
ourselves the ASPD, I am on that Public Affairs Committee, and
I would like to report to you that I visited my entire
delegation this week and we have pushed for science funding and
to balance the budget, and I told them I would pay more taxes
too, but they were not very excited about that.
So ASPD is an organization of approximately 5,000 faculty,
postdoc graduate students and the educators across all 50
states and worldwide. We are very much the advocates for plant
biology, we communicate plant research, and we are trying to
promote the interest of plant biologists in general.
We recognize that there is a terrible fiscal environment
and we are very much in support of the National Science
Foundation funding.
Plants as you know are the only thing on earth that keeps
us all alive because they are the only thing that can harvest
the sun's energy and give us food, fabrics, materials, fuel,
security--not just oil, but fuel security and biofuels--and
promote health through nutrition, and we are absolutely in
support of the $7.76 billion budget that is being proposed.
NSF has had a significant impact on my life. I was a
program director there in the recent past and witnessed
firsthand the absolute positive effects that it can have and
the wonderful projects that it funds.
Also the State of Arkansas where I am coming from today has
received two experimental program grants for stimulating
competitive research and we have used those tremendous
investments in the state to promote research and the reputation
of the scientists in the State of Arkansas, and even though
they were large grants we took very good care of them, we spent
the money very wisely.
So the bio directorate is the most important one to the
plant biologists. Within the plant directorate is the Plant
Genome Research Program and we advocate bringing that back as a
line item for full funding in the coming year.
The discoveries will be delayed if we do not have this
investment, and of course we all know that tremendous
discoveries lead to tremendous innovations for the state and
the nation and the world.
So the NSF also invests in the education and training as
well as innovation and research and is one of the few
foundations that actually funds innovations in education as
well as in research.
We urge you to revitalize the programs in graduate research
fellowships, career grants, as well as graduate student
stipends. We are very dedicated in our organization to
promoting diversity in the workforce and especially in the STEM
disciplines, and so we are working very strongly with NSF to
improve diversity in our workforce in science and technology.
So America's challenges in energy, agriculture, and health
will not be resolved in a year, an administration, or a
generation, but it is going to take decades of investment and
hard work to get to where we need to do. And we realize that we
need this investment to get the great results and that the
economics of the nation depend on the innovations that are
going to come out of the science and technology fields.
And I thank you very much for your consideration of my
testimony and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you very much. I agree with you, and
I said when the earlier group was here that I think the answer
is to deal with the entitlements. Senator Mark Warner from my
state, who is a Democrat and Tom Coburn from Oklahoma who is a
Republican along with Saxby Chambliss, a Republican from
Georgia and Dick Durbin, a Democrat from Illinois have come
together to put together a group and they are trying to adopt
the Simpson Bowles, however it is referred to, as a vehicle, as
an outline.
If we were to do that and do it in this year I think it is
safe to say that the NSF budget would not only be fully funded,
it would probably be increased. I think the only inhibiting
factor will be if that is not done, and the concern is if it is
not done by the end of this year you are going to get into a
Presidential election, and not only President, but House and
Senate. People do not want to go there.
So I think the answer is to come together in a bipartisan
way, and I have said that I would support the recommendations
in the commission. There are some that I have problems with
that I would attempt to change, but having said that, everyone
cannot just get whatever they want. There was a chart which I
almost was going to bring, and I might bring for other
hearings, showing that all of the cuts that are being proposed
are basically coming out of about 15 percent, it is even less
than that of the budget looking at a pie chart, and all of the
others are really off limits, and a large portion is Medicare,
Medicaid, social security, and interest on the debt. That
number is getting worse each and every year.
So hopefully we can do that by the end of the year and I do
appreciate your testimony.
And Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Well, I want to thank you for your testimony
and your great work.
We are spending $2 billion this week in Afghanistan. We did
$900 billion in tax cuts over the next two years to some of the
wealthiest citizens in the country.
Since Singapore is spending $5 billion on a national
research foundation and they have less than 5 million people,
they have a country of 300 million, I agree that we need to get
the entitlements under control and am committed to voting to do
that. But we also need to make a decision that we are prepared
to spend the money, and that is raise it through revenue, to be
a leading force in this world as we have been for a few hundred
years. If we want to retain that, we are going to have to
invest in science and innovation.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. I am not responding to Mr. Fattah, we
are really friends, but I do want to say this----
Mr. Fattah. We agree with each other.
Mr. Wolf. We agree. I do not know, I assume maybe I know
how Mr. Fattah voted, I voted against the tax extension
package. Not that I was opposed to the extent of the tax cut
package, but there was also a provision in there that they
reduced--actually they reduced every one here's payroll tax.
They gave a payroll tax break to Jimmy Buffett from
Margaritaville and Warren Buffett from Nebraska, and I voted
against that.
That one provision taking it aside of extending tax cuts,
which I favor, that one provision will cost the treasury for
one year $112 billion.
If we could have taken a portion of that and put it into
NASA, NSF, NOAA, and the sciences--now what is going to happen
is at the end of this year there will be an effort probably not
to extend that and they are going to pay for that $112 billion
by borrowing from the general fund. The general fund obviously
is broke.
So I did vote against that. I think it is one of the best
votes that I have cast, because as much as you wanted to extend
the tax cuts, as I did, they went further and borrowed from the
general fund and no one even knew. Then the President bragged
this was an example of how he and the Republican Congress
worked together. True, most Republicans supported it, but it is
easy to work together if we are giving things away, and Mr.
Fattah and I were going to say how much can we give you, but it
is how much can we? So giving is not particularly courageous,
it is dealing with it and it borders on the word called
sacrifice, something that the nation has done, and I think if
we come together on these entitlements we can do it in a way
that hopefully we can allow this; we can fund the sciences. But
$112 billion; one year. In one year.
Thank you for your testimony.
The Soil Science Society of America, Ms. Gala.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

SOIL SCIENCE SOCIETY OF AMERICA

WITNESS

CARON E. GALA BIJL, SENIOR SCIENCE POLICY ASSOCIATE, SOIL SCIENCE
SOCIETY OF AMERICA
Ms. Gala. Thank you for giving the Soil Science Society of
America the opportunity to testify today.
Many of our members, scientists, fundamental research
depends on grants from the National Science Foundation's BIO,
GEO, and education and human resource directorates.
The Soil Science Society of America testifies today in
support of funding the funding level put forth for the National
Science Foundation and the President's budget request of $7.8
billion as this budget level is consistent with the amount
authorized in the recent America COMPETES Law.
We recognize that Congress faces a major challenge to
reduce first of all budget deficits and bring the national debt
under control. Cuts must be implemented strategically with an
eye towards the future economic health of the U.S.
Continued strong funding of basic scientific research in
NSF as well as investments in STEM education programs like
those in EHR will help insure the economic growth needed to
restore long-term fiscal strength and national prosperity
occurs.
Food and energy security, human nutrition and health, water
availability and quality, adaptation to variable weather
patterns are some of the greatest challenges facing our Nation
and the world today.
There are also major societal needs identified by the
committee on new biology for the 21st Century which require
solutions developed through the new biology initiative.
The soil provides numerous ecosystem services which will
help play a role in addressing these challenges, including
water purification necessary for potable and recreational water
use, waste treatment essential for recycling waste products and
nutrients, retention and treatment of chemical and biological
agents from air, land, and biological systems, nutrient cycling
in soils for food and energy security, among many others.
Life-supporting services provided by the soil can be
enhanced by increasing the inherent resilience of soil and
manage natural systems. Soil health however faces increasing
human-linked threats from contamination, unplanned urban
development, desertification, salinzation, mismanagement, and
erosion.
Research performed in programs like BIO's molecular and
cellular biosciences is essential to understand processes at
molecular, subcellular, and cellular levels that affect soil
health.
The microbial observatories and microbial interactions and
processes program allows us to build upon the information that
we now have about microbial communities and to learn more about
how industrial processes may be developed which can capitalize
on the interactions between communities and plants.
Similarly the plant Genome Research Program also plays a
critical role in understanding the basic biology of soil and
plant relationships.
In GEO, the earth sciences division supports biological geo
hydrologic sciences and the study of natural hazards. An
important funding within this division is the critical zone
observatories which focuses on watershed scale studies that
advance understanding of the integration and coupling of earth
surface processes as mediated by the presence and flux of fresh
water.
Finally and not to be understated, the critical programs
offered by EHR are essential to training a high-caliber
scientific workforce.
We hope that you will continue to strongly support funding
for NSF, especially the BIO, GEO, and EHR directorates.
Thank you for providing us with the opportunity to testify
today, and I am free to answer any of your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Sure. Well, thank you very much for your
testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you. I think that we have said it and we
will say it again that we agree. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Next the witness will be Mathematical
Association of America, David Bressoud.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA

WITNESS

DAVID M. BRESSOUD, PH.D., PAST-PRESIDENT, MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF
AMERICA
Mr. Bressoud. Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, thank
you so much for this opportunity to come before you today to
speak on behalf of the National Science Foundation, and thank
you especially for all of the support that you have given to
science in the United States.
I am David Bressoud, I am past-president of the
Mathematical Association of America. This is the largest
professional association in the world that focuses on
undergraduate level mathematics, and undergraduate teaching is
what we are primarily concerned with.
I teach right now at Macalester College, but I will pull
the Penn State card, I taught there for 17 years before moving
to Minnesota in 1994.
I do not need to convince you how important it is to have a
highly trained workforce in engineering and the sciences, the
people who are--got the mathematics background in order to
succeed in the kinds of jobs that we need to create for the
21st Century. Certainly many other countries realize this. You
look at China, you look at India, you look at Singapore, they
are invested heavily in their undergraduate science and
mathematics and engineering programs, and unfortunately the
United States has been slipping.
I have included in my written testimony some graphs. You go
back 25 years, we were graduating more engineers 25 years ago--
75 to 80,000 engineers each year--than we are going now. We are
now graduating less than 75,000 engineers per year. And not
only are we losing numbers in engineers, we are losing numbers
in the sciences, and we are particularly losing numbers among
women and students from underrepresented groups, historically
underrepresented groups.
During the '80s and '90s we were very successful in
increasing the percentage of women going into engineering, the
same was true with Hispanic students and African American
students. The past decade has seen these numbers slip. The
number of women going into engineering, it got up as high as 21
percent of engineers were women, in the past decade it has now
slipped back down to about 18 percent.
Very dramatic changes among African Americans. Twelve years
ago we reached a peak in the number of African Americans
majoring in mathematics and statistics, those numbers have
dropped by 25 percent in the past decade.
Now, it does not have to be like this. We know the kinds of
programs that are successful in getting students into these
science and engineering fields and successfully through them,
and the National Science Foundation's directorate for education
and human resources is really the only federal agency that
really focuses on undergraduate level science and mathematics,
and the work is absolutely critical.
I am speaking generally for funding for National Science
Foundation, but more specifically for EHR, because they have
been able to identify the programs that are successful and show
how to leverage that by helping other colleges and universities
to adopt those programs and adapt them to their local needs.
Often it is a question of small amounts of money, sometimes
30, $50,000 is enough to get a school to get people interested,
willing to commit the time to start up one of these programs,
like the Emerging Scholars Program that has been so successful,
it is run out of the Dana Center at the University of Texas,
Austin. Or you have got a great program as Arizona State
University, the Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute
that is run by Carlos Castillo Chavez. These are programs that
provide the mentoring in order to be able to get students
successfully in and through the math intensive majors.
So I want to thank you again for this opportunity to appear
before you and I hope that you will seriously consider the
funding, especially for EHR. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you. Well, we will. We were involved
with the Gathering Storm report. Looking at the latest one, if
my memory serves me, is we were graduating about 70,000
engineers and of that about 30,000 or 35,000 were foreign
students; many who were not going to live here after
graduation. In China the numbers were roughly 700,000, although
it is not engineer for engineer, but it is still a number that
sort of frightens you a little bit.
Mr. Bressoud. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. And the other figure was that we are graduating
fewer Ph.D.s in physics now than we did in 1956.
Two years ago we asked the National Science Foundation to
put together a program for the best practices, what is working,
and frankly they dropped the ball. Now they are picking the
ball up and running with it, so I would ask if you would call
maybe the NSF, the staff can be in touch with you.
Mr. Bressoud. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. Because we are trying to get them to put together
what are the very best practices with regard to teaching math
and science, what age do you begin to lose people? Is it fourth
grade, fifth grade, and you sounded like you were saying we
pretty much know in that area.
Mr. Bressoud. Yes, we have got a pretty good idea of what
works.
Mr. Wolf. Well, then if you could talk to them and a staff
member will put you in touch with Joanne Freeney.
Mr. Bressoud. Oh, sure, she is a good friend.
Mr. Wolf. If you would call her and share it, because they
are going to have a conference in May. Then there is going to
be a roll out of whatever recommendations they make some time
in the summer or the fall, and if you could help her. They were
just going to look at two states when I thought maybe they
should be looking at many different programs. So if you would
do that and help us out we would appreciate that.
Mr. Bressoud. Yes, and of course one of the biggest
challenges is to take successful programs at one institution
and figure out how to translate them so that they will work at
another institution.
Mr. Wolf. Well, you all are the experts and we are looking
for you to tell us what you think is the best.
Mr. Bressoud. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I agree with the chairman and I appreciate your
input. You have crystallized and quantified where we are. Thank
you.
Mr. Bressoud. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
How is your football team there, pretty good? Are you in
the big 50? Is that the big 50 or big 100?
Mr. Bressoud. Not quite.
Mr. Wolf. Why would you leave Happy Valley?
The next member of Congress we have Ms. Richardson from
California.
Mr. Fattah. You are being bumped for a second.
Friday, March 11, 2011.

JUSTICE AND SCIENCE

WITNESS

HON. LAURA RICHARDSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA
Ms. Richardson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman for having
me. It is kind of ironic that you were before my committee
yesterday, so now it is reversed roles and I am in this
position. And my football team is doing just fine. I went to
both UCLA and USC, so we are having our days.
I want to thank Chairman Wolf and Ranking Member Fattah for
this opportunity to appear before the House Appropriations
Committee on the issues of justice and science and really give
you some of my thoughts about appropriations as we move forward
in 2012.
As we begin to recover from the deepest recession that we
have had since the great depression, it is important that our
spending decisions reflect the needs of investments that we
know have worked, because we have less money to do with the
things that we need to achieve.
I am here to stress the support of a number of community,
safety, criminal justice, economic and science research
programs that are important not only to the 37th Congressional
district, but to the nation as well.
Sir, I represent a very urban community. Long Beach is the
very largest city that I live in and I also include Compton,
Carson, and a part of Watts. I point that out to you because
you have different interests in people here who are talking,
but I wanted to put a face to you of what my district is about.
In my district one-third of the grandparents are raising
their grandchildren. The average income is approximately
$32,000. When I first became an elected official in local
government, my district was number one in murder, manslaughter,
rape, and assault.
So when I come to you and I talk to you about the
importance of these programs it is based upon that information
that I sit here with you today.
The number one, the first program I wanted to discuss with
you was the COPS Program. As you know, that program was
started, it was not really intended initially to be a program
that would be utilized for ongoing of paying for police
officers. It was to initially get more officers on the street.
And what we have found is even with the officers that we have,
we are still struggling to maintain the pay of those that we
have and to have enough officers to provide adequate safety in
our communities. So I would urge your consideration of
continuing to support that program.
The second one is the Debbie Smith DNA Backlog Grant
Program. As you know, I believe I am--as much as I work to make
sure we have safety in our communities--I am also very strong
on being tough if people are violators of those laws. This DNA
Backlog Grant Program is so important because we have
assailants who are out there who would be caught on past crimes
that they have already committed and future ones that they are
engaging in at this time, and so I would urge your support in
that area as well.
I have cut my comments back because I wanted to respect the
time that I had before you.
Keeping our communities safe however demands not only
responsive services, but preventative measures as well, and so
I want to talk a little bit about the prisoner reentry programs
that have benefited by community.
The recidivism rate in the United States is intolerable 67
percent. This is because too many prisoners are released
without having learned appropriate skills that they could use
coming out.
I would like to share with you, and if you are not familiar
with Chef Jeff, Chef Jeff was in a prison in California. He
actually learned how to become a professional chef, and ended
up being a chef in the Bellagio and many of the very high name
hotels in Las Vegas. He has written many books. I would be
happy to share that information with you.
I have drafted a bill called the Chef Act, and it is
Cooking Helps Elevate Futures Act. And what it basically would
do is: prisoners are in prison, they are going to be eating. So
we might as well, if they are going to be eating and if they
are going to be helping in the cooking, they ought to be
learning some of the skills so that that way if they come out
they would have the ability to work in a place of business
where they could actually have a job and therefore not coming
back returning to prison and costing us more money that we do
not have.
So as that moves forward I would hope that you would
consider potential laws like that and other programs that
currently exist that Danny Davis, Representative Davis brought
forward: the Second Chance Act. That really has not received
the appropriate funding that it so richly deserves.
In Los Angeles County, the average daily jail population is
19,000. Now I am moving to my last couple points. Twenty-two
percent of those inmates are undocumented immigrants, and 17
percent of those are undocumented felons. The total State
Criminal Alien Assistance Program, SCAAP, cost Los Angeles
County in 2009 nearly $117 million, and yet Los Angeles County
only received $15 million. States should not be expected to
bear the burden of undocumented illegal immigrants who we are
then left to house and have to pay for. So I strongly support
the funding of SCAAP at $950 million for the 2012 year coming
forward.
As I close for both you Chairman Wolf and also Ranking
Member Fattah, I want to say that, for all of us, public safety
and economic security is clearly our top priority, but it is
important that we support programs that have worked. I have a
lot of programs that I believe in, but I respectfully came to
you to highlight and to paint a picture of some of the very key
ones that I would urge you to please consider granting it our
full support in the House.
Underfunded programs negatively impact American's lives,
and I would venture to tell you it will actually cost us more
if we do not support them now.
I thank you for the time that you have given me and I will
now pause for any questions that you might have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, I do not have any questions, just to thank
you for your testimony. I think the committee is sympathetic.
We are going to try to carry language to require more work in
the prisons with the Bureau of Prisons.
Actually the Congress has voted to decrease the work in the
prison industry system. If you want to give us a letter in
detail, we can get it down to Director Lappin to see if we are
able to convince them to increase this program. It may be
easier to do it that way than it is to get the bill passed, so
give us a copy and we will talk to Director Lappin.
Secondly, I was out in California a while back giving a
speech at Pepperdine on human rights and there was a person
there who had worked in the prosecuting attorney's office in
Compton. They were telling me you really have a very, very,
very serious gang problem with regard to that.
Ms. Richardson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf. I have been to Long Beach, and I do appreciate
your testimony. I think we are meeting with Director Lappin on
Tuesday. If you can get us something by next Tuesday we will
ask him to take a look at your bill because he is coming before
the committee next week.
Ms. Richardson. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. But thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, and let me thank you for your great
leadership in the Congress on a whole range of issues on behalf
of California and the country and Compton.
But on this point, we are spending as you know over a
billion dollars on police in Iraq, and on training their police
we have spent billions. So the idea that we would cut the COPS
Program--and the chairman's father was a Philadelphia
policeman, so we know that he sympathizes on these issues.
I want to thank you for your testimony, we are going to
work as hard as we can on the priorities that you have laid
out. Thank you.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you very much. And Chairman Wolf, I
also want to stress, I look forward to working with you and we
will get you that information. So far I have already co-signed
onto six Republican bills, and the reputation I want to
establish with you is I want to fix the problems, so I am happy
to work with you.
Thank you, Mr. Fattah, as well for your kind comments.
Mr. Wolf. The next witness will be George Washington
Institute of Public Policy, George Washington University, Dr.
Andrew Reamer.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

GEORGE WASHINGTON INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC POLICY

WITNESS

DR. ANDREW REAMER, RESEARCH PROFESSOR, GEORGE WASHINGTON INSTITUTE OF
PUBLIC POLICY, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Mr. Reamer. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member Fattah, I am
Andrew Reamer, research professor at George Washington
University's Institute of Public Policy, I focus on federal
policies to promote employment and competitiveness.
I appreciate the opportunity to comment on the proposed
fiscal year 2012 budget for three statistical organizations
under your purview. The Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, and NSF's National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics.
These agencies' data guide public and business decisions
that determine the health of $15 trillion in annual national
economic activity which comes to $48,000 a person in the
country, and the future of $71 trillion in U.S. household
assets, and $37 trillion in U.S. non-financial business assets
which comes to over $300,000 per person in national wealth.
Specifically agency data informed decisions by policy
makers responding to national economic and fiscal conditions by
millions of businesses regarding location, markets, products,
investment, and hiring by thousands of education and training
organizations determining program offerings and by thousands of
regional economic development organizations addressing
opportunities for business creation, retention, expansion, and
attraction.
Consequently the nation's return on investment in these
agencies will be extraordinarily high. Essentially $1.1 billion
in investment to protect the future of over $100 trillion in
national wealth on a per capita basis is investing $3.67 per
capita to protect the future of over $300,000 per capita.
In particular I recommend one billion thirty-one point two
million dollars for the Census Bureau, $6.5 million above the
President's request, and $108.9 million for BEA, the
President's request, $38.01 million for NCSES, the President's
request.
The President's request for the Census Bureau will allow
the agency to operate its essential programs and add a timely
low cost effort to gather data on state and local government
pension programs, which includes unfunded liabilities, which
have been in the news as of late.
I recommend that the subcommittee fund two programs slated
for termination in the President's budget at a cost of six and
a half million dollars or two cents per capita.
The first is the Consolidated Federal Funds Report which
provides Congress and the public with annual data on federal
expenditures and obligations for every state and county in all
spending categories. CFFR's termination would leave members
with a reduced understanding of the details of federal spending
to the detriment of sound fiscal management.
I also ask the subcommittee to preserve the Current
Industrial Reports Programs which surveys firms in 47
manufacturing sectors. The loss of the CIR program would result
in less reliable economic statistics, not a good thing in these
times.
Regarding BEA I strongly recommend the subcommittee endorse
BEA's budget initiatives totaling $13.2 million or four cents
per capita. These initiatives will enhance the safety of the
national wealth and soundness of the nation's economy in four
ways. They will remove blind spots in macro economists' and
financial markets' abilities to see emerging economic risks.
BES says that the statistical system, quote, fell short in
providing advance warning signs of a building economic crisis,
unquote. What BEA does not say is that the missing data would
have cost about a nickel per person.
The statistical agencies have sought funding to get those
data since the 1990s, and that absent the warning signs
resulting economic crisis led to a 16 percent drop in household
assets in one year coming to about $42,000 in lost wealth per
person.
Second the initiatives will result in more reliable
forecasts of federal deficits.
Third, the new data will enhance the ability of
corporations to make decisions more likely to lead to greater
competitiveness, higher profits in jobs, and finally the new
data will allow Congress and the administration to take actions
that better support small business development.
Finally the work of the National Center for Science and
Engineering Statistics is essential for guiding government,
university, and corporate decisions regarding R and D
innovation and education that will determine the nation's
economic competitiveness going forward.
The President's request including four important low cost
and high impact initiatives is worthy of the subcommittee's
report.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
present my views.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I think the per capita illustrations are
important for us to understand the issues at hand, and thank
you for your testimony.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. The next witness will be former
Congressman Jim Ramstad representing National Association of
Drug Court Professionals. Jim, welcome to the committee.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF DRUG COURT PROFESSIONALS

WITNESS

HON. JIM RAMSTAD, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF DRUG PROFESSIONALS
Mr. Ramstad. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, it is nice to be
back, Ranking Member Fattah, it is good to be back among
friends and former colleagues.
My name is Jim Ramstad and I am a senior policy advisor to
the National Association of Drug Court Professionals, and I am
here today to talk about drug courts, the most effective and
cost beneficial criminal justice strategy for non-violent drug
addicted offenders, or as one judge put it, the most successful
justice reform in our lifetime, the most successful justice
reform in our lifetime.
Mr. Chairman, as you and many of my other former colleagues
know, on July 31st, 1981 I woke up from my last alcoholic
blackout in a jail cell in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, under
arrest for disorderly conduct, resisting arrest, failure to
vacate the premise.
I am alive and sober today almost 30 years later only
because of the access I had to treatment for my alcoholism,
only because of the access I had for treatment, the same access
drug courts provide each and every day across America.
Last year alone drug courts served over 120,000 people,
people given the same opportunity of recovery that I have had.
The opportunity to live a sober, a productive, and a healthy
life.
Drug courts are not only changing lives, they are saving
lives and they are saving taxpayer dollars, and that point in
this time of budget deficits and horrendous monumental debt is
one that I can not overemphasize, the savings that are a result
of the taxpayer from drug courts.
The most conservative studies, in fact, Mr. Chairman, show
for every dollar invested in drug courts $15.36 is saved on
reduced emergency room visits, other health care, foster care,
and welfare costs, property losses, and criminal justice and
incarceration cost.
As a conference of chief justices declared recently, and I
am quoting now, Mr. Chairman, drug courts are the most
effective strategy for reducing drug use and reducing criminal
recidivism. Remarkably 75 percent of drug court graduates
remain arrest free. Seventy-five percent of drug court
graduates stay arrest free compared to 30 percent of offenders
released from prison. That is on a national level.
One such successful graduate named John is sitting to my
left, Mr. Chairman. John in fact is from Loudon County from
your district. John got hooked on painkillers following a very
complicated wisdom tooth extraction when he was 17 years old.
Subsequently he experienced an overdose and faced criminal
charges.
John said it all, Mr. Chairman, when he said, and I am
quoting this young man, the drug court program changed my life
forever. It enabled me to be drug free and it taught me how to
live again. It taught me how to live again. John is currently
pursuing a Ph.D. degree in psychology and behavioral
neuroscience, and John has been in recovery now for three years
and 38 days.
In addition to being a proven cost effective budget
solution drug courts also promote public safety and address the
alarming number--and it really is alarming--the alarming number
of addicted and justice involved veterans among the 2,400,000
veterans who have returned from Iraq and Afghanistan.
As law enforcement and prosecutors agree substance abuse is
a national concern with shared responsibilities among federal,
state, and local governments.
Last week's budget hearing of your subcommittee with
Attorney General Holder demonstrated why drug abuse is a
national issue requiring a national response on the supply side
and the demand side.
On the supply side increased border security and
interdiction, but not forgetting the demand side, reduction
provided by drug courts and other efforts.
Mr. Chairman, I was moved by your concern after hearing
about that hearing, I was moved by your concern and that of
Chairman Rogers as to the enforcement and treatment of
prescription drug abusers. An epidemic as you know Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member Fattah, an epidemic that is devastating many
communities and thousands of veterans. There is no question it
would be counter productive to eliminate funding for the
prescription drug monitoring program that was sponsored by
Chairman Rogers.
Mr. Chairman, today over 2,500 communities have found drug
courts to be a proven public safety solution that work better
than jail, probation, or treatment alone and reduce drug abuse
and crime more effectively and less costly than another other
drug strategy.
Drug courts need to be available, Mr. Chairman, for our
brave veterans ravished by PTSD and chemical addiction. In fact
the most recent study on that point, the most recent study
showed one in five returning veterans has a mental health
disorder. Think of that, 20 percent of the returning veterans
from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan has some mental health
disorder, and one in four a substance abuse disorder. One in
four, 25 percent of our GIs coming back from war have a
substance abuse problem. And of course as you know and as we
have discussed abuse of prescription drugs is exploding among
veterans as they seek to counter the pain of combat.
Drug courts are working closely with the Department of
Veterans Affairs to connect veterans with the benefits and
services that they have earned. Adequate federal funding, Mr.
Chairman, for drug courts will accommodate more eligible
veterans without limiting eligible non-veterans. So from health
care to housing and employment, caring for our veterans needs
to continue to be a shared responsibility by states and the
federal government.
Mr. Chairman, no other justice intervention can match the
proven results of drug courts. I have attended numerous drug
court graduations during my 28 years in public office and I am
constantly in awe at the lives being restored, families
reunited, little children returned to their parents, people's
careers resurrected, people's lives saved and changed
dramatically for the better, but the hard reality is there
simply are not enough drug courts to reach all who are
eligible.
In fact the Department of Justice has identified 1,200,000
substance abusing offenders who are currently eligible for drug
court, but are unable to access drug court, many of whom are
veterans.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, let me say I fully realize, I
truly do the monumental task before you facing the huge deficit
and the mind boggling debt, that is why I ask the fundamental
question, how much longer can we continue to spend $60 billion
a year building new prisons and jails with minimal return on
investment as compared to drug courts? How much longer can we
continue to spend $60 billion a year as a nation on more cells
when drug courts work so much more effectively?
That is why I urge the subcommittee to approve fiscal year
2011 funding for drug courts at least at the same level
approved by the subcommittee last year. An investment that is
$50 million as you know, Mr. Chairman, and that investment of
$50 million will save upwards of $168 million in criminal
justice and victimization costs alone and will result in $1.3
billion in additional benefits to the economy. And if you want
the studies to prove those numbers and those savings I refer
you no further than the group that has been recently formed by
former Speaker Gingrich, former Attorney General Ed Meese,
three other exemplary public servants whose names escape me
right now, but none has been accused of being a liberal, I can
assure you of that, and as they say, the most responsible thing
to do in terms of dealing with the drug and alcohol addiction
problem is drug courts. They hardly endorse drug courts, and I
will be glad to get that material to you for the record, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson, Ranking Member
Fattah, for your support of a justice system that truly works.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. I thank you Jim. And John, we welcome you. Well,
Jim, thank you.
Mr. Ramstad. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Fattah.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Well, thank you, Jim. First of all, I have no
problem with being accused of being a liberal, so I just want
the record to reflect that I resemble that remark.
But I want to congratulate John for his pursuit of his
doctoral degree and for dealing with the challenges that he has
had to deal with. I was the proud sponsor of the drug court
legislation in Pennsylvania when I was--this is a couple of
decades ago--when I was in the state senate. I think that
everything you said is correct in terms of the empirical
evidence, so I thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Ramstad. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Thank you, John.
The next witness will be American Society of Agronomy and
Crop Science Society, Catherine Swoboda. Welcome.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN SOCIETY OF AGRONOMY AND CROP SCIENCE SOCIETY OF AMERICA

WITNESS

CATHERINE SWOBODA, SCIENCE POLICY INTERN, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF AGRONOMY
AND CROP SCIENCE SOCIETY OF AMERICA
Ms. Swoboda. Thank you for offering the American Society of
Agronomy and the Crop Science Society of America the
opportunity to comment today. Many of our member scientists'
fundamental research depends on grants from the National
Science Foundation's BIO, GEO, and EHR directorates.
The American Society of Agronomy and the Crop Science
Society of America testify today in support of the funding
level put forth for the National Science Foundation and the
President's budget request of $7.8 billion as this budget level
is consistent with the amount authorized in the recent America
COMPETES Act.
Throughout history farmers have adapted agricultural
systems to changes in the environment; however, recent extreme
and unpredictable weather events linked to unprecedented
climate change have outpaced land managers' ability to adapt.
Increases in frequency and intensity of precipitation, elevated
temperatures, drought, and other extreme weather events are
negatively impacting crop yield and quality. These negative
weather impacts can be seen here in America.
Just last January in Florida one-third of the winter fruit
and vegetable harvest was lost when the state suffered 13
consecutive nights of below freezing temperatures,
significantly driving up produce costs to consumers.
Such extreme weather events can act as a threat multiplier
for instability, leaving already most volatile regions of the
world even more vulnerable to instability due to greater
hunger, violence, and crime.
There are several factors associated with climate change
that impact cropping systems. Drought will limit the
productivity of over half of the earth's arable land in the
next 50 years and adversely impact crop yields, Elevated
temperatures can shorten the period of grain filling which in
turn will limit weight gain in the grain and reduce pollen
viability. Carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere will
also increase. Carbon dioxide is a fundamental requirement for
plant carbohydrate production in overall plant metabolism. Some
plants will be more productive with the continued climb of
carbon dioxide; however, tropical grasses like maize, sugar
cane, sorghum, and cellulosic biofuel crops may not respond
positively.
Furthermore the benefits seen by other plants may be
counter balanced by other pressures both biotic and abiotic
which accompany climate change and continued release of carbon
dioxide.
Crops will be vulnerable to increasingly active biotic
stresses such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi which are highly
responsive to humidity and rainfall as well as temperature.
And finally as the seasons lengthen and winters moderate
due to climate change, adaptation zones of invasive animal,
plant, pathogen, and insect species are likely to increase as
overwintering and movement of pests and pathogens occurs more
rapidly.
Adapting crops and cropping systems to new seasons,
temperatures, gases, and biotic stresses will require crop and
region specific crop adaptation technologies and strategies.
Basic science approaches for adapting crops to climate change
include improvement of crop cultivars and development of new
methods of managing the crops in the field.
We need to capitalize on these known approaches and seek
out additional advances to overcoming the challenges to
agricultural production.
We hope that you will continue to strongly support funding
for NSF and especially the BIO, GEO, and EHR directorates as
the work performed in these directorates will be essential for
developing technologies and strategies for crop adaptation.
Thank you again for providing us with the opportunity to
testify today.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I want to thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Swoboda. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
American Astronomical Society, Dr. Debbie Elmegreen.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY

WITNESS

DR. DEBBIE ELMEGREEN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY
Ms. Elmegreen. Thank you, I am Debbie Elmegreen from Vassar
College where we have no football team.
Thank you Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, for the
opportunity to comment on astronomy in the fiscal year 2012
budget from my perspective as president of the American
Astronomical Society, the organization for professional
astronomers in North America.
The AAS supports the NASA, NSF, and DOE budget request as
they pertain to astronomy and the office of nuclear energy
plutonium 238 production restart.
We are in a golden age of discovery for astronomy from
planets around nearby stars to dark matter, dark energy, and
the early universe. We stand poised to answer big questions,
are we alone? How did universe begin? What is it made of?
Astronomy inspires generations of scientists and engineers
through discoveries about the universe rebuilt by NSF's
supported telescopes on the ground like the new ALMA radio
telescope, and NASA missions in space like Hubble Space
Telescope and Kepler which finds earth-like planets.
Each year a quarter of a million college students enroll in
astronomy courses, including 15 percent of all future K-12
teachers.
The U.S. Astronomical community just completed its sixth
decadal survey to determine the most compelling research and to
prioritize the projects to accomplish those goals. This well
respected survey process has helped make the U.S. a world
astronomy leader.
The report, New Worlds, New Horizons, produced by the
National Academies and funded by NASA, NSF, and DOE, provides
policy makers with a prioritized set of initiatives for federal
support. It is based on input from over 1,000 astronomers and
independent assessment of costs and risks and budgetary
constraints. The recommended program is a balance of small,
medium, and large projects and builds on international,
private, and interagency partnerships.
The top large ground project is the revolutionary large
synoptic survey telescope enabling time discoveries by rapid
repeated sky scans. It will find small near earth asteroids as
congressionally mandated, and distant supernova which map out
the universes acceleration. Nightly acquisitions of over 10,000
gigabytes of data will drive new methods for data achieving,
LLST will be unique worldwide highlighting U.S. leadership. A
recommended mid scale innovations program will allow a competed
program in NSF for medium cost projects.
Our top ranked medium project is CCAT, a large sub-
millimeter telescope that will compliment ALMA by surveying
regions forming planets or forming galaxies.
The James Webb Space Telescope is the successor to the
Hubble Space Telescope and was the top ranked program in the
2000 decadal survey. It underlies many of the 2010 decadal
recommended activities.
JWST will transform astronomy through observations of the
very first stars and galaxies, black holes, and planets
information. We support JWST. A timely launch of JWST also
enables this decadal survey's top ranked launch space program,
the wide-field infrared space telescope. Its goals encompass
two high priority astronomy areas, earth like planets and dark
energy. Our leadership in dark energy studies is at risk in a
WFIRST launch this decade or a suitable partnership with the
European space agency is not achieved.
The mid scale explorer missions in NASA's astrophysics
division address other important issues. They provide rapid
launches for timely research as with the cosmic background
explorer that led to a Nobel prize and they enable instrument
training for young scientists.
An issue critical planetary science is the production of
plutonium 238 used to power missions to the outer solar system
such as the Cassini mission to Saturn. There is no viable
energy alternative for deep space missions. Our production
restart is vital to avoid delayed missions and escalating cost.
We urge funding the plutonium restart.
In closing I thank Representative Wolf for your bipartisan
leadership in supporting science and advanced research. Your
efforts, along with this whole committee have benefited science
broadly and astronomy in particular. I can think of no more
important way to rebuild America than to support advanced
research and maintain U.S. leadership in science, engineering,
and technology.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Let me thank you, and I also think that the
plutonium 238 restart is critically important and I want to
also note for the record your comments in your written
testimony on the budget deficit and how we ought to proceed.
Thank you.
Ms. Elmegreen. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
The American Physical Society, Dr. Michael Lubell.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN PHYSICAL SOCIETY

WITNESS

DR. MICHAEL LUBELL, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS, AMERICAN PHYSICAL
SOCIETY
Mr. Lubell. Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
I am appearing on behalf of the American Physical Society
which represents 48,000 physicists in universities, industry,
and national laboratories.
I want to begin by thanking the committee for its past
support for NSF, NASA, and NIST, and in particular, Chairman
Wolf, when I was in your office which almost seems like
yesterday, but your role in promoting what became the Rising
Above the Gathering Storm report.
I also want to note that APS along with a number of other
organizations that are a part of the task force on American
innovation sent a letter to the Bowles Simpson Commission last
fall urging entitlement reform, so we are on the record on
that. I just want to make that clear, and Mr. Culberson had
raised that, and I think we feel very strongly about it.
I am a professor at CCNY in addition to the work that I do
for the American Physical Society, and as a university
professor and research physicist I can personally attest to the
critical role NSF, NASA, and NIST have played in advancing the
frontiers of American science and in training America's next
generation of scientists.
You have already heard other witnesses testify to the facts
so I will not repeat them, instead I want to return to an issue
that APS raised in prior testimony before this committee, one
that was not dealt with during the last three years and now
looms large in fiscal year 2012 for NSF.
In November of 2008 then-President Elect Obama requested
APS to provide the new administration with advice on sciences
research and needs that could be addressed in an economic
stimulus bill and we were pleased to do so. We compiled a list
of shovel ready projects and instrumentation requests pending
at a number of federal agencies, among them NSF.
Most of the agencies largely followed our guidance. NSF
elected however to use a majority of the funds it received in
the American Recovery Reinvestment Act to address another
critical need, increasing the acceptance rates of very highly
ranked research proposals that budgetary strictors had
prevented the foundation from supporting previously. The
acceptance rate had declined precipitously and then-Director
Arden Bement believed he was reaching price in proportion.
The need was compelling but NSF's decision to address it
with funds that would last only three years created the specter
of a significant short fall in fiscal year 2012.
Indeed President Obama's fiscal year 2009 budget recognized
the problem, it projected an increase of 17 percent for the NSF
and the out year budget fiscal year 2012.
In prior testimony we called this committee's attention to
the administration's plan which we deemed difficult, if not
impossible to realize, and to address the shortfall we urged
the committee to allocate much of the increases in NSF's 2009,
'10, and '11 budgets to one shot such as laboratory start ups
or new faculty grants of limited duration.
Unfortunately our recommendations were not enacted into law
and today the NSF faces a problem of either allowing students
supported with ARRA funds to be stranded in the middle of their
graduate education and severely restricting the award of new
grants.
Neither course is desirable, both are damaging to America's
global scientific leadership and public polling has shown the
public values deeply.
The clock cannot be turned back, but if this committee
elects not to grant the NSF the appropriation increase
requested by the President the problem the foundation faces
will be made considerably worse.
Therefore although we fully recognize the need to shrink
the federal deficit, we urge this committee to be wise in how
it reduces expenditures and where it applies its cuts.
Building a better America requires a strong science
research enterprise in a highly skilled work force. To sustain
our nation's economic growth and to keep the highly skilled
jobs within our borders we must commit ourselves to educating
the scientific workforce of the future and providing the young
scientists today with the resources they need to keep our
Nation at the innovation frontier.
Over the years NSF has played a central and extraordinary
effective role in both endeavors and we believe it deserves the
funding the President has requested. We hope the committee will
find a way to provide the necessary appropriation.
Again, thank you for your past support and for allowing me
to testify today.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you very much. We will do everything
we can for education. So you understand this subcommittee will
be given an allocation----
Mr. Lubell. Right.
Mr. Wolf. And in the CR, if you look at the CR, we are
heavy in protecting NSF and NASA. Others took quite a big hit.
Our hands, Mr. Fattah's hands are now tied because when I
was in the minority I could differ, but generally we are going
to have to reach the budget numbers. This is a pretty
impressive year. I think if we could have video conferenced
this and allowed the President, his Chief of Staff Daley and
Mr. Lew to look at this, I think it could have made a
difference.
Mr. Lubell. I agree.
Mr. Wolf. Niall Ferguson, the historian who I have great
respect for said the great nations decline rapidly. Once
decline comes, the flapping of the wings of a butterfly and all
of a sudden it goes. I think we are really approaching that. We
are going to have to hopefully resolve this by the end of the
year. I would appreciate very much your sending that letter. I
would hope that all of the groups here would ask to meet with
the administration--obviously the President cannot meet with
everybody. Put together a team prepared to deal with the
Simpson Bowles Commission because we want to protect, or not
only protect, I think the word is is to enhance, the funding on
the sciences to make sure that we do whatever so we can create
the jobs here. That is going to be where this thing comes out.
I know there were some amendments on the floor in the CR where
they took money out of NASA and put it into COPS.
Mr. Lubell. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. I am sure the members heard from the local law
enforcement, and I understand, but until we get that deficit
issue resolved it will be very tough, so thank you for doing
that.
Mr. Lubell. We are doing whatever we can to help. Thank
you.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I was out at the Sandia National Lab. It is an
amazing thing that we as a nation should be proud of in terms
of the investments that have been made.
I agree with the chairman. I want to say a couple of
things. One is, I do not assume because I am in the minority
that that gives me some notion of being irresponsible. I am
committed that we are going to come to a bipartisan process in
the subcommittee and have something that we can support. I am
going to work with my chairman, and he has got to work with an
allocation.
I do want to note that I am going to also introduce a bill
next week that would focus on the other side of this equation.
David Walker, who I think has done remarkable work getting
the nation focused on the debt, yesterday said this problem is
not going to be solved by cuts alone, that it is impossible. It
was Roll Call's editorial last year that said that the proposed
cuts in the scientific and innovation areas are eating our
country's seed corn.
So we have to work within an allocation, but we also need
to point the direction. Partly it is about entitlement reform,
but it is also understanding that we are going to have to raise
the stakes in terms of having the revenue we need focused on
the priorities to insure our position as the number one nation
in the world.
So thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Mr. Lubell. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
The next is Congressman Sam Farr from California. How are
you, Sam?
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

NATIONAL OCEANIC ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

HON. SAM FARR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA
Mr. Farr. Well, our coastline is a little threatened, but
it seems to be okay from the tsunami, and I would just like
to----
Mr. Wolf. What have you heard? We have been in here all
morning.
Mr. Farr. Well, there was a huge earthquake in Japan.
Mr. Wolf. No, I know that, but with regard to California.
Mr. Fattah. We have not been here since that early in the
morning.
Mr. Wolf. No, we followed it all morning, but----
Mr. Farr. Well, California put out a coastal all along the
west coast was a tsunami warning.
Mr. Wolf. Right, but I mean has anything happened?
Mr. Farr. No.
Mr. Wolf. No.
Mr. Farr. It is a great advertisement for everybody to rush
to the very spot they should not be in is to go to the beach
and watch it. Because every time they have done one of these
tsunami warnings nothing has happened so people want to see
what is going to happen. Some day we are going to have a
crisis.
Mr. Wolf. Now I will tell you for the record this committee
several years ago when the tsunami took place we sent a letter
to every governor and I believe almost every mayor. We sent a
letter to everybody urging them on the tsunami warning system
and hopefully some of that came in effect.
Mr. Farr. Well, I would like to invite you out as a
committee to come see what we have done on the west coast. I
mean it is phenomenal the amount of technology we have put into
it along the Hawaii----
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Mr. Farr [continuing]. To do this early detection system so
that the warnings-- we have never had these warnings in the
past.
Mr. Wolf. I know.
Mr. Farr. I think until you have a chance to just see how
much of this globe is ocean and how the majority of all that
flying was over ocean and how big that Pacific ocean is, and we
flew from Andrew's Air Force Base to refuel in Shannon and then
spent the night in Kuwait, and talking to the pilots just over
the north Atlantic 20,000 aircraft a day. They are lined up
every 25 miles apart going in each direction, and the interest
is all of that depends on the weather forecast of whether that
line up is going to be going this way or this way or this way.
It is all based on weather, but that amount of cargo and people
is just phenomenal. Versus the southern hemisphere we flew
across the entire Indian ocean and one commercial aircraft
passed us. So the northern hemisphere and the amount of
instrumentation you put in there through NOAA.
But I am here to not so much talk about the weather stuff,
because you know frankly in the commerce budget there is a lot
of sort of contract, big contractors in that. Think of all the
satellite stuff and all of the material they need. The ocean on
the other side is where our manpower, scientists are, and NOAA
has always put more money in the atmosphere side than they do
in the ocean side, so I am going to kind of make a pitch today
for the oceans because we woke up this morning hearing about
what the impact of an earthquake was on one country's ocean and
could have a consequence on us.
I mean I do this every year, it is kind of a focus, but I
want to just point out to you, Mr. Chairman, and I think you
understand this because you would not be in politics as long as
you are, but in Virginia and Maryland the commercial seafood
industry contributes $2 billion in sales and supports 41,000
jobs, but why NOAA is so important is because the environmental
conditions which allow that industry to be healthy when they
are not right have huge economic costs.
The pollution and poor water quality has degraded oyster
reefs in Chesapeake Bay, the losses in Virginia and Maryland's
oyster industry have been more than $4 billion in losses, and
our national economy depends on NOAA being able to do its job
so that the commerce from the ocean can move, and yet in this
budget we have a $54 million decrease in NOAA and it has
trickled down consequences that I think we need to be aware of.
First of all if the Appropriations Committee is going to
count on the sort of baseline data that it was in H.R. 1, I
would hope that you would really drill down on doing oversight
on what that trickle down effect is going to have, because we
just passed that without any discussion, no hearings and all
that. But the examples of cuts, there is a $10 million cut to
the Marine Sanctuary Program, and marine sanctuaries are not
everywhere, but where they are they are a big economic asset,
plus a huge scientific asset. There is a $10 million cut to the
Cooperative Research Program. That thing benefits as it points
out it was cooperative between fishermen and scientists.
We are going to catch shares which we really support on the
west coast, it has been controversial on the east coast, west
coast love it, fishermen are in it, this is going to be a
managed system, it is going to be a lot safer for fishermen, it
can be smarter. And essentially what fish shares does is it
allows you to catch shares, is that you are allocated a tonnage
of fish that you can catch within these seasonal conditions.
And something those seasons are short, but then that means you
got to go out then, right then and catch it all or try to catch
it all and you put yourself and your boat and your crew at
risk. Now you know what you are allotted, you can go out any
days you want, you wait for a day that there are better
conditions for fishing, it is a lot safer, and frankly not all
of the fish get hit the same day by all the boats. So it is
just less bombardment on the fish stocks.
So it has really improved the stock assessment and it is a
win-win and you are going hear a lot of controversy from the
northeast here, you know, around the New England states, but if
you do take a hatchet at that please exempt the west coast and
Alaska because they are very, very satisfied with the catch
share program.
I am here to put the ocean back into NOAA, to put the O
back in. I think a few years ago I complained that they were
cutting so much out of the ocean we ought to change the
agency's name to NAA.
And again, you know what was also amazing, we were at East
Timor, this was the house democracy partnership committee in
Indonesia. Indonesia looks a little small on that map, but it
is the fourth largest populated country in the world. It was
longer than the United States is wide. It is made up of 17,000
islands. It is the largest Muslim democracy in the world. And
it is very pro-U.S. But you cannot get there unless you fly
over oceans.
And when we got out and went into these small islands, I
just could not believe the amount of trash that was on the
beaches. In East Timor, one of the poorest countries in the
world, they could not generate that trash because they do not
have a capital to buy that stuff. There is lots of plastics and
tires and all kinds of stuff that you just do not see on the
island, it is not in the economy, it got there from the oceans,
and you realize my God, if this stuff is on the beaches from
the oceans then it has got to be all over the waters. And you
know, if the ocean does not stay healthy we are dead, because
life on the planet depends on healthy oceans. And you are the
only committee that has all this jurisdiction and I just really
appreciate it.
And lastly I want to put in a pitch for two programs that
are in your justice category because they really work. One is
the COPS Program that our communities have been able to take
advantage. And you know they have to put up their own capital
to continue hiring the cops, there is no free lunch there. And
California's cost is much higher than the nation because that
program is the same salary for every cop in the nation
regardless of what the local conditions are, but even with that
we get the smaller return than a less costly state or salaries
are lower in other states, those strapped communities are
excited about getting into the program because it is the one
hand out there that allows them to get cops right in the areas
where we are facing trouble.
And the second issue in your jurisdiction there is the drug
courts. I know your predecessor was really keen on it, I think
that diverting people out of the regular criminal process and
getting them in through courts where they are going to get
treatment, because without treatment--you can convict people
for drug crimes, but if they go into prison they are going to
go stay addicts, they are going to do strange things while they
are locked up and they are going to go right back to doing
strange things when they get out, and drug courts have been
very effective at getting diversion and treatment and I am
really appreciative of that.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Jim Ramstad was just here to testify
too.
Mr. Farr. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Sam, I appreciate it.
Mr. Farr. Thank you very much, thank you for your
leadership.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Farr. And I will get you all a fax about the New Jersey
shores, okay.
Mr. Wolf. Avalon.
Mr. Farr. At least you have got a television program out of
it. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thanks, Sam.
Next American Society of Civil Engineers, Tom Smith.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS

WITNESS

TOM SMITH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR/GENERAL COUNSEL, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CIVIL ENGINEERS
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Fattah and members of the committee
and staff I want to thank you for the opportunity to be here
today. It is a great pleasure to be here. I thank you for your
service to this committee. I agree with the chairman that this
is a very impressive committee and much of what I want to do is
reinforce some of the comments that you have made from the
distinguished colleagues that have already spoken, and I thank
you also, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership in Virginia, I am a
lifetime resident of Fairfax County and appreciate your
leadership here today and everything you have done to us.
We are pleased to offer this testimony in support of the
$7.767 billion budget for the National Science Foundation and
also the $1.001 billion budget for the National Institute for
Standards and Technology for fiscal year 2012.
We recognize that you must make difficult decisions as have
been eluded to earlier. We believe however that the plan put
forth by the co-chairs of the national commission on fiscal
responsibility and the President's fiscal year 2012 budget
recognized the importance of investment in science and research
which are critical to the competitiveness and future of this
country.
ASC publishes a report card that we update every four years
and you may have heard President Obama reference it in the
State of the Union speech where he referenced the grade of D
for our country's infrastructure which is you know another
issue, and the funding recommendation that we have over the
next five years is $2.2 trillion to meet national
infrastructure needs.
Now recognizing that the spending at this rate is unlikely,
research is needed to increase productivity and reduce costs
through the development of innovative design materials,
construction methodologies, and rehabilitation technologies,
maintenance procedures, and operation techniques. We think it
is particularly important for the federal government to be
involved in this area.
You know, in our industry, you know, you see a certain
amount of fragmentation with, you know, subcontractors and
different disciplines involved in design and construction,
there is also low profit margins, and you also see the constant
threat of litigation which has a tendency to stifle innovation,
so this topic of tort reform is probably another topic which we
would love to see advanced in another forum, but recognizing
the difficulties in the private sector and innovation in this
area is particularly important we believe to have organizations
like NSF and NIST and other federal agencies that can help us
realize the goals that are necessary in science and technology.
According to the National Academy of Sciences, more than
half the increase in the U.S. gross domestic product in the
last 50 years can be attributed to advances in science
technology, innovation, and engineering, it effectively touches
everything we do, and we do believe that by making an
investment like this we are going to be able to focus on the
revenue side for this country as well.
This solution to many nations' and the world's greatest
challenges are energy, environment, food and water, health
care, economic growth, and others depend on advancement in
science, technology, innovation, and engineering.
The support that the federal government has provided for
basic research and development, the primary function of the
National Science Foundation has helped this country retain its
world leadership position in research and education and science
and engineering, but we believe that that position is as
precarious as has been eluded to earlier with the National
Academy of Engineering's report that came out last year on the
Rising Above the Gathering Storm revisited.
Without qualified scientists and engineers there can be for
innovation, our education system is not meeting the needs of
our society and many elementary, middle, and high school
students do not receive adequate instruction in math and
science such that the possibility of studying engineering at
the college level is inhibited, and I agree with a lot of the
comments from the mathematical society that you heard earlier
and the concerns about the statistics regarding diversity and
attracting the best and brightest to our profession which is so
critical to the future of this country.
ASE supports the President's request of $231 million for
the K through 12 science technology, education, and mathematic
programs at NSF.
We also urge Congress to carefully consider K through 12
STEM funding throughout the federal government. Our nation's
future competitiveness and the global marketplace is directly
tied to the ability of your schools to prepare children in the
STEM fields.
The mission of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology is to promote U.S. innovation and industrial
competitiveness by advancing measurement science standards in
technology in ways that enhance economic security and improve
the quality of life. The well being of the nation is effected
every day by mismeasurement and standards work including the
quality of your water, air, food, et cetera. We fully support
the request for $678 million to fund these vital activities.
The national laboratory at NIST is also a relatively small
program that addresses a large need including fire science,
fire safety engineering, building materials, computer
integrated construction practices, structural, mechanical, and
environmental engineering and building economics.
We also applaud NIST for its strong leadership in this area
and urge Congress to continue to support these activities
including the engineering laboratory's $91 million request
which includes the disaster resilient buildings infrastructure
and communities initiative at $10.6 million.
Finally we also urge Congress to support the national
construction safety team with an appropriation of at least $1
million.
Once again, we thank you for your service for this country
and the opportunity to be here today for speak in favor of
these important programs.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I thank you for your testimony and we have our
work cut out for us. But you know, I am sure that the chairman
and I are going to figure it all out.
Mr. Smith. We have confidence in you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much.
American Society for Quality, Dr. David Spong.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR QUALITY

WITNESS

DR. DAVID SPONG, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR QUALITY
Mr. Spong. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Fattah, my name is David
Spong, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you
today.
I represent the Foundation for the Malcolm Baldridge
National Quality Award which serves to raise money to support
the Baldridge Performance Excellence Program.
I am also here today as president of the American Society
for Quality, a professional association and the leading
authority or quality which has administered the Baldridge award
since 1991. Additionally an alliance of 33 similar state award
programs support my testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I am testifying today to support full funding
for the Baldridge Program, a program that may seem small in
size in funding, but the very large in the way it positively
impacts our country, its citizens, companies, customers, and
right now perhaps most importantly jobs, and I should know, I
have had the honor of leading two organizations to receive the
Baldridge award. I have seen firsthand how the real life
application of the Baldridge principals can improve
organizational excellence. Believe me it works.
As an example, in 2010 the 83 Baldridge applicants
represented almost 300,000 jobs, $38 billion in revenue, and
greater than 80 million customers. And now the very program
which has proven its measurable worth over and over is coming
under misguided pressure to cut its funding at a time when our
economy needs it most.
President Obama's fiscal year 2012 budget recommends
reducing funding for the Baldridge Program by $2.2 million out
of about 10 million. He recommends evaluating ways to
transition out of federal funding and have the private sector
shoulder the cost.
The foundation or any other private organization in my view
would not be sustainably capable of achieving the goals and
true mission of the effort nor provide the prestige and
patriotic almost of the program if it were to be privatized.
In fact if I were president I would ask Congress to
increase the funding for the program, not decrease it so that
its impact on the U.S. economy would be even greater.
Mr. Chairman, with all respect continued federal funding of
the Baldridge Program at current levels is not only critically
necessary, but completely economically justifiable to the U.S.
government even in these times of significant budget pressure.
The Baldridge Program is a very strong example of an
appropriate use of leverage dollars. An independent study
calculates a 207 to 1 rate of return to the economy for every
dollar the government invests in it.
The Baldridge Program is the only U.S. public private
partnership dedicated to improving U.S. organizations so that
they can complete globally. It educates business, education,
health care, and non-profit organizations on best practices in
organizational management.
The federal funding is in fact only a fraction of the total
amount of hours funding and value contributed to the program,
yet government support is critical as it provides the
leadership, prestige, integrity, independence, consistency, and
continuity the program needs, and without an efficient and
effectively managed program as it is now through NIST the
entire stakeholder system would collapse.
The government contributions to the Baldridge Program is
supported by those thousands of experts who volunteer as an act
of patriotic service to their country. The $9.6 million
appropriation for the program is one of the best investments
taxpayers can make to promote economic growth and improve
America's competitiveness.
Mr. Chairman, I respectfully urge you to vote to invest
fully in the Baldridge Program.
Thank you for this opportunity to insure that you know how
important the Baldridge Performance Excellence Program is to
our country, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I have no questions, but thank you for your
work in this area.
Mr. Spong. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, sir.
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Dr.
Roberta Balstad. Welcome.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

UNIVERSITY CORPORATION FOR ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH

WITNESS

DR. ROBERTA BALSTAD, MEMBER, BOARD OF TRUSTEES, UNIVERSITY CORPORATION
FOR ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH
Ms. Balstad. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research or UCAR, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify before you today.
I am a trustee of UCAR and a special research scientist at
Columbia University.
UCAR is consortium of over 100 research institutions that
operate the national center for research on atmospheric
research.
My testimony regarding the NSF begins with a cautionary
tale. Last December Richard Anthes, UCAR's president, was on a
team to evaluate China's national science foundation. His
experience was eye opening. The budget of the Chinese NSF has
increased by over 20 percent annually since its founding in
1986. In 1949 there were about 600 Chinese citizens working on
scientific research and development. By 2009 there were 51
million. China now has the world's fastest super computer and
its students have the world's top scores in reading,
mathmatics, and science.
China is investing in R&D and education in the same
aggressive manner as the United States did decades ago, and
because of this investment over the past several decades we
have created the world's largest and most successful economy.
If we abandon that approach to economic growth at the same time
as our competitors are adopting it the consequences could be
dire.
For evidence of how NSF effects the economy and jobs just
one example look at Sergey Brin, cofounder of Google, who began
his work on search engines with the support of an NSF graduate
fellowship.
On behalf of UCAR I urge you to support the full fiscal '12
requests of 7.8 billion for NSF.
NASA's new and ongoing satellites as recommended by the
National Academy of Sciences decadal survey are also essential
both to support national priorities and to respond to
catastrophic natural hazards which are on the rise here and
globally.
Given the critical importance of these satellite
measurements to the private sector, to state and local
government, managers, and decision makers, to first responders,
and to scientific research, the nation must not allow any
further delay in the deployment of these resources.
On behalf of UCAR I urge the committee to fund the full
fiscal '12 request of $5 billion for NASA science mission
directorate.
NOAA operations save lives, protect valuable natural
resources and property and serve many industrial sectors.
Despite these critical functions NOAA faces an uncertain
budgetary outlook year after year.
Now in addition to a request for fiscal '12 funding that
the below the fiscal '11 levels NOAA is having difficulty in
getting approval to organize itself in a manner that is
responsive to the needs of the nation. We must have sustained
information to deal with changes and long-term weather patterns
that cause droughts and floods, hurricanes, and blizzards, and
effect all aspects of the economy, including national security.
On behalf of UCAR I ask that the committee allow NOAA to
implement the planned no cost reorganization that will provide
this country with a much needed climate service. Further I ask
the committee to fund NOAA at least at the fiscal '12 request
level of $5.5 billion. This will allow NOAA to make progress in
replacing aging weather satellites with a joint polar satellite
system. The economy and the safety of the American people
depend upon having access to accurate weather information.
Mr. Chairman, we know that we all must become more
economical, and I believe that we are up to making the
sacrifices that task entails, but I urge the committee to give
high priority to funding for science agencies that support our
nation's R&D, that promote economic and job growth, and that
contribute to the continued global competitiveness of our
nation.
I thank members of the committee for your stewardship of
the nation's science enterprise.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony. On the
reorganization that has not been authorized yet, and I think
Mr. Hall is looking at that. I think they are going to have
hearings and I think that is the one hang up.
Ms. Balstad. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. But I appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I want to thank you and I thought the numbers
relative to China were startling. You know, we get distracted a
lot. We spend a lot of time on earmarks, which are about half
of one percent, and we are focused on these spending cuts,
which is a one and a half percent proposition at the maximum,
neither of which solves our problems. You know, our tax rates
are at the lowest they have been since 1950.
Ms. Balstad. Yes.
Mr. Fattah. But you were right, our competition is moving
quickly and we are going to have to really think hard and long
on all of this.
So thank you very much.
Ms. Balstad. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. That is a very depressing figure about the 51
million.
Ms. Balstad. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. Association of Science-Technology Centers,
Anthony Bud Rock, executive director. Did I skip over one? Oh,
I did. Well, it does not matter, unless you are catching a
plane and since you are there just go ahead. Go ahead, you look
like you are looking at your watch, come on, go ahead.
Mr. Fattah. You can come up together if you like.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

ASSOCIATION OF SCIENCE-TECHNOLOGY CENTERS

WITNESS

ANTHONY ``BUD'' ROCK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ASSOCIATION OF SCIENCE-
TECHNOLOGY CENTERS
Mr. Rock. Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah, it is nice
to see you again and thank you for the opportunity to come
before you on what I know is a long day for you to speak on
behalf of the education programs in the National Science
Foundation, NOAA, and NASA.
My name is Bud Rock and I am the chief executive officer of
the Association of Science-Technology Centers, ASTC. And ASTC
is a non-profit organization of science centers that are
providing quality education experiences to students and
families and further in public engagement with science among
increasingly diverse audiences. We have nearly 600
institutional members in 62 countries, we collectively count
about 82 million visits to your institutions annually. In the
United States alone your constituents are passing through the
doors of your science centers about 60 million times a year and
they are getting intriguing educational science activities when
they do.
The message contained in my written statement focuses on
the vital role of the science centers and science museums in
providing a substantive high quality educational offering in
STEM education for students, for teachers, and for the general
public.
I am here before you today because the subcommittee is
vital in this STEM education debate. The subcommittee provides
40 percent of all of the federal support for STEM education
through competitive merit based and appropriately mission
focused programs at NSF, NOAA, and NASA.
In fiscal year 2010 the informal science education program
with the National Science Foundation would receive $68.14
million under the administration's request and the education
programs at NOAA and at NASA would receive $20.84 million and
$138.4 million respectively.
In defense of the modest resources designated for these
programs let me simply acknowledge that there is a universal
call in this country for improvements in STEM education, in
student learning, and in teacher training to enable this nation
to retain and sharpen its competitive edge, that is exactly why
90 percent of our science centers are providing curriculum
oriented classes and demonstrations. Ninety percent are
offering safe and productive science based outreach programs
outside the school day. Almost 85 percent are providing teacher
training in a range of forms from formal certifications in
science teaching onward. Seventy-five percent are offering
curriculum support materials for their school districts and
beyond, and many of these programs and tools are made possible
by the grants provided by NSF, NOAA, and NASA.
Mr. Chairman, as a proud Virginia resident myself I was
informed of a story that you recounted some time back about
going to a school in your district one evening to attend a
science fair and the event was taking place on the same evening
as a major televised sporting event, I think it may have been
the NCAA.
Mr. Wolf. I think it was the World Series.
Mr. Rock. Okay. I heard that it may have been George Mason
in the final four, but----
Mr. Wolf. No, it was the World Series and Dr. Ballard was
speaking at Rachel Carson Intermediate. No, it was the World
Series.
Mr. Rock. If I understand correctly from what I have heard
is you yourself remarked that despite a major sporting event at
that time the parking lot was filled and there was standing
room only with students and teachers. Yes, remarkable, the
excitement and the enthusiasm associated with a science-based
activity.
And frankly, Mr. Chairman, this nation needs to find a way
to bottle that and to distribute it over the entire country
exactly what you observed that evening.
I think the hands on experiential opportunities that we are
providing inspire you, they inspire their interest, they
inspire them toward careers, and they prepare them for the
future of national prosperity and security.
I deeply appreciate that this subcommittee and your
colleagues have a nearly impossible task to allocate the scarce
resources between so many worthy and important functions.
Somehow we have to get both our fiscal house in order and your
suggestions today have been heard and understood and will be
taken back and we still need to invest in these programs that
guide our children and their children toward a brighter future.
Let me just simply say that I hope that this subcommittee
will take into account the support that has already been
provided, the resources that already have been provided to
these federal agencies and that will help to meet the goals to
the inspirational hands on activities that science centers and
science museums can provide.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear and I am
happy to take any questions you might have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I think almost everything has been said.
Everyone has not said it, but thank you for your contribution.
Mr. Rock. Thank you so much.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you again.
And again I apologize for jumping ahead. The International
Research Institute for Climate Society of the Earth Institute
at Columbia University.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

THE EARTH INSTITUTE AT COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

WITNESS

DR. STEPHEN E. ZEBIAK, DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH
INSTITUTE FOR CLIMATE AND SOCIETY, THE EARTH INSTITUTE AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY
Mr. Zebiak. Thanks. Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member Fattah,
thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today.
My name is Steve Zebiak and I am the director general of
the International Research Institute for Climate and Society,
we call ourselves IRI for short, we are based at Columbia
University.
My remarks concern international climate research and are
relevant to the proposed fiscal year 2012 NOAA budget.
Last fall Medhin Reda who farms about one acre of land in
Adi Ha, Ethiopia was able to afford crop insurance for the
first time. She bought what is called index insurance, an
innovation created by the IRI in partnership with Oxfam
America, Swiss Re insurance, and local banks in Ethiopia.
What makes it affordable is that it is indexed to climate
conditions verifiable by rain gauges and satellite remote
sensing. Farmers everywhere are subject to the vagaries of
climate variations. With this innovation the poor can obtain
some of the protection which previously has been available only
in rich countries.
Insurance is a form of adaptation to climate which is
basically the core business of your program. Our immediate
concern is with natural variations like El Nino and La Nina,
but our products apply to all climate variations whatever their
causes.
Savvy American farmers think about global markets and
global competitors. They tell us that they are keenly
interested in climate impacts on their competitors around the
world and on export markets. The worldwide rise in food prices
fed in good measure by climate calamities like last summer's
heat wave in Russia have potent implications for our own
security interests.
Over the past 15 years the IRI has built a unique
capability to address the need for climate information of both
average American citizens and those engaged with our national
security throughout the world. Our work is about understanding
tomorrow's environment and creating strategies to deal with it.
IRI helps developing countries understand and adapt to the
climate variations that can imperil people by flooding,
contaminating water supply, increasing vector-borne diseases
such as malaria and other climate sensitive diseases like
meningitis.
Our program is the main part of NOAA's international
climate program and, the only federal program in the climate
area doing this kind of work and providing this kind of
information. We are proud of your humanitarian contributions,
but also proud of the value of what we do for policymakers at
all levels.
Mr. Chairman, we are concerned that the fiscal year 2012
NOAA budget proposes to cut support for this valuable
international climate activity by two-thirds, thus jeopardizing
its future. We believe that it is in the United States'
national interest to continue the existing international
climate activity for some of the reasons that I have already
mentioned, and urge the committee to restore funding for it to
its current levels.
Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you. You ought to tell your local
newspaper, the New York Times, they ought to get with the
program though. They never say anything constructive on this.
People can come and say we need funds. I want to fund every
single entity that has testified today. Maybe there is one or
two that I might take difference with on an earlier panel.
Unless we ask how are we going to pay for it; $14 trillion of
debt, last month we had the largest deficit we have ever had
for one month.
Now I may not have the best approach. Five years ago I put
in a bill. We had 140 co-sponsors, for a bipartisan commission
that put every single thing on the table. I was the author of
this Iraq Study Group, Baker-Hamilton. We cannot get this
administration to come forward.
And I hope it does not make Mr. Fattah uncomfortable,
because I was equally critical of the Bush administration. I am
going to put all those letters in the record. I am going to
give Mr. Fattah copies of them all so he can see, because there
is a normal inclination that I respect, that when someone is
going after your team, your administration, you sort of feel
this obligation to sort of defend them.
I did in the past, but for a whole period of time, and when
you get the printed record of this testimony you will be able
to see the letters that I sent to Paulson and to the last
administration who frankly did nothing. They did nothing.
But now we are at a tipping point and we really have to
come forward to say okay, we are going to fund these programs,
but here is how we are going to do it.
Also I have not signed the no tax pledge. I am not
intimidated by anybody. I am going to do whatever I have to do.
I do not like to raise taxes. I do not want to raise taxes. I
want to see how we can cut first. But, I also want to deal with
the entitlements. The Simpson Bowles Commission is sort of a
grand compromise. A grand compromise that not everyone really
feels totally comfortable with. But you know that they are kind
of moving in the right direction. So we really are going to
have to get it out of this administration to participate with
us.
I mean the President has a much more powerful office than I
have. I can say from my congressional district that I am going
to support the Simpson Bowles Commission. He certainly can say
it. He is much more articulate than I am. He can give his
better speech. I have been a lifelong stutterer, I could not
compare speaking to as well as he does, but I know in my heart
of hearts that I cannot kid myself. I cannot pretend that there
is something else out there. I know the realities. It is kind
of like when you go take a test. A doctor says this is what the
MRI has demonstrated your problem is, and we cannot hide from
it. At the State of the Union message the President had an
opportunity to lead the way that President Reagan did on a
couple of things in a bipartisan way and to sort of force the
Congress. I believe, and I want to say on behalf of the
leadership of my side, I believe that John Boehner is committed
deeply to deal with this issue. To deal with the issue of the
debt and the deficit by dealing with the entitlements, but we
have got to do both. So I think we can. That is what leadership
is about.
Maybe some people will be defeated by it. I do not know
what is going happen. We do not know where this is going to go.
My sense is though that the American people are actually ahead
of the political leadership on both sides of the aisle and on
both sides of the Senate.
So when you tell the editorial board of the New York Times
that we want to do these things, let's come together again in a
bipartisan way, because you know we can make points. It is
easy, this place is a point making place. Do we want to make a
difference? And if we want to make a difference for the future
for the programs we have got to come together in a bipartisan
way. There is no other way. It is impossible to do this if it
does not have the support, not of a majority of everybody on
both sides of the aisle, but a majority of both sides of the
aisle whereby we basically link arms together and say okay,
this is a tough vote. But we are going to do it because we
think we want to fund the sciences, and to protect the poor.
You got to though say then what will your recommendation be and
how will you deal with the issue of Medicare, Medicaid, and
Social Security?
And I appreciate your testimony. I am glad you are helping
the third world like in Ethiopia.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Let me try to make a difference.
The chairman and I voted the same way on the question of
trade relationships with China years ago. We share a lot more
in common than one might suspect, but that is because we are
both from Philadelphia originally.
So here is the deal. I was here, we balanced the budget
under Clinton, we made some tough cuts, we raised some taxes on
the highest income people, and we balanced the budget. And that
shows that as a matter of science it can be done again. That
is, it was done once, it can be done again, and it cannot be
repeated unless it is done in the same way. That is, if it is
done in a bipartisan way, there is going to have to be a
balance between new revenues and cuts.
And David Walker said that yesterday. I think that what is
called the Simpson Bowles Commission is in fact the President's
commission on debt appointed by the President under an
executive order after supporting a bipartisan bill in the
Senate that failed.
So the President does have a responsibility to lead and I
believe that with Speaker Boehner we have the team to make this
happen. We just have to kind of get past the distractions
first, and we spend a lot of time on distractions.
One and a half percent of the spending cut, the $61
billion, will not solve our problem. Cutting earmarks, half of
one percent, will not solve our problem. We have to have a
comprehensive approach. I support Simpson Bowles, or the
President's Commission. It is not enough. It does not balance
the budget. It still leaves us in the hole. We need to take a
non-incremental approach to getting our fiscal house in order
because we actually have more important work to do, which is to
compete in a global economy.
So I want to support any comprehensive approach to solve
this problem. I am even going to offer my own next week. I
think there is a lot more support among the members of the
Congress to get this resolved. There have to be points made on
the political side, we are going through that now, but I
believe that over the horizon we will have an opportunity to
resolve this matter.
Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah, thank you very much for
your testimony.
The next, University of Virginia, Tom Skalak, Ph.D. from
Charlottesville. Good to see you. Two of my kids went to UVA.
----------                              --
--------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

RESEARCH AND EDUCATION

WITNESS

TOM SKALAK, PH.D. PROFESSOR, BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING & VICE PRESIDENT
FOR RESEARCH, UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
Mr. Skalak. That was a good choice.
Chairman Wolf and other members of the subcommittee thank
you for the opportunity to provide this testimony today.
As the vice president for research at the University of
Virginia, a public university located in Charlottesville,
Virginia, I speak on behalf of our Research and Education
Programs. Founded by Thomas Jefferson to serve the entire
nation, UVA sustains the ideal of developing leaders who shape
the nation. UVA conducts science and engineering research that
helps maintain our national economic strength and competitive
edge in the world. In 2010 UVA received over $276 million in
federal funding for research.
I urge the committee to support the President's proposed
increases for the federal science agencies including the
National Science Foundation, NIST, the Department of Commerce's
Economic Development Administration, and science aeronautics
and space technology within NASA.
Last year UVA received over $29 million in NSF grants to
conduct research that improves our nation's wireless networks
and enhances cyber security, develops new heating technologies
that moves a nation toward energy independence, revolutionizes
tissue regeneration of injured nerves and ligaments helping to
reduce health care costs, and increases the number of women and
minority students in STEM fields.
NSF is at the forefront of efforts to insure that
scientific research is transformed into products that help the
lives of Americans.
My own NSF partnership for innovation grant created a
global network linking universities and industries in
bioengineering and biomedical engineering, enhancing innovation
in this important American industry, one of the few in which
exports greatly exceed imports.
UVA in partnership with the Coulter Foundation is bringing
discoveries to the marketplace. An independent audit showed
this year that our proof of concept funds produced a 5 to 1
return on investment after five years and a 42 to 1 return on
investment for the top 10 percent of our portfolio projects
spinning out new small businesses and creating new jobs in the
United States. This high performance and proof of concept
research makes a difference and offers a model that could guide
enhanced federal funding for proof of concept programs
nationwide.
UVA supports the proposed increases for NIST and the EDA
because their technology innovation program and regional
innovation program promote collaboration between universities
and industries. A successful example of this is the
Commonwealth Center for Advanced Manufacturing, a partnership
between UVA, Virginia Tech, John Tyler Community College, and
industry partners. This partnership has created a research
facility at a new Rolls Royce manufacturing site in an
impoverished region of Prince George County. This center will
spur manufacturing innovation that will improve U.S.
competitiveness.
I would like to thank the committee, particularly Chairman
Wolf for your support of the federal science and engineering
agencies and I hope that you will choose to support these
strategic increases for the agencies. They lie at the heart of
the U.S. innovation system which is the envy today of the rest
of the world, they are the foundation of American
competitiveness over the long term, they represent the
pioneering American spirit for exploring new frontiers, and
they are the only way to insure America's future, economic
strength, and security.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, I appreciate your testimony very much.
Thank you. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I concur with the chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Again, thanks for coming.
Mr. Skalak. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. All right. The last witness is the Consortium of
Social Science Associations, Howard Silver. Dr. Silver,
welcome.
----------

Friday, March 11, 2011.

CONSORTIUM OF SOCIAL SCIENCE ASSOCIATIONS

WITNESS

HOWARD J. SILVER, PH.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CONSORTIUM OF SOCIAL
SCIENCE ASSOCIATIONS
Mr. Silver. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. It says in the Bible ``the last shall be first,''
and so you are it.
Mr. Silver. Yes, I appreciate it.
I am Howard Silver, I am the executive director of the
Consortium of Social Science Associations or COSSA. For almost
30 years now we have been promoting attention to and federal
funding for the social, behavioral and economic sciences.
Our first executive director you just heard from, Dr.
Balstad, who is also the person who hired me 28 years ago when
she wanted somebody with a pair of young legs to run around the
Hill, and I understand that completely 28 years later.
I am here today to talk about three agencies, the NSF, the
National Institute of Justice, and the Bureau of Justice
Statistics. I usually also talk about the Census Bureau and the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, but this year I would just like to
associate COSSA with the previous testimony from Dr. Reamer.
With regard to NSF, we support the President's fiscal 2012
request as many of my predecessors up here today.
I do want to talk about the role of SBE directorate. As you
know, NSF is very important to the social, behavioral and
economic sciences, and as I have heard over the years most
discussions of scientific discovery leading to innovation--we
hear a lot about activities in the physical and natural
sciences and engineering, and I would like to argue that two of
the most important discoveries in innovation came from research
in the SBE sciences.
In the mid 1980's NSF made a commitment to fund the
National Center for Geographic Information Analysis at three
universities. The basic research supported has evolved into the
multi-billion dollar geographic information systems industries.
These systems are now applied by states, counties, and
localities for many purposes from planning to disaster response
evidenced in New York City during the 9/11 attacks. GIS has
also become the backbone of crime activities such as CompuStat
that played such an important role in the crime reduction
America has experienced in the past two decades.
The second you heard about yesterday, that basic economic
research has helped win Nobel prizes for some people as well as
creating the maximizing of the option of the spectrum, and as
you know NSF in the 2012 budget is involved in that as well.
I would also like to say that the other day I was at the
Press Club and there was a presentation that included people
from IBM and Microsoft talking about cyber security which I
know you spent some time on yesterday, and the emphasis there
was on the technology will only go so far, we really have to
pay attention to the human element, and so in the 2012 budget
NSF is asking for cyber security funds that include the SBE
sciences as well.
And then with regard to the earlier talk about the tsunami
and the earthquake, a lot of the research undergirding some of
the things I think Congressman Farr talked about on risk
communication, disaster response come from the SBE sciences.
With regard to NIJ and BJS we are delighted with the new
leadership--research scientists now leading the agency. Because
these agencies have been underfunded for so long we ask the
subcommittee to fund them at the fiscal '11 request level and
also endorse Assistant Attorney General Robinson's request over
the past few years for a 3 percent set aside of OJP funds for
research and statistics.
I want to thank the chairman for helping us present a
briefing in the middle of February on crime and imprisonment,
how to reduce both, which included former Attorney General
Thornburgh and former police commissioner Bill Bratton, and I
brought the journal that helped us do this that has the
comments from Thornburgh and Bratton as well as James Q.
Wilson.
The NIJ has a new NAS report and John Laub the director is
moving quickly to implement its recommendations, former
Attorney General Meese, former D.C. police commissioner and now
Philadelphia Commissioner Charles Ramsey were on the committee.
The results brought a lot of attention to the relationship
between research and practice. NIJ has been funding these hard
rated executive sessions for years that included a number of
police commissioners including D.C.'s Cathy Lanier.
With regard to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jim Lynch
is moving to implement the 2009 academy report and to upgrade
the national crime victimization survey to making it more
useful.
And with that I thank you.
But before I go I would like to say one other thing. I was
here yesterday and I strongly endorse the subcommittee's field
trip to Pat's Steaks in Philadelphia. You may remember from
last year my wife is from Philadelphia and with due respect to
you two gentlemen, the best thing to come out of Philadelphia
besides her is cheesesteaks.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much for your testimony, we
appreciate it.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. I want to thank the chairman for conducting
this hearing. And again, just so everyone knows, these
statements, the complete statements are in the record. It is
very important that we have a record so that when the
subcommittee takes action, the record is clear. But the
chairman has been here throughout and I have learned a lot from
our witnesses.
I agree with the associate attorney general's request for
the evidence-based approach in the three percent set aside. I
think that is critically important.
I thank the chairman and look forward to continuing our
work as we go towards getting our bill together. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Great, thank you. Thank you very much, thank you
all the witnesses.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


