- DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  NITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, and Miles Taylor,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 2

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
Department of Homeland Security..................................    1
U.S. Customs and Border Protection...............................  163
U.S. Coast Guard.................................................  277

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas               DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas         LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey NITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                    JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, and Miles Taylor,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 2

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
Department of Homeland Security..................................    1
U.S. Customs and Border Protection...............................  163
U.S. Coast Guard.................................................  277

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

66-893                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\       NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia             PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia              NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                    ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama         JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri            JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                  ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho           DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas         MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida             LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana              SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas               JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana         CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California             STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                  SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio          BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                  ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                 MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida          BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
----------
\1\Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Wednesday, March 2, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

WITNESS

HON. JANET NAPOLITANO, SECRETARY, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY

Opening Statement: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The hearing is called to order.
I would like to welcome everyone to our first scheduled
hearing for the year. It is an honor for me to chair this
Subcommittee, and also to welcome some new Members to the
Subcommittee who are still, I think, making their way in. Thank
you for being here, and welcome to the Subcommittee.
Today we welcome Secretary Napolitano to what marks her
third appearance before the Subcommittee. Madam Secretary, we
thank you for being here, and I look forward to hearing your
testimony as part of the President's fiscal year 2012 budget
request for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
Madam Secretary, as you know, the threats facing our
country have never been as persistent and as diverse as they
are today. In fact, recently you testified before the Senate
that in some ways the threat facing us is at its most
heightened state since the 9/11 attacks. This past year we have
seen intensified terrorist activity, including new threats to
aviation and several home-grown plots. Furthermore, the cartel-
fueled violence in Mexico continues to cast a lengthy shadow
over the Southwest Border and even claimed the life of an ICE
agent 2 weeks ago. And certainly our thoughts and prayers go
out to the family of Special Agent Zapata.
In light of such challenges, the importance of the
Department's work cannot be overemphasized. This is especially
true as we approach the tenth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks
later this year. That is precisely why H.R. 1, the full-year
continuing resolution passed by the House just a week and a
half ago, fully funds all frontline operation and essential
personnel, including Border Patrol agents, ICE agents, Coast
Guard personnel, intelligence officers, and other key
employees. In fact, the funds provided in H.R. 1, combined with
fiscal year 2010 supplemental funds, enable the Department of
Homeland Security to actually increase the number of Border
Patrol agents beyond the minimum 20,500 agents to reach the
target of 21,370 agents by the end of fiscal year 2011.
As we work to enact a responsible FY 2011 appropriation for
Department of Homeland Security, we are mindful both of our
critical national security needs and our government's mounting
fiscal crisis. Even in the name of security, we can no longer
afford to simply throw money at programs without tangible
results. We must carefully align funding to mission
requirements and be able to show the American people how every
single dollar is making our Nation safer and more secure. This
alignment of funding to results will be the mantra of this
Subcommittee under my Chairmanship.
This brings us to the substance of the Department's fiscal
year 2012 budget request, which includes some fairly austere
and reasonably balanced proposals. But these virtues are,
unfortunately, outweighed by the budget's substantially
inadequate justification for the cost of disaster relief, for
phony offsets in the form of increased fees that have yet to be
enacted, and the undefined reductions to operational budgets.
In total, your budget request ignores an estimated $4.9 billion
in known disaster relief costs, relies upon $650 million in
aviation security and custom fee revenues that have yet to
materialize, and proposes more than $615 million in reductions
from the Department's operational components through so-called
administrative savings or efficiencies that are not clearly
itemized in the Department's budget justifications.
Madam Secretary, at a time of record deficits and mounting
debt, the first thing we need from the administration and each
and every department and agency across the Federal Government
is ``truth-in-budgeting.''
Having said that, I am sincerely pleased that your budget
pledges to cut costs. It limits administrative overhead,
promotes efficiency, and it places priority on frontline
operations. And these are the priorities of this Subcommittee
as well. But these promises will be little more than rhetoric
if the Department does not live up to its fiscal
responsibilities and follow through on its legislative
proposals.
The Department of Homeland Security cannot operate in a
world as it would like to be; instead, it must follow the law
as it is written. This assertion not only applies to the budget
realities I have just outlined but also to areas where this
administration has been reluctant to fully engage, such as
immigration enforcement, REAL ID, and a biometric exit solution
for US-VISIT. These are mandates the Department of Homeland
Security must plan for, budget for, and perform.
While I realize the enormity of this obligation, it is a
duty the American people are counting on you to fulfill, and
there is no room for failure. We must find a way to balance our
limited resources across our competing priorities and numerous
vulnerabilities in order to confront every threat with tenacity
and with purpose.
Madam Secretary, I know you have a tough, often thankless,
job. That is precisely why we are relying upon you to explain
how this budget moves our Nation's security forward and does so
in a way that is fiscally responsible and well justified. We do
thank you for being here today and look forward to our
discussion and your budget request in greater detail as we move
forward.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Aderholt. Before I turn to the Secretary for her
statement, let me recognize the distinguished Ranking Member
and then the former chairman of the Subcommittee, Mr. Rogers,
for any remarks that he may have.
Mr. Price.

Opening Statement: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to congratulate
you on your appointment to lead this Subcommittee. You and I
have worked together on the Appropriations Committee for years,
and you served on this Subcommittee in the early years. So we
welcome you back.
Since this Subcommittee was established under Mr. Rogers'
leadership, the Chairman and Ranking Member have always striven
to do our work professionally and collaboratively and in a very
bipartisan fashion. I understand you intend to continue that
tradition, and I very much look forward to a strong working
relationship.
Madam Secretary, you are no stranger to this Subcommittee
either, of course, and I have enjoyed our working relationship
over these last two years when I was privileged to serve as
Chairman. We welcome you back to kick off our hearings on
Homeland Security's fiscal year 2012 budget and a review of its
ongoing activities.
This past year has been one of major challenges with
multiple attempted attacks on our homeland beginning with the
attempted Christmas Day bombing, followed by the Times Square
incident, and most recently the air cargo threat from Yemen.
You have been confronting continued violence associated with
transnational drug cartels along our Southwest Border resulting
in the deaths of both Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and
Immigrations and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agents, the
challenges resulting from the Deepwater Horizon catastrophe,
and the constant onslaught of cyber attacks on our government
networks and critical infrastructure. So I thank you for your
constant vigilance in facing so many competing challenges head
on, especially as the threats to our homeland have diversified
and proliferated.
The 2012 discretionary budget for the Department of
Homeland Security is $43.2 billion, about $400 million above
the 2010 enacted level, but 1.4 percent less than the 2011
budget request. Just as we are doing elsewhere in the Federal
Government, you have been asked to do more with fewer
resources.
Your budget includes many examples where administrative and
overhead costs have been reduced, where programs have been
trimmed, stretched out, or suspended to achieve cost savings
without significantly degrading critical security requirements.
By making these reductions, you were able to preserve essential
frontline security operations, for which I applaud you.
I am pleased to see that you continue to prioritize the
identification and deportation of convicted criminals, a
program that originated after I challenged the Department to
prioritize the identification and removal from our country of
illegal immigrants who have been convicted of serious crimes.
Your budget expands on this priority.
Similarly, I am pleased to see that the budget request
includes a significant increase in Coast Guard personnel for
marine safety and environmental response following the
Deepwater Horizon disaster, as well as funds for 11 maritime
safety and security teams, recognizing that this Subcommittee
disagreed with the 2011 request to decommission four of these
teams.
Finally, the budget request includes funding specifically
to address the substantial rise in threats from homegrown
terrorists as well as threats from across the globe. This
includes funding within the Customs and Border Protection for
additional targeting efforts, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) for additional aviation and surface
security efforts, and intelligence and analysis for additional
enhancements to our State and local fusion centers to better
manage and coordinate our intelligence-sharing agencies.
So there are many, many items to applaud within this budget
request. I also believe there are some challenges that this
Committee will need to address with your help, and we will need
guidance as we come to grips with these issues.
First, the administration continues to underfund the actual
needs for disaster relief funded through FEMA. The 2012 request
totals $1.8 billion, which is likely to last only halfway
through the fiscal year, requiring a supplemental early next
year.
In addition, FEMA has at least $6 billion in known
catastrophic costs that it must reimburse localities for which
are not factored into this budget request, and about half of
these costs are expected to come to you in 2012. If we know the
costs for ongoing recovery activities associated with large
disasters, then I believe it makes sense to budget accordingly
rather than to assume that Congress can follow behind with
emergency supplemental bills. It is much better for the
administration to present Congress with a workable plan to meet
these disaster relief obligations by budgeting for them.
Otherwise, you are virtually inviting Congress to make
budgetary trade-offs without full vetting and guidance from the
Department, which I am afraid is exactly what is taking place
as we speak as we consider the 2011 continuing resolution for
the remainder of the year.
Second, the budget assumes the collection of $645 million
in additional fee revenues for TSA and CBP. This includes an
additional $1.50 in the fees charged to airlines per passenger
resulting in $590 million in additional revenues and an
additional $55 million in new immigration and aviation
processing fees for Canada, Mexico, and most of the Caribbean
Islands. Both of these fee adjustments require Congress to
change authorizing statutes. We all know these fee proposals
have been languishing with the authorizing committees for years
already, so we are going to need your help in determining how
we deal with the $645 million shortfall in your budget if
Congress does not change these fees for 2012. Alternatively, we
are going to need the administration to work very seriously
with the authorizers to get these proposals enacted.
Finally, I have some reservations about your cuts to
automation and construction accounts in your budget, and I
would be very surprised if you didn't also have some
misgivings.
This Subcommittee has had to fight repeatedly against
irresponsible cuts to the front office, irresponsible cuts for
construction to new DHS headquarters and related lease-
consolidation efforts and to protect your information
technology needs. You and your associates have had to testify
repeatedly about the importance of these requirements. Just
last year we had a very impressive hearing on the cost savings
associated with DHS offices being collocated at St. Elizabeths
or in fewer spaces. We were told, and we were told very
convincingly, that deferring these investments will ultimately
affect frontline operations and will cost us more money in the
long run. I want to make sure we are not being penny wise and
pound foolish with these cuts, and we will welcome your
explanation in this regard.
As we began our hearings to more closely examine the
budget, it is important to note that no program or account will
be off limits to scrutiny. Our obligation is to take a
balanced, realistic approach, to weigh risks carefully, and to
make prudent investments in effective security. Secretary
Napolitano, I have no doubt that you share this point of view,
and I look forward to working again with you this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Aderholt. At this time I would like to recognize the
full Committee Chairman and former chairman of this
Subcommittee Mr. Rogers.

Opening Statement: Chairman Rogers

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And congratulations to
you for assuming that chair. I have a warm spot in my heart for
that chair on this Subcommittee, and this Subcommittee and the
Department. And it is good to be back on the same platform with
my friend David Price. We had a wonderful working relationship
and still do. And we welcome all the new Members of this
Subcommittee.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being with us today.
This marks the eighth anniversary of the Department. I am proud
to say that I was there at the beginning and helped, along with
others, nurse it along, and continue to do so, and I always
wish you and the Department well.
This is truly an historic time. I don't have to tell you
that our Nation has found itself at a crossroads. Over the last
2 years, we have increased discretionary spending by 24
percent, 84 percent if you include the stimulus monies. We are
borrowing 42 cents on every dollar we spend. And so it is time
to get serious, we have to, about reducing spending and putting
a dent in the record-setting deficit that we all abhor.
In that vein, I certainly applaud your efforts to cut costs
and limit administrative overhead. I do have some serious
concerns about the budget request.
While the President has essentially leveled out non-
security spending in his 2012 request, your request is actually
$300 million lower than in fiscal year 2011, marking the first
time the Department has decreased its request from one fiscal
year to another.
There is no question that the Department plays a vital role
in fighting terrorism and keeping our country safe. That is
what it is for. And the brave men and women in our law
enforcement community ought to be commended for the good work
they do, and I do that right now. And that is why, for the past
few years, I have pushed and pushed for you to place a stronger
emphasis on operations in your budgeting.
I am happy to see that you are taking steps in that
direction; however, many of the cost reductions you have noted
in your budget request should be further scrutinized. These
cost-cutting gimmicks only undermine these great pledges to our
men and women on the front lines. The budget proposal simply
ignores some $5 billion in known disaster-relief costs, and
offsets other costs with $650 million in fees that Congress has
yet to approve all these years. If we are going to be serious
about deficit reduction, we have got to stop fudging numbers.
We have got some tough choices, and I look forward to
hearing from you today about the administration's priorities.
As I have said many times, when it comes to the security of the
country, we should spend all the money we can, but not a penny
more. That adage has never been more salient than today when
considering the fiscal and security challenges confronting our
Nation.
In closing, I note that the estimated costs now of the St.
Elizabeths facility has now gone up another $200 million or so.
I asked last year, I think it was, for assurances that the cost
that was projected at that time would be accurate and final,
but it has already gone up another $200 million. We have got to
find a way to discipline that spending. It is good to be with
you and see you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dicks.

Opening Statement: Ranking Member Dicks

Mr. Dicks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to welcome Secretary Napolitano and congratulate
her on the good work that the Department has been doing. I
think it has made a lot of improvements. I was on the
authorizing committee for three terms, and, to put it bluntly,
there was a lot of disorganization at Homeland Security and an
inability to do good procurement work.
The issue I am concerned about--I am not going to get into
this in great detail today, but I would like to have somebody
come up and give me a briefing on this and meet some of your
people--on cybersecurity issues. I have served as chairman and
ranking member of the Defense Subcommittee and on the
Intelligence Committee, and I believe the cybersecurity issue
is one of the top three issues that face our country. And the
Department plays a major part in this on the ``dot.gov'' part
of the equation and working with the private sector. And it is
my understanding, having met with some of the people, I think,
from your Department earlier, that the Department doesn't have
all the authorities that it may need in order to deal with the
private sector effectively. So, again, I welcome you. But I
would like to work this out to arrange it with your office to
get this briefing so we can see it.
[The information follows:]

The subject briefing was provided March 7, 2011.

Also, if you would just in your statement talk a little bit
about the agreement that you and Secretary Gates agreed to. It
is supposed to be a landmark memorandum of agreement. So I
would appreciate if you could mention or talk about that a
little bit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Dicks.

Opening Statement: Secretary Napolitano

Mr. Aderholt. And again, we welcome the Secretary. And we
will turn it over to you for your comments.
Secretary Napolitano. Well, thank you, Chairmen Aderholt,
Price, Rogers, Dicks, and Members of the Committee, for the
opportunity to discuss President Obama's fiscal year (FY) 2012
budget for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). And I
would be happy as well to answer questions about the House
continuing resolution for FY 2011.
The demands on DHS have never been greater. This is
especially true as we remember those at the Department who have
given their lives in service to our mission of securing
America, including most recently Border Patrol Agent Brian
Terry and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
Special Agent Jaime Zapata. Mexico is leading the criminal
investigation into the death of Agent Zapata, and we are
supporting Mexico through a joint Department of Justice/DHS
task force that the Attorney General and I announced 2 weeks
ago. Recently Mexican authorities have apprehended some of the
alleged killers of Agent Zapata, and we are conducting a number
of operations throughout the United States related to the drug
cartels.
I can speak for the entire administration when I say we are
not only saddened by the loss of an agent, but we are outraged
by this act of violence against an officer of the United
States. And make no mistake, justice will be brought to those
involved. We owe nothing less to the memory of Agent Zapata and
to those who are still on the job in Mexico.
Now, the loss of these brave agents is a stark reminder of
the sacrifices made by the men and women of DHS every day. It
also strengthens our resolve to continue to do everything in
our power to protect against, mitigate, and respond to threats,
and to make our Nation more resilient for years to come.
Today's threat picture features adversaries who evolve
quickly and are determined to strike us here at home, from the
aviation system and global supply chain to surface
transportation, to critical infrastructure, to our cyber
networks.
We are leading the administration's unprecedented effort to
strengthen Southwest Border security, coupled with a smart and
effective approach to enforcing immigration laws in the
interior of the country. And we continue to prepare for,
respond to, and recover from disasters of all types.
President Obama's FY 2012 budget for the Department allows
us to continue to meet these evolving threats and challenges by
prioritizing our essential operational requirements while
reflecting an unprecedented commitment to fiscal discipline
that maximizes the effectiveness of every security dollar we
receive. Reflecting the current fiscal environment and building
the FY 2012 budget, all DHS components identified savings
associated with the Department's 33 efficiency review
initiatives, and we cut administration and overhead, including
my own office's budget, by over $800 million. Savings were
realized through efficiencies in acquisition, asset and real
property management, as well as employee vetting and
credentialing, hiring and onboarding, and information
technology. We cut professional services contracts, travel, and
nonmission-critical training. We also delayed construction of
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Offices at the new
DHS headquarters at St. Elizabeths and deferred a number of
office co-locations as well as building maintenance and
enhancements.
My written statement includes a comprehensive list of the
operational priorities in the budget request. Today I would
like to highlight just a few of those priorities for you.
First, preventing terrorism and enhancing security. Now,
this was the founding mission of DHS. It remains our top
priority today. This budget safeguards transportation modes
through a layered detection system, including the deployment of
additional transportation security officers (TSOs), behavioral
detection officers, canine teams, and advanced imaging
technology (AIT) machines at domestic airports, while expanding
watch list vetting through the Secure Flight program and
enhancing screening and targeting of international travelers
before they board U.S.-bound flights through the Immigration
Advisory Program.
This budget also strengthens surface transportation
security by supporting 12 new multimodal Visible Intermodal
Prevention and Response (VIPR) teams, which conduct operations
throughout the transportation sector to prevent potential
terrorist activity. The request also provides funding for the
Securing the Cities program to protect our highest-risk cities
from a radiological or nuclear attack. In addition, the request
makes a significant investment in the National Bio and Agro-
defense Facility (NBAF), which will provide enhanced diagnostic
capabilities to protect our country from foreign animal and
emerging diseases. The request expands support for the national
network of State and local fusion centers to enhance baseline
capabilities and provide local law enforcement with the tools
to address threats in their communities.
To secure and manage our borders, the request continues the
administration's historic border security efforts by supporting
21,320 Border Patrol agents and 21,186 Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) officers, both all-time highs. The budget
includes $242 million for the continued deployment of proven
effective surveillance technology along the highest-trafficked
areas of the Southwest Border to better meet the operational
requirements of our agents on the front lines. For the northern
border, this budget request supports investments in technology
tailored to the maritime and cold-weather environment,
including proven stand-alone technology to provide immediate
operational benefits. And for our Nation's maritime borders,
this budget includes funding to continue the essential National
Security Cutter program and makes historic investments to
recapitalize the Coast Guard's aging assets, including 6 fast
response cutters, 40 response boats, as well as a sizeable
investment in the renovation and restoration of aging shore
facilities.
This budget request also continues the Department's focus
on smart and effective enforcement of our Nation's immigration
laws, while streamlining and facilitating the legal immigration
process.
Building on our record over the past 2 years, the
Department will continue to prioritize the identification and
removal of criminal aliens who pose a threat to public safety,
and target employers who knowingly and repeatedly break the
law. The request enables ICE to fund 33,400 detention beds,
remove more than 200,000 criminal aliens, and deploy Secure
Communities to 96 percent of all jurisdictions nationally in FY
2012, while promoting compliance with work-site-related laws
through criminal prosecution of egregious employers, Form I-9
inspections, and continued expansion and enhancement of the E-
Verify system. The request also funds immigrant integration
efforts, including programs supporting English-language and
citizenship education, and continues the detention reform
efforts currently under way.
To safeguard and secure cyberspace, the budget increases
resources to identify and reduce vulnerabilities in our
Nation's key cyber networks. The request includes significant
investment to expedite the deployment of EINSTEIN 3 to prevent
and detect intrusions on government computer systems, increase
Federal network security of large and small agencies, and
continue to develop a robust cybersecurity workforce to protect
against and respond to cybersecurity threats. The budget also
focuses on combating cyber crime and preventing attacks against
U.S. critical infrastructure.
To ensure resilience to disasters, the budget request
focuses on moving resources out of Washington, D.C., and into
the hands of State and local responders, who are often best
positioned to detect and respond to terrorism, natural
disasters, and other threats, by sustaining Federal funding for
State and local preparedness grants, providing more than $3.8
billion in FY 2012. This funding includes $670 million for
Assistance to Firefighter grants, and that funding includes
$420 million to rehire an estimated 2,300 laid-off firefighters
and retain veteran first responders.
To lead and support essential national and economic
security efforts, this budget expands the Coast Guard's
operational capacity by funding 50,682 military and civilian
positions, and establishes the Coast Guard's first Incident
Management Assistance Team, which will be deployed rapidly to
support incidents of national significance.
The request also continues to support ICE and CBP efforts
and investigative efforts to protect U.S. intellectual property
rights, as well as the Secret Service's state-of-the-art
forensic support to the National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children.
Mr. Chairman, this budget is the culmination of a major
first-of-its-kind effort by the Department through the
Quadrennial Homeland Security Review as well as the Bottom-Up
Review to align our resources with a comprehensive strategy to
ensure a safe, secure, and resilient Homeland, while making an
unprecedented commitment to fiscal discipline.
Mr. Chairman, Representative Price, Members of the
Committee, I want to thank you for this opportunity to testify.
I ask that my full statement be included in the record. I am
happy to address your questions, particularly as they relate to
the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF), to the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) and CBP fees, and to the impact of the FY
2011 H.R.1. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Madam Secretary, for your opening
comments.
[The information follows:]

DISASTER RELIEF FUND

Mr. Aderholt. And certainly FEMA's disaster relief fund is
something I think of concern. FEMA has requested $1.8 billion
in the fiscal year 2012 request for the DRF, and there are no
funds requested for prior-year catastrophic events.
The bottom line is that your fiscal year 2011 budget and
your fiscal year 2012 request do not support these disaster
relief costs for the rest of the year or next, and we would
like to know your plan in regard to that. How will you complete
the year when you are clearly short of required funding for
fiscal year 2011 by $1.6 billion?
Secretary Napolitano. Mr. Chairman, a few, I think, salient
points in response to that.
First, one of the things that we have focused on is going
backward in FEMA and returning funds to the DRF that had
previously been obligated but not used. By that process, we
returned approximately $2 billion to the DRF in FY 2010, and
those efforts continue to be under way.
Secondly, for many, many years, under both Republican and
Democratic administrations, under different majorities in the
Congress, the DRF has been funded by taking a rolling average
of noncatastrophic disasters, in this case a 5-year rolling
average of noncatastrophic disasters, which are disasters that
are less than $500 million, and that average goes into the DRF
base. But because of unpredictability and other factors,
including, for example, years after the fact, the ability to go
back and see what was actually used and to deobligate funds,
the Congress and the administration have relied on
supplementals to support the DRF. I think it is the
administration's intent to come back when there is an
appropriate number and work with the Congress on what a
supplemental would look like for the DRF in accord with
historic practice.
Mr. Aderholt. What is the funding requirement for fiscal
year 2012 for prior-year catastrophic events?
Secretary Napolitano. For prior catastrophic events? It is
hard to say given the deobligation issues. I would say, the
funding requirement is approximately between $2 billion and $3
billion.
Mr. Aderholt. But clearly these costs are not measured in
fiscal year 2012; is that correct?
Secretary Napolitano. They are not in the baseline budget.
That is correct.
Mr. Aderholt. Madam Secretary, as we stated earlier, your
budget request significantly underfunds DRF for 2012 because of
that reason, based on your comments that you foresee that there
will be an emergency request over the next several months for
fiscal year 2012.
Secretary Napolitano. What we anticipate, Mr. Chairman, is
that we would proceed as the DRF has been handled historically,
which is, yes, to finish the fiscal year with supplementals
related to catastrophic disasters.
Mr. Aderholt. And I think the concern is, and we have sort
of been dancing around it, that it is really a ``truth-in-
budgeting'' issue. The historic data shows that the funding for
some of these disasters is in the billions of dollars, and we
know that it will be. So I'm concerned that you are not
bringing that up into the current request, and it really just
comes down to a truth-in-budgeting issue from the beginning I
think. This is a concern to this Subcommittee.
Secretary Napolitano. Mr. Chairman, we are happy to work
with you on the DRF issue. As I said before, the budget has
been written in accord with how the DRF has always been
handled, in part because of the unpredictability of the size of
disasters when a budget is submitted. But we are happy to work
with you. And as I stated, the intent of the administration
would be to seek an appropriate supplemental at the appropriate
time.

AVIATION SECURITY FEE INCREASE: FEASIBILITY IN FY 2012

Mr. Aderholt. Let me move on, because I do know that we
have votes that will be coming up soon. I know you have to be
out later this afternoon for other obligations. So let me move
on to the issue of user fees, aviation security, and Customs.
In the fiscal year 2012 request, it assumes an increase in
the aviation passenger security fees and a change in the COBRA
fee for Customs processing. Given the difficulty in getting
aviation security fee increases and Customs fee changes enacted
in the past, I guess the question that I would pose to you is:
is it realistic to think that your proposals can get
implemented this year?
Secretary Napolitano. Well, we will work with the
authorizers. And, indeed, I have been speaking with the
authorizers about the need for this. But it seems to me, Mr.
Chair, that in this era of fiscal discipline, one of the things
that we ought to be looking at is what is the true cost of an
enplanement security fee, what is the true cost in Customs.
The security fees have not been adjusted for TSA since
2002, and the plain fact of the matter is that we know that
aviation remains a key target of our adversaries. We know that
we have to provide additional security. We know that a small
increase in the security fee enables us to do this and cover
all of the security responsibilities we have against all the
modes of transportation.
So we will work with this Committee; we will work with the
authorizers. But the consequence of not having these fees is
very serious for the operations of this Department. It is
effectively another $600 million out of operations that would
come directly out of the front line.
Mr. Aderholt. So if the fees are not implemented in time,
then how do you foresee filling in that $600-plus million gap?
Secretary Napolitano. First of all, we assumed that they
would not be ready by the beginning of the fiscal year, so the
number that we use is only for the third and fourth quarters of
the fiscal year 2012, in part because there needs to be a
rulemaking associated with the fees. But we have been to this
Congress before. We are here at this Congress again. I think in
this fiscal time, the authorizers are perhaps more receptive to
acknowledging that this should come out of almost a user fee, a
security fee arrangement, as opposed to out of the general tax
base.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, and certainly that is our concern here
on the Subcommittee, and we have discussed this, is the fact
that the reality of these, they may not be implemented in time.
And so that would be something that again we would be concerned
about, and we want to just bring that to your attention.
Let me go to Mr. Price now and turn the mic over to him.

GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN: POTENTIAL IMPACT ON DHS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, the President has a few hours ago signed a
2-week extension of the continuing resolution to keep the
government running. After that it is anybody's guess as to what
extent the new House leadership is interested in responsibly
discharging their duties, or whether they will continue to
insist on slashing domestic programs, which individually and
cumulatively threaten to stall the recovery, while ironically
leaving 88 percent of the budget untouched.
Having said that, many are drawing comparisons to the split
between the Republican Congress in 1995 and President Clinton
on the budget, which led to a government shutdown. The
Department of Homeland Security, of course, was not around when
that happened.
In this uncertain budget requirement, have you been
considering the implications of a budget impasse and a
potential shutdown? What impact would this have, or indeed has
it already had, on DHS?
Secretary Napolitano. Well, I think, Representative Price,
managing a large agency by continuing resolution is
extraordinarily difficult. We are already halfway through the
fiscal year, and you are trying to make plans about how many
agents you have to put where, where your equipment could be,
will you have it, can you fix this, so forth.
In terms of the 2-week extension and the possibility of an
impasse and a shutdown, because we were not around in 1995, we
have been looking at what would be shut down and what would be
exempt. We have made some judgments that are internal to the
Secretary's office right now as to what would stop, what would
be partially stopped, and what would need to continue. I think
it is fair to say that frontline personnel would continue. But
those who support the frontline personnel and enable them to do
their job most effectively, a number of those types of
positions would not be able to be sustained.
The thing I am also concerned about, I must say, is that a
number of our frontline positions are not very well paid:
Border Patrol officers, TSOs in our airports, the ones we
really rely on to be the last line of defense for entry into
the country or protection of an aircraft. Many of our employees
live paycheck to paycheck. And even when you work under a
shutdown scenario, you don't get paid until Congress catches
you up. That is a hardship as well.
So we are hopeful. I am hopeful that this will be worked
out, and that Congress will reach a resolution on fiscal year
2011. I thought I would share that with you.
Mr. Price. Thank you. It does strike one that so many of
your personnel are, in effect, waiting for some kind of
disaster to strike, most obviously in FEMA with natural
disasters. There is a kind of depth of capacity that is
required that is not immediately engaged in an emergency maybe,
but nonetheless needs to be on call at very rapid notice. In
that kind of situation, it strikes me as especially difficult
to discern between essential and less essential personnel, or
emergency and nonemergency personnel.
Secretary Napolitano. Representative Price, you are exactly
right. It is going to be, in some of these areas very, very
difficult to make those judgments. And, again, even for those
who are deemed exempt from a shutdown, they will be undergoing
financial hardship.

H.R. 1: IMPACT ON DHS FUNDING

Mr. Price. Let me, in the limited time I have remaining, go
back to this question of how we fund for emergencies. And there
clearly is an ongoing discussion we need to have here, but I
don't have a hard time concluding that whatever one thinks
about what the initial budget should look like, it is not a
very good practice in the middle of the fiscal year to
cannibalize other DHS accounts to pay for unaccounted-for
costs. In fact, H.R. 1, reduces DHS funding to levels prior to
the 2009 Christmas Day attack to pay for disaster relief. That
is not an ideal situation, to put it mildly, and I don't think
we ought to replicate it in the future.
So I wonder if you could tell us today, what are the
consequences of lowering the boom in this way, halfway through
the fiscal year, by cutting 1 point--$5.65 billion in DHS
activities to make up for the disaster relief shortfall?
Secretary Napolitano. Well, H.R. 1 has some very serious
impacts for the Department. I mean, there are impacts on
counterterrorism. We will cut the number of AIT machines we
were intending to deploy to protect lanes at airports in half.
We will cut the number of explosive trace detection machines
that we could make available by half. We will cut the number of
canine teams by almost two-thirds. This will have an impact on
aviation security.
It does, Mr. Chairman--I think we have a disagreement on
this point, but in my reading of it, 250 ICE agents who are
currently paid for would not be paid for under the H.R. 1. That
is a problem. And we can talk about why that is, but that is
our count. It could reduce FEMA grants by almost $1 billion.
And, as you know, that really will affect State and local
preparedness.
I could go on, but there are very real operational impacts
by H.R. 1 because does not fund the President's requested FY
2011 budget.

DISASTER RELIEF FUND

Mr. Price. We need to have an ongoing discussion about the
normal practice for disaster funding and including it into the
budget. I don't perceive any disagreement at all about the dire
consequences of lowering the boom in this way halfway through
the fiscal year. That is what I wanted to get you to elaborate
on, and I would invite you to elaborate further for the record.
Before my time expires, though, let me ask the obvious
remaining question. Does this mean we will be expecting a
supplemental from you? Would you expect that you would be
submitting a disaster relief supplemental sometime later this
year?
Secretary Napolitano. Representative Price, as I stated
earlier, the budget was planned based on the historical
practice, which is, yes, you fund the base, and then you seek a
supplemental. So the answer is yes. And we would work with the
Committee on that.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Madam Secretary, you mentioned the ICE
agents, and I am forced to respond to that, because H.R. 1
actually does provide an increase to ICE above FY 2010 based
upon technical budget assistance that your staff provided the
Committee. H.R. 1 sustains all ICE agents, especially those
deployed along the Southwest Border, and supports the same
33,400 bed funding that it did in fiscal year 2010. In fact,
H.R. 1 actually increases the numbers for CBP, ICE, and the
Coast Guard above the fiscal year 2010 level, and sustains the
funding for TSA operational functions and all the intelligence
officers across the Department. So I did want to point that
out.
Now I would like to recognize the full Chairman, the former
chairman of this Subcommittee, Mr. Rogers for questions.

AVIATION SECURITY FEE INCREASE: JUSTIFICATION FOR FY 2012

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a note about the proposed fee increase. There you go
again. We have been facing this for years. Every year, whomever
the Secretary was always comes in with this fee increase,
knowing that Congress is not going to do it, and we won't do
it. And we don't know yet what you would do to replace that big
$600 million hole, and my information is that your budget
request assumes that that fee would be in place for all of 2012
to produce $589,940,000, not the last quarter but the whole
year. That is the justifications that I have seen.
Secretary Napolitano. Mr. Chairman, first of all, I think
in response to the Chairman's last comment, I believe our
staffs need to get together. There clearly is a strong
difference of opinion as to what H.R. 1 does to ICE agents.
With respect to the fee, Mr. Chair, it seems to me that in
an era of fiscal restraint or fiscal discipline, or whatever we
want to call it, we all know we have a tough fiscal time. And
this is a dire situation. To continue to come back, as I now
have, the third Secretary, and say we need to have a security
fee for enplanement that is commensurate with the cost of
providing the security, to say that the fee is a no-go from the
outset, to me, means that the general taxpayer has to pick up
the cost or the income generated.
Now, the airlines have not experienced any deleterious
impact by imposing fees to check baggage or to buy a Coke on an
airplane. And it seems to me that, at this particular juncture,
where the Federal budget is under stress, resuscitating this
idea as a real idea that makes sense from a policy and a fiscal
perspective is the right thing to do. We will work with the
authorizers on that. I have already done that. And we want to
work with this Committee on it. But right now we are stuck with
a fee that in no way covers the actual costs of the service we
are providing.
Mr. Rogers. Well, it has been proposed every year since I
have been chairman of the Subcommittee, I think, virtually
every year, and we always turn it down. And I don't see any
change in that this time.
Secretary Napolitano. Well, this is the first year, Mr.
Chairman, respectfully, that we have been in this kind of a
fiscal situation. So if I might respectfully request,
everything deserves a fresh look, and this does as well.

TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION: PERSONNEL CAP

Mr. Rogers. Well, whatever the Ways and Means Committee or
whomever does, we have to find $600 million. It is a plain
fact. And we can't rely upon this fee being authorized, because
it never has been, and it has been tried year after year.
But I wanted to move on to something else. I have been a
proponent on this Subcommittee all along of trying to utilize
electronics and equipment and mechanization to the maximum to
try to help us with the personnel costs of TSA. And you have
pushed that, too. But I don't see us making much headway. I
think the employment level at TSA is now at 52,269. I remember
when we put a cap on the employment levels at TSA a few years
ago at 45,000 just for screeners. And I don't see much impact
mechanization or using of equipment and machinery is doing us
much good in reducing the personnel at TSA. I know the airports
I fly through, I see a lot of personnel not doing anything, and
I think that is the universal thing that practically all of us
would agree to.
In H.R. 1, we reintroduce the FTE levels at 46,000 in an
attempt to prompt you to more closely examine your
requirements. And I know that we are placing some new machines
in out there that are going to require probably more personnel,
but I don't see us saving personnel on the other side of that
equation. What do you say about a cap again of 46,000 in TSA?
Secretary Napolitano. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have some real
problems with that for several reasons. One is I don't know
where the 46,000 came from. It could be 47-: it could be 48-.
But second, once this Congress sets a cap, it is like
setting our security fee in 2002; getting that changed, no
matter the circumstances, can be very, very difficult.
And, number three, as you have noted, we are now installing
AIT machines. The threat in aviation is different than it was
several years ago. It is different in the sense that our
adversaries are now clearly using or trying to use and get onto
planes material that is nonmetallic in nature--powders, gels,
or liquids--that could be used as an explosive. And that means
that we have to move into, and quickly, this next-generation
machinery, the AITs. Our budget supports the personnel
necessary to put 500 more AITs on airport lanes in fiscal year
2011.
And then, last, I think it is important to note that the
security laydown in an airport is not all constituted by TSOs
who you observe there. There are undercover TSOs, there are
behavioral detection TSOs, and there are also individuals who
operate in canine teams in the airports. So there is a whole
mixture of things, different layer of things necessary to
secure the air environment.
So my view is, or my judgment is that, rather than an
arbitrary cap, we work together to make sure that we have got
the right mix of technology and personnel every year necessary
to meet the threats that we have.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I agree with you on that, but I don't
think I have seen enough effort to get technology involved to
replace personnel that in off times during the day at the
airport have nothing to do during the non-peak hours.
Secretary Napolitano. Well, if I might, Mr. Chairman,
again, one of the consequences of H.R. 1 is it cuts in half our
Science and Technology budget. That is the budget that funds,
among other things, the research that we are doing with the
national labs to look at the checkpoint of the future. How do
we get beyond what we have now and get to something that allows
people to keep their shoes on and to carry a large bottle of
water on a plane and so forth? The technology simply doesn't
exist right now to do that or to do it safely. That is in the
research and development part of the budget and--S&T, Science
and Technology, excuse me. Sorry for using acronyms. And that
itself, that whole budget was cut 50 percent in the continuing
resolution.
Mr. Rogers. Well, you are asking for an additional 510
transportation security officers assumedly to be financed by
the fee increase. But an increase of 510 additional officers on
top of what we have, when I see at the airports that I travel
through personnel that could easily handle the new machines
without any increase in personnel at that airport, what do you
say about that?
Secretary Napolitano. Well, I can't speak to what you see
at which airports. All I can say is we know now, with pretty
hard certainty, what it takes to operate an AIT for the number
of hours it needs to be operated in an airport environment, and
our budget and the personnel we request is based on that. It is
actual experience.
Mr. Rogers. Madam Secretary, thank you.
Secretary Napolitano. Thank you, sir.

CYBERSECURITY: AGREEMENT WITH DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Dicks. I know we are short on time here, and we have to
go vote. Tell us about what you are doing on cybersecurity and
what this agreement you reached with Secretary Gates will
accomplish.
Secretary Napolitano. The agreement with Defense Secretary
Gates allows us to co-locate personnel. He has some folks in
our shop; we have some folks in his. More importantly,
Representative Dicks, it enables us to be able to use or have
access to the technological resources of the National Security
Agency. We have people now located there. We have a lawyer with
them, and we have a privacy officer with them, because there
are different rules that apply in the civilian environment than
the military. But the resources of the NSA are key.

CYBERSECURITY: AUTHORITY OVER PRIVATE SECTOR

Mr. Dicks. That is good.
Now, my time is very short. What about authority? Do you
need more authority over the private sector to get them to do
the things necessary to protect themselves? Talking about
utilities, financial institutions, things of that nature, that
could be vulnerable.
Secretary Napolitano. The subject of authorities is
something that we would like to discuss with you. The answer is
we have been working with different committees as a cyber bill
was being prepared, looking at clarifying and improving on the
authorities we do have. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dicks. How does the private sector do on their own? Are
they taking this threat seriously? I understand that $1
trillion has been lost in intellectual property worldwide
because of cyberattacks.
Secretary Napolitano. It----
Mr. Dicks. That is a big deal.
Secretary Napolitano. It is a big, big deal. And I would
say that we have good connectivity with some sectors of the
private sector and not so good with some others. It varies. But
some of the key ones, for example, financial institutions, the
connectivity is very good.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Let me thank you, Madam Secretary. We have a
vote, as you probably know by now. I know you have to leave at
5:00 today.
Secretary Napolitano. 4:45, excuse me, sir, for a 5
o'clock.
Mr. Aderholt. What we are going to do is when we vote,
quickly come back. I know some other Members want to ask a few
questions.
Secretary Napolitano. I will try to keep my answers
shorter.
Mr. Aderholt. I will encourage everyone to hustle back
right after the vote. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Aderholt. Mrs. Lowey, you are recognized.

URBAN AREAS SECURITY INITIATIVE: FUNDING

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
And it is also a pleasure to be with you today. We thank you
for your service and your leadership.
Let me start by saying I appreciate that the fiscal year
2012 request proposes increased funding to the Urban Areas
Security Initiative, the UASI program. However, a $34 million
increase in UASI funding strikes me as insufficient if we are,
in fact, at our most heightened state since 9/11, as you
recently said, and when the program is authorized at $1.3
billion for fiscal year 2012. Given the grave threats we face,
why is the administration request nearly $400 million below the
authorized level for this program?
Maybe I will ask the rest of the questions. That is the
first. Along those lines, UASI funding has continually been
diluted by increasing the number of recipients. What started as
a program for 7 urban areas now serves 64. Every area of the
country deserves funds, I want to make that very clear, but not
from the high-risk program. I attached an amendment to the CR
to limit UASI funding to the top 25 highest-risk regions,
restoring the program to its original intent. So will you
commit once and for all to stop using the UASI program as a
form of DHS pork-barrel spending and limit recipients to only
high-risk, high-density urban areas for which it was dedicated?
Secretary Napolitano. Well, Representative, first of all,
the President's fiscal year 2012 budget for grants maintains
the overall grant level, about $3.8 billion. It also requests
that we be allowed to consolidate grants so that grants can be
used by localities for various purposes. I think we now have 17
different grant programs that have been established over time.
We think that can be compressed to everybody's advantage.
With respect to the UASI or the tiering of high-risk
locales, we have a methodology we use to evaluate risk. As I
mentioned at a hearing earlier, another hearing earlier this
morning, there are risks that you can identify in all areas of
the country. And so one of the things that happens is that,
through formula requirements of the Congress, all areas of the
country get at least some base level for preparedness, for
response, and the like. We will continue to work to refine
that. We will continue to work with the Congress to make sure
the money is going where it will have the most beneficial
effect.
And last, one of the things I would mention is that the
President has requested funding this year for the Securing the
Cities program, which is a program to fund sensors for
radiological or nuclear devices. It is being piloted in New
York, particularly around devising sensors for the tunnels and
the bridges there. And we hope that if the President's fiscal
year 2012 budget is funded, we would be able to add one more
pilot location at a major U.S. city as well.
Mrs. Lowey. Well, let me just say I have been to that
location, and I hope to bring the Chair to New York and perhaps
the airports just to see the money in action. And I am very
impressed with what Commissioner Kelly is doing with that
money. And I am glad that there was wise decision made so that
would be in the budget.
But I do hope you will look at the UASI funding again,
because I want to make it very clear, I am not thrilled about
being ``number one'' as a New Yorker and living in a high-
threat area, but to divide the money, that money that is for
high-threat areas. Where areas should be getting other funds,
fine, everyone needs funding, but if this started with 7, and
it is now at 64, I think 25 might be a reasonable number for
this program, and others can apply for other programs. So I
would appreciate your consideration.
Secretary Napolitano. Thank you.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.

CHEMICAL FACILITY SECURITY

Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you, Madam Secretary. Just a couple things. On
chemical plant security, chemical facility security rather, we
passed legislation in 2009 on Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards (CFATS) with some adjustments, including
implementation of the inherently safer technology (IST) issue.
I have introduced legislation again this Congress to extend the
CFATS for about 5 years, up to 2015. Do you support a long-term
extension of these CFATS regs?
Secretary Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Dent. Very good. And if IST was federally mandated,
does the Department have the professionals in place to
implement the IST requirement on regulated chemical facilities?
Secretary Napolitano. Let me check back on that, because I
don't want to give you an inaccurate answer. My understanding
is that we would be--as in all things CFATS related, we would
stack up appropriately.
[The information follows:]

Representative Dent's office was contacted March 21, 2011 and
briefed on the capability. A follow-on briefing involving
Undersecretary Beers is under consideration.

Mr. Dent. Okay. Because I just want to make sure the
Department has a grasp on the financial consequences of the IST
mandates. It is very, very expensive, and you need a lot of
people. And there are potential job losses tied to that issue
in the private sector.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY: PASSENGER EDUCATION

On passenger screening--I am going quickly because I only
have a minute--the budget proposal requests an additional 200
units for installation. As you know, I have been very
supportive of the AIT and other passenger-screening
initiatives. And the big issue is what are we doing to educate
the public better about AIT and other passenger enhancements?
We went through that situation back around Thanksgiving where
there was a lot of public discontent with some of the
practices. What are you doing to help educate the public, as
well as Members of Congress, because we are going to face
amendments on AIT, I suspect, as we deal with this Homeland
Security appropriations bill in 2012.
Secretary Napolitano. Well, first of all, experience is the
best educator. More and more passengers now have gone through
the AITs. They recognize that it is actually fast, it is
thorough, it is the next wave of technology, and it makes
airports safer and air travel safer. And if you say to
passengers, ``Do you want to fly on a plane where people have
been through the AIT or not through the AIT?''--they are going
to pick the AIT. But we are also doing in-airport education,
and we are making a lot of information available to the TSA.
Mr. Dent. I have additional questions. I will submit them
for the record. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Are you operating under
a special time limit at the moment?
Mr. Aderholt. Three minutes.

ADVANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGY: MODEL TYPES

Mr. Olver. Three minutes, okay. Well, that is going to
constrain me greatly.
Just one other question on AIT. How many different kinds
of--how many different models are you working with these days;
how many different models are under testing?
Secretary Napolitano. You mean in terms of hardware or
software or both?
Mr. Olver. Well, maybe I don't know what an AIT is. I am
referring, and I thought Mr. Dent was referring, to full-body
scanners.
Secretary Napolitano. Yes. And there are basically two
types of the hardware. But we are also now piloting a new type
of software that gives you basically a stick figure outline of
an individual, as opposed to an image, and if there is an
anomaly, identifies that anomaly is for pat-down purposes.

TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION: EMPLOYEE TURNOVER

Mr. Olver. I was going to say it seems to me there is
technology that is being developed that is quite noninvasive
from a privacy point of view. So you seem to be headed toward
that in any case.
My impression is, from where I go in and out of my airport,
is that there is a lot of turnover; people are always changing.
Is the agency seeing a fair amount of turnover, or are people
pretty stable in their jobs and just adding more?
Secretary Napolitano. At the TSA?
Mr. Olver. Yes.
Secretary Napolitano. There is some turnover, I would say.
In part it is because of the size and, you know, just the type
of workforce there is. It is a very high-stress job. I have
worked a line for a while myself. It is hard work, and it is
zero-error work, which adds to the stress. In other words, if
you are the TSO who permits something to get on a plane, the
consequences could be dire.
So we work with our TSOs. We are developing a career path
for them that makes it a long-term career as opposed to not.
And we are doing a number of other things to make the workplace
conditions better for them.
Mr. Olver. Okay. I want to turn to something in relation to
immigration. I have quite a few responses in my office that
look for immigration assistance, and every once in a while I
sit down with great care and talk with people that seem to me
to have an egregious error or problem. And I wanted to just
mention one that happened quite recently of a family that had
come in under some sort of a waive situation just before 9/11--
I am not sure whether the waive arrangement is still being
used--but a family, which was a father and mother, man and
wife, and two children 13 and 7 or 8, something like that.
This is now 20 years ago. They stayed. They overstayed. And
the daughter, the older person, by the time she was 19 or 20,
she had graduated from college--this is Massachusetts--and
gotten a degree and married, and at which point she was able to
adjust for her parents, for her parents, who also had been
under the radar for all of that period of time. But her younger
brother she couldn't adjust for, she cannot adjust for.
Now, he was 7 or 8 when he came in probably 15 years ago--I
guess I exaggerated slightly--and he is about to be deported
back to someplace in South America. I know where it is, but I
am not going to mention exactly where. And he speaks English as
well as we do, had scholarships allowed for college and so
forth.
Is there any hope for people like that?
Mr. Aderholt. The gentleman's time is expired. The
Secretary has to leave at 5:00, and we have one more question.
So Mr. Carter.
Secretary Napolitano. We will get back to you on that
situation, Representative. I will have somebody come visit with
you.
Mr. Olver. I would appreciate it. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

USCIS briefed Representative Olver's staff on the specifics of the
immigration case on March 22, 2011. Representative Olver's staff
indicated the information was sufficient and that a meeting would not
be necessary.

BORDER SECURITY: NATIONAL GUARD ASSISTANCE

Mr. Carter. Madam Secretary, thank you for waiting here for
us. I really appreciate that.
You were the first Governor, I believe, to attempt to use
our new law that allows you to request the National Guard to be
deployed in your State, and I believe as a result of that
request your response from then-Secretary Rumsfeld was that he
didn't think it was their duty to enforce the borders; it was
the duty of the Homeland Security Department. You experienced
that, I believe. And right now my Governor in my State is
saying that he needs troops on our border for safety and
security of the citizens of the State of Texas, and I believe
he does.
Do you believe we should approve a Governor's request to
use the National Guard on the border, and do you think that we
should authorize the Department of Homeland Security to pay for
National Guard deployments if necessary by the Governors?
Secretary Napolitano. First of all, the President has put
1,200-plus National Guards on the border, and they are
providing very useful counter-drug assistance to the Border
Patrol. You have also, in this Congress, approved upping the
personnel in the Border Patrol, and that is the ideal situation
where you have enough Federal civilian resources. But there can
be a role for the National Guard. That is why we have some of
them down there now. And I think that there is going to be a
continuing discussion between us, the Department of Defense,
and these committees as to how many, where, and how it should
be paid for.
Mr. Carter. And part of that discussion right now is that
the Department of Defense says they won't pay for it. And so
then my question is under a circumstance which you and I may
not be able to imagine, although our Governor believes he needs
it right now. Should we think about authorizing the payment of
those guardsmen by our Department?
Secretary Napolitano. I certainly think that is something
that, as we move forward, will need to be discussed between the
legislative and executive branches, yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, again, I apologize for leaving you bereft
today for an hour, but we appreciate your patience. We have to
close out now. I will be submitting some questions for the
record. Some of them commend you for progress you made; for
example, on the 100 percent screening requirement for cargo in
the hold of passenger planes. You have actually accelerated the
timetable for meeting that requirement, and recent incidents
showed just how important that is. In other areas, for example,
the future of the CSI, the Container Security Initiative in
overseas ports, I am going to want to seek some clarification
as to exactly what the implications of your budget are for the
future of that and other programs. But we will have to do that
for the record, and now I just want to thank you for your good
work, for your presence here today, and again express how much
we are looking forward to another round of working with you.
Secretary Napolitano. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Madam Secretary, let me again echo what
Ranking Member Price said. The votes are out of our control, as
you know, so we are at the mercy of the Speaker and when they
call it. But I do thank you for being here today. And we are
about to begin working with the Senate to pass a full year CR.
Without additional information, we have no option but to fully
fund the DRF. Part of the reason we took the cuts in H.R. 1 was
due to a lack of a budget amendment or a supplemental.
But, Madam Secretary, what I would ask you to do is to
commit to working with my staff on developing a plan that will
fund the DRF through the end of the year and fund the DRF in
fiscal year 2012.
Secretary Napolitano. Yes, sir. And I really appreciate
your forbearance with my schedule, too. I think we have all
been juggling like crazy this afternoon. I know I put off one
thing and so forth. So I really appreciate the consideration
you and your staff have shown. And obviously and absolutely we
will work with you and with staff on the DRF and some of these
other issues that have been raised this afternoon.
Mr. Aderholt. Sure. Well, thank you very much. We look
forward to working with you. And again, thank you for your
attendance this afternoon. The meeting is adjourned.

Wednesday, March 9, 2011.

U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION

WITNESS

ALAN BERSIN, COMMISSIONER, U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION

Opening Statement: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The hearing is called to order.
This morning we welcome Alan Bersin, Commissioner of U.S.
Customs and Border Protection, as we consider the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget request to secure our borders and
facilitate lawful travel and trade. Commissioner, we thank you
for being here, and we look forward to hearing your testimony
this morning.
CBP has experienced dramatic growth in the past 8 years.
Today it is the largest agency within the Department of
Homeland Security, with a budget of $11.8 billion and a
workforce of nearly 60,000. Given the significance of CBP's
mission to our Nation's security and prosperity, and
considering the continuing threats we face, Congress has
certainly provided robust resources. Going forward, we expect
to see results for those investments.
Commissioner, at a time of financial crisis, the American
people are demanding responsible budgets and accountability for
every dollar spent. That is why I am pleased to see your budget
pledges to cut costs and put a priority on frontline
operations. As I said before, these are also priorities of this
Subcommittee.
I am, however, concerned that the President's request for
CBP includes undefined efficiencies and administrative savings
that will likely impact operations. For example, the request
cuts $60 million from air and marine personnel and assets which
will likely reduce surveillance of the Southwest border. It
also reduces overtime flexibility for CBP officers by $20
million that will likely increase wait times at ports of entry.
I am not convinced that this request stabilizes CBP's budget to
sustain the workforce, much less support investments in
technology, infrastructure, and assets needed to meet the
mission.
Commissioner, during this time of fiscal crisis, there are
two things we need: truth in budgeting and clear results.
First, let's tackle truth in budgeting.
Those so-called efficiencies and savings I mentioned
earlier, in addition to program reductions, account for $330
million. While some proposals represent real savings, the rest
are merely budget fiction. Operations will suffer and true
needs will be deferred.
The President's request also proposed a hypothetical
increase to customs user fees of $55 million for fiscal year
2012. Authorizing legislation would be needed to require
passengers entering the U.S. from Canada and Mexico to pay the
fee. If not enacted, history tells us these changes are
difficult to enact, CBP will likely expect this Subcommittee to
fill that $55 million hole.
The second thing we need is results, a clear understanding
of how your request supports operational needs. The United
States invested billions in Southwest border operations in
recent years across law enforcement agencies but, in
particular, in CBP. We are scheduled to hear from Field
Operations and Border Patrol next week on detailed operations;
but today, Commissioner, I look forward to having a clear
understanding of how you will define operational control of the
border and your plan to get there.
Equally significant, this Subcommittee is particularly
pleased to have the esteemed Mr. Price. He has invested in
CBP's strategy to push out the border, and I would like to hear
how this request supports CBP's overseas operations to secure
trade and travel to the United States.
The American public demands straightforward answers to our
border security efforts. Truth in budgeting and transparency
with respect to operational needs are essential in this fiscal
climate. I appreciate you appearing before us today, before
this Subcommittee, and thank you in advance for your candor in
helping us to understand CBP's budget request for fiscal year
2012.
At this point, I would like to recognize the Subcommittee's
distinguished Ranking Member, the former Chairman of this
Committee, Mr. Price, for his opening remarks.
[The information follows:]

Opening Statement: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will be very
brief because I know with the joint session we are going to be
pressed for time. So let me just welcome you, Commissioner, and
make a couple of brief comments.
Over the past few years, the size and assets of CBP have
grown substantially. Since 2006, just five years ago, the
number of Border Patrol agents who patrol the Mexican and
Canadian borders and the coastal waters surrounding Florida and
Puerto Rico has grown by 70 percent; from 12,349 to 21,370
Border Patrol agents funded in 2012.
Meanwhile, the number of CBP officers has grown by 18
percent to more than 21,186 officers funded in 2012, largely to
enhance Southwest Border port-of-entry operations. Your 2012
budget request reflects your heavy reliance on people for all
of our activities, with over two-thirds of the request funding
salaries and benefits alone.
From 2010 to 2012, salaries and benefits grew by $1.1
billion. This leaves very few dollars to invest in new
technologies and tools for your personnel and to conduct
maintenance on your facilities. Moreover, during this time of
fiscal restraint, you most likely will be asked to do more with
less. We need to make sure that in doing so, critical
operations are not negatively affected.
Commissioner, your agency carries on one of the core
functions of DHS: keeping dangerous goods and people out of the
country while facilitating lawful cross-border movement.
Accomplishing that task in an ever-changing threat environment
requires an agency that is flexible and forward leaning, making
good use of intelligence, preferably intercepting threats
before they reach our borders.
A good example of that approach, I believe, is the
Immigration Advisory Program, which places CBP officers in
foreign airports to stop potential terrorists from boarding
flights to the U.S. I commend you on the progress of that
initiative, and am pleased to note the expansion of this
program in your budget request, along with additional funds to
improve our targeting capabilities.
Recognizing the staffing needs at our ports of entry, I am
also glad you proposed 300 new CBP officers and new canine
teams. And I want to call attention to your efforts in the
critically important area of officer integrity. Specifically,
you propose $26 million to enhance CBP's polygraph program and
to conduct timely background investigations.
I do have some concerns about what is missing from this
request. There is no new funding for air cargo security, even
though CBP informally asked this Subcommittee to provide
additional resources after the attempted air cargo bombing plot
out of Yemen last fall. The budget substantially reduces
funding to your facilities, delaying maintenance and repairs
and alterations. It reduces air and marine programs, which your
own budget brief says, ``will reduce the ability to safely and
effectively transport personnel and equipment in support of
border security missions.'' And, finally, the budget contains
changes in maritime container security efforts that seem to be
at odds with what both the Secretary and CBP have been
proposing for the last few years. I look forward to discussing
each of these in detail during the hearing today.
Commissioner, we hold the men and women of CBP in the
highest regard. We place great value in the work they and you
do, day in and day out. Many operate in many dangerous areas,
and they put their lives on the line to protect us. I know we
are going to discuss this in more detail next week at our
hearing on Southwest border violence.
As we begin this hearing to more closely examine your 2012
budget, it is important to note that no program or account will
be off limits to scrutiny. Our obligation is to take a balanced
realistic approach, to weigh risks carefully, and to make
prudent investments. Commissioner, I have no doubt that you
share this point of view. I look forward to working with you
again this year. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
[The information follows:]

Opening Statement: Commissioner Bersin

Mr. Aderholt. Again, Commissioner, we thank you for being
here this morning and for taking time to address the
Subcommittee. And we at this time would like to hear your
testimony before the Subcommittee.
Mr. Bersin. Good morning. And thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Price, Representative Lowey. CBP [U.S. Customs
and Border Protection], all of its nearly 60,000 employees,
join me in thanking this Committee and the Congress generally
for the support that you have provided, providing the resources
and the funding necessary to accomplish the mission sets that
the Nation has assigned CBP.
I recognize, Mr. Chairman, that time is limited today, so I
will shorten an already brief statement so that we can get to
the questions and answers. But I do want to reiterate and
emphasize the high points.
CBP is charged with keeping dangerous people and dangerous
things out of the American Homeland, away from American
communities and families. We do that in terms of two direct
approaches.
First, we are charged with protecting the land borders of
the United States. This encompasses the Southwest border, which
has garnered most of the attention in the last years because of
the activities there and in Mexico. But it also encompasses the
Canadian border, more than 3,900 miles that are on the Northern
border from Maine to Seattle and the State of Washington. It
also encompasses, in concert with the United States Coast
Guard, responsibilities on the littorals, the maritime
approaches off the coasts of the United States. The resources
that this Committee has provided have had an impact and will
continue to have an impact on all of those mission sets having
to do with the border.
We also look at the border not simply as a boundary between
the United States and Mexico and the United States and Canada,
but we also look at it as securing the flow of goods and people
toward the United States, and the twin dimensions to this
issue, as the Ranking Member and the Chairman both indicated.
We have a responsibility to secure the flows to be sure that
dangerous people and dangerous things are identified as far
away from the physical borders as possible and as early in time
as possible. That is why we have the international footprint at
CBP.
We also have an enormous responsibility with regard to the
expediting of lawful trade and traffic. And the approach that
CBP takes to this task is by risk management, by assessing
risks and being able to distinguish between trusted travelers,
trusted shippers, and those about whom or about which we have
adverse information or about which we lack sufficient
information to make a judgment as to how we ought to expedite
their passage across our physical borders.
These two mission sets--securing the land border, the
Southwest border, the Northern border and the littorals, and
also securing the flow of goods and people through programs
such as the Immigration Advisory Program or the Container
Security Initiative--are the way in which we accomplish our
tasks.
The 2012 budget that has been proposed by the
Administration is under consideration by this Committee and the
Congress provides us with the resources that we need to do this
job. It is not a perfect budget. It never is. But I hope that,
in discussions with this Committee and generally between the
administration and the Congress, we can sharpen the budget,
fill the gaps that are perceived to exist, and continue the
progress that we have made both in protecting the land borders,
protecting the aviation borders, protecting the maritime
approaches, and also securing flows of people and goods so that
we can continue to partner with the private sector to process
$2 trillion worth of imports that come into the United States
each year, and we can also expedite the movement of $1.8
trillion in exports that leave this country each year.
With regard to the challenges, rather than go into them as
I thought I originally would, I think the Ranking Member and
the Chairman have each raised the major challenges that we face
with regard to maintaining the personnel, also maintaining the
ability to make efficiencies, show efficiencies in a time of
constrained budget, and yet keep the productivity of our men
and women of CBP high and growing, and also make their
activities more efficient and effective at the same time.
With that, Mr. Chairman, and in the interests of beginning
the dialogue so critical to this enterprise, let me again thank
you on behalf of the 58,000 men and women of CBP for the
support that this Committee has always shown our efforts. Thank
you, Sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Commissioner. And we will enter
your full statement into the record, and we thank you for your
opening comments.
[The information follows:]

BORDER SECURITY: UNITED STATES-MEXICO COOPERATION

Mr. Aderholt. The first issue that I would like to bring up
is a clear goal for border security. The United States
Government has made significant investments in Mexico directly
and in United States law enforcement agencies, in particular
the Department of Homeland Security, to counter Mexican drug
trafficking organizations and to assist the Calderon
administration. While it is clear that these efforts are
disrupting cartel activity, it remains to be seen what the end
goal actually is and how we expect to get there, especially as
the Calderon administration draws to an end in 2012.
How would you describe our progress collectively, United
States and Mexican efforts, to undermine the drug trafficking
organizations, and what evidence do we have of the impact on
the cartels?
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Chairman, an issue critical to our border
security and also to our national security. The enterprise of
cooperation with Mexico is a work in process; in fact, we have
started down a path that is truly historical. The decision in
2006 of President Calderon to take on the organized crime
elements that had so infiltrated both Mexican politics and
Mexican society, that were having such a detrimental impact on
our border and on our country, was truly a turning point in
Mexican history and in the history of our two countries,
particularly at the United States-Mexican border. That effort
has led to the kind of violence that we have seen in Mexico
that has resulted in the deaths of more than 35,000 Mexicans
since 2006.
Recognizing how critical Mexican national security is to
our own border security and, I would argue, our national
security, the Obama administration, continuing the work of
Merida, has actually taken the level of collaboration and
cooperation to a new level and a new status. This is a work in
process, but I believe that we have achieved something that is
critical as we look forward.
I believe, regardless of changes that might take place in
the leadership of the United States or Mexico, that we have
with our neighbor to the south for the first time, really,
since the 19th century treaty that ended the U.S.-Mexican War,
reached a level of collaboration and cooperation that will
never, ever go back to where it was, where we had erect
borders, but not violent borders, but never terribly
cooperative borders between the United States and Mexico.
The key to this has been the understanding between
President Obama and President Calderon that in fact the issue
of guns going south and cash going south and drugs coming north
is not the occasion for finger-pointing, which it was for so
much of our bilateral history: Mexicans blaming us for their
problem of violent crime due to the consumption of drugs in the
United States; and Mexicans blaming the United States for the
passage of weapons into Mexico, without accepting the notion
that there was a Mafia of frightening proportion growing in
their country. That actually, thankfully, is a matter of the
past.
For the first time in our history, instead of pointing
fingers at one another, the United States and Mexico recognize
drugs coming north, guns and cash going south, as being part of
a common problem for which we have shared responsibility. That
acceptance, Mr. Chairman, has permitted us for the first time
to not only design common solutions but to be well along the
path of implementing them. It is a major change for the good.
Mr. Aderholt. Just to follow up on that. You mentioned it
has changed historically, the finger-pointing. As the
Presidential election year approaches, 2011 is a critical year.
President Calderon is under increasing pressure internally, and
we have seen, him publicly lashing out at the United States,
calling cooperation from the United States ``notoriously
insufficient'' and saying, ``How can Americans cooperate? By
reducing drug use, which they haven't done. And the flow of
weapons hasn't slowed, it has increased.''
While the tone was better in the Calderon meetings with the
President last week, there is still that concern. Let me just
follow with that and just your take on that.
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Chairman, I think that actually that is an
index of the relationship that we now have; that in fact, when
you are engaged in the kind of partnership that we now have,
there can be candid, even publicly candid remarks about the
shortcomings that are perceived in the performance of the other
partner.
So, for example, yes, the fact is that President Calderon
underlines, with regard to drug trafficking, the critical role
played by drug consumption in this country. He also outlines,
with regard to illegal immigration, the lack of a legitimate
labor market between the United States and Mexico, and the
desire on the part of some Americans for both secure borders
and cheap labor. I look at that as the candor and the frank
discussion that will permit us to start to address those issues
together.
So, for example, we point out to the Mexicans, in ways that
were unsayable even 3 or 4 years ago, that they have a major
problem of corruption in their law enforcement, that their
state and local law enforcement and much of their judiciary,
unfortunately, remains plagued by problems of corruption. Those
are the kinds of public statements and acknowledgements that I
think reflect the deeper partnership and the greater potential
for cooperation than has ever existed before.
But I take your point. There are candid exchanges between
partners that in fact our people, both in Mexico and the United
States, need to hear and increasingly understand.

BORDER SECURITY: ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION

Mr. Aderholt. You have often stated in your public comments
that the border is as secure as it has ever been. But this
assertion doesn't tell us how close we are to actually securing
operational control of the border. So that begs the question,
given the billions that we have invested into the border, what
is your goal for border security, and how close are we to
achieving it?
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Chairman, a critical question and well
asked and reasonably asked, ``What does border security mean?''
So let me begin perhaps by describing what it can and cannot
mean.
If we understand border security to be the absence of any
illegal migration at all across the United States borders or
the absence of any drug smuggling at all, then in fact we have
set a goal that is impracticable and not possible in terms of
an absolute sealing of the American border. That would be an
issue of resources and an issue of actually having to correct
those problems that, as I indicated in response to your
previous question, have led to an understanding that the
consumption of drugs in this country is as much a part of the
problem as the smuggling of drugs by organized criminals in
Mexico across the border. We need to work on that. Under ONDCP
[the Office of National Drug Control Policy], we are making
very serious efforts of curtailing drug use and seeing some
progress.
The same thing goes with regard to the labor market. As
long as the magnet, the job magnet exists, we will see this
flow. But, Mr. Chairman, security means that these are not
flows that disrupt American family life and community life
either in border communities or in the interior of our country.
And there we need to basically take the position that if you
try to cross into our country illegally, either to smuggle
drugs or to come here to work illegally, you will be detected
and you will be arrested. And that is the sense in which we
approach our task at CBP.
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to report to you that compared
to certainly five years ago, certainly 10 years ago, and I know
myself, having started with the border first, as the United
States Attorney in the Southern District of California 15 years
ago, that the border is actually more secure than it has ever
been in terms of the ability to detect and apprehend those who
come into the country illegally.
Having said that, we have considerable work to do,
particularly in the Tucson Sector. That sector from Hermosilla,
Mexico, in Sonora, to Nogales, Sonora, to Tucson, to Phoenix,
half of the illegal immigration in the United States comes
through that corridor. Half of the marijuana smuggling into the
United States from Mexico takes place through that corridor.
And that is why Secretary Napolitano, beginning in March
2009, two years ago, began the greatest buildup of resources in
Arizona that we have ever seen. This Committee has facilitated
the growth of the Border Patrol, as indicated by the Ranking
Member, such that by the end of fiscal year 2012, we will have
21,370 Border Patrol agents. Sir, I remember in 1993, when I
first became involved with the border, we had 2,800 Border
Patrol agents in the entire country. We now have nearly 10
times that many. They are being used to good effect, and in no
place better than in the Tucson Sector where we have more than
6,000 people between the ports of entry CBP and at the ports of
entry. And they are showing results in their work.
What does bringing that border under control and that
sector under control mean? It means reducing the flow of
illegal traffic into the United States from Mexico to a point
that both assures public safety and is perceived by the people
who live on the border and the people who live in Arizona as
being safe and secure.
So I can tell you, having lived and worked there myself,
and my family still lives on the border between Baja
California, Mexico, and California. In San Diego, in 1994, when
Proposition 187 was passed by the people of California, a
proposition that is reminiscent of Arizona's bill 1070 of this
last year in the context of Arizona politics, 565,000 illegal
immigrants, illegal aliens, crossed over from Mexico and were
arrested on the San Diego-Tijuana border. And at least twice
that many, Mr. Chairman, got by the Border Patrol and made
their way up to Los Angeles.
Today, the situation is completely different in terms of
the resources Congress has provided. We have more than 3,000
Border Patrol agents in the San Diego Sector. We have a
complete set of infrastructure in terms of fencing and
pedestrian fencing and vehicle fencing. We have technology that
permits us to detect the very large majority, I estimate 90
percent, of the people who are trying to cross illegally into
the United States in that sector. But what that means, Mr.
Chairman, is that when we say 58,000 as opposed to 560,000
people were arrested last year in San Diego, I can tell you
that my friends and neighbors in San Diego will tell you this
border is not out of control. San Diego is one of the safest 10
cities in the United States, and there are three other border
cities that are among the 10 safest cities in the United
States: El Paso, Texas; Austin, Texas; and Phoenix, Arizona.
So, with regard to this motion of what will it take to
complete the job, I would say respectfully, Mr. Chairman, that
until we have the kind of legitimate labor market between the
United States and Mexico, and until we reduce the level of drug
demand in the United States, we are going to continue to have
attempted crossings on our border. The issue is, how many? And
how many do we arrest after detecting them? The situation there
is considerably improved, and it will be improved in Arizona as
a result of Secretary Napolitano's initiative and, frankly, the
Congress' Southwest border supplemental bill of last spring.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Commissioner.
Let me turn now to Mr. Price.

AIR CARGO SECURITY: EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner, I would like you to address air cargo
security, first in respect to the capacities that you are
developing, and secondly, some of the budget implications of
those efforts.
Prior to the attempted air cargo bombing plot out of Yemen
last fall, CBP was receiving international air cargo manifests
four hours before cargo arrival in the United States; that is,
after the plane was airborne. In response to the October 29,
2010, mailing of improvised explosive devices from Yemen, the
National Targeting Center has been working with air carriers so
they can analyze cargo manifests before flights take off.
In December, CBP began piloting this type of screening with
the Big Four all-cargo carriers. Two of these pilot efforts
have been completed, two others are either ongoing or are
starting shortly. I know you call these pilots, but I don't
believe there are any plans to turn them off. Maybe some
analysis will follow, but this is going to be, as we
understand, a permanent improvement of capacity.
So I wonder, first, if you could highlight what efforts
CBP, in conjunction with the carriers, has undertaken to
strengthen your air cargo security before it arrives in the
United States, and what you believe the next steps are. And
then, secondly, I want to ask you about the budget implications
of all this.
I was somewhat surprised that the 2012 budget didn't
include any additional funding for better targeting of cargo.
Last November, CBP told the Committee that it needed up to $80
million for these specific efforts. In December, in our
consultations, this figure was revised twice, to $50 million
and then to $17.3 million for the ``highest needs.'' The
highest needs include 40 new air cargo targeting positions
funded to upgrade targeting infrastructure and funding to
develop new targeting rules. Since final funding for 2011
unfortunately has not been resolved, we were unable to provide
these resources; however, we did expect to see something in the
2012 budget. It is not there.
Last December, CBP told the Subcommittee it would expand
its review of cargo transportation documents, known as bills of
lading, to countries surrounding Yemen. That required
additional staff, required additional infrastructure
improvements to provide adequate bandwidth and hardware to
support the workload, and additional screening technology. Has
something changed? Or what has changed over the last few months
so that you didn't include these needs in the 2012 request? And
I guess the obvious question is, are you now planning to fund
these activities from base resources?
Mr. Bersin. Ranking Member Price, thank you for that
question that focuses on that dimension of our mission that is
securing goods so that when they arrive at the physical ports
of entry, we have done everything we need to do to identify, as
best we can, dangerous cargo. And in fact, the Yemen cargo
plot, with regard to packages and freight, led to the same kind
of changes that we saw a year earlier with regard to the
processing of passengers as a result of the Abdul Muttalib
attempt to blow up a Northwest airliner over Detroit. So let me
indicate what we have done, and then provide a very direct
response to your question about how will this be funded.
Two major partnerships characterized our response. And
remember, as you indicated, what happened in the Yemen cargo
plot was that we received intelligence, our government did,
from the Saudi intelligence that indicated there were two
packages that were on their way to the United States that were
intended to be detonated in the cargo plane over Chicago. So
the question then was, how do we locate those packages? And I
think one of the changes in the global supply chain was we did
identify, out of this mass of tens of millions of packages and
cargos involved in the international trade. We were in
relatively short order, working together with our partners
abroad, able to pluck out those two packages and to neutralize
them so they did not do damage to the American Homeland.
As we analyzed the situation, though, we were able then to
identify very quickly where the other packages that had come in
the preceding days from Yemen were. But what we also noticed
was that we needed, as we did in the passenger context, to be
doing much more work away from the American Homeland and early
in time. And that is what led to the pilot projects that you
indicated.
Three critical partnerships have characterized the work.
The first is, as I suggested, the partnership with foreign
customs and police authorities, which needs to be very close
and is increasingly close.
The second has to do with the partnership within DHS
between the Transportation Security Administration (TSA),
charged with cargo security, and CBP. And the linking of the
work of CBP and TSA on this has been extraordinary. And I know
that government agencies always talk about the extent to which
they cooperate, but I can tell you, having been in the Federal
Government, this is cooperation with real results that we see
exemplified and illustrated in the way in which our Nation has
responded to the cargo plot from Yemen.
The third partnership and key to this is the way in which
we have collaborated with the private sector. From day one, we
began working with the express cargo carriers, with the
commercial airlines, and with the large cargo operators to
begin to co-create the solution.
So what does the solution look like? And, frankly, I would
say parenthetically that the way in which we have worked with
the private sector contrasts with what I believe the Ranking
Member and Members of the Subcommittee are familiar with, which
is the contentious manner in which we began to deal with
maritime security in the wake of 2001. That situation has
vastly improved, but it has taken a long time for those engaged
in maritime trade to look at the requirements that we imposed
on them top down, in part through Congress imposing
requirements on DHS. We basically mandated a series of changes
to require advance information and a whole variety of pre-
departure and pre-arrival changes. We took a different
approach, frankly, Mr. Price, to this situation, air cargo.
From day one, Secretary Napolitano convened working groups
involving the private sector and TSA and CBP to address the
issue. And within a month, we began what you referred to as
pilot projects. And they basically have two dimensions to them.
We get advanced information. Right now, the law provides that
when cargo is coming toward the United States, it must be given
to CBP four hours before arrival. It must be entered into our
system. Or if the place of disembarkation is fewer than four
hours from our homeland, then it is entered into the system
upon wheels-up of the cargo plane or the commercial plane
carrying cargo.
What the pilot project basically does is it articulates and
starts to implement a new grand bargain between governmental
authorities and the private sector. Basically, the grand
bargain is if you give us information early in advance of the
departure, we will use the National Targeting Center to analyze
the information you give us in terms of manifest data, and we
will make a judgment about whether or not we need to screen and
look at it and in which way we need to look and screen the
cargo much earlier.
That has led express cargo--and right now the pilot is
between the United States Government, DHS, and the express
carriers, FedEx, UPS, I believe will be extended to DHL soon,
and to TNT in the not-too-distant future. And basically what we
see from UPS is that we are getting the information sometimes
24 hours earlier before departure, sometimes even 36 hours. And
we are able to make this decision, working together: Do we
screen it? Do we isolate it? Do we do it abroad? Do we do it en
route? Or do we do it when it arrives at the physical
boundaries of the United States?
That is the nature of the bargain. It is an extraordinary
collaboration, and will be extended over the next six months to
commercial airlines and the large cargo operators.
So then, Mr. Price, you say, so why haven't you asked for
additional funding to support this? And the answer is that we
have asked for additional funding, as you indicated in your
question. We have asked for additional personnel at the
National Targeting Center. Now, we have actually asked for, I
believe, 33 additional targeters that will work in Herndon and
be able to analyze that manifest data.
And, Sir, I indicate to you, as we have with the
Immigration Advisory Program, we will be coming back to the
Congress when we have perfected this, when we have gotten to
the point where we can say, as a result of the experience we
have had, these are the additional measures that we need to
take. And I think you have understood that we are not bashful
about asking for resources.
But taking the Chairman's caution into account, in the
environment in which we are operating, the Secretary is
determined that we need to perfect these protocols. And we are
able to do that within our existing resource base, together
with the additional resources we asked for at the National
Targeting Center.
Mr. Price. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is expiring. Just
one clarification, though. I thought these additional personnel
that you referred to were aimed at a passenger screening
operation.
Mr. Bersin. The National Targeting Center--I will correct
the record if I misspeak, but I believe these are going to be
National Targeting Center for Cargo. We have the NTC-P,
National Targeting Center for Passengers in Reston, Virginia,
and that is the program that works with the Immigration
Advisory Program. But I believe that these were destined, and
we intend to allocate them to the NTC-P.
Clerk's Note.--The Commissioner confirmed that the FY12
request was for NTC-P analysts, not cargo.
Mr. Price. That is not the information that we have. But if
you can get this straight for the record. And while you are at
it, please provide us with whatever accounting you can of where
in the budget these items that we had earlier been briefed on
and had anticipated might be embedded; and to the extent that
they are not in the budget, how you are making up the
difference. That would be very helpful to us as we try to
support this program fully. You understand, we want this to
happen. We want to make sure that we understand the full budget
implications of this capacity building, though.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Bersin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Price. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning. A
couple things following up on Mr. Price's questions.
It is my understanding that 100 percent of outbound
commercial aircraft carrying cargo is now screened. Is that
correct?
Mr. Bersin. No. I don't believe that 100 percent of the
outbound cargo is----
Mr. Dent. On passenger planes.
Mr. Bersin. This may be a TSA function. I know that CBP is
not screening 100 percent of outbound.
Mr. Dent. On the issue of the inbound, you just referred to
the Yemen situation. Even if we were to screen 100 percent of
all inbound cargo coming on non-passenger aircraft, how
confident are you that we are going to detect problematic
material, given what you know about the situation?
Mr. Bersin. Again, Mr. Dent, with regard to inbound, on
commercial planes coming to the United States, there is 100
percent screening by TSA-certified screeners or by the TSA
itself of inbound cargo. And I believe with regard to that
extent, we do have--we can always improve our screening
capacity. We need to improve our protection capacity in terms
of the technology. But that situation is considerably improved
from where it was even a few short years ago.
Mr. Dent. It is my understanding on the inbound, coming
from overseas in, we are still not at 100 percent. Outbound, we
were. You met the mandate.
Mr. Bersin. I will correct the record again. This is a TSA
function.
Mr. Dent. Understood.
Mr. Bersin. I will correct the record if I have misspoken.

BORDER SECURITY: USE OF CIVIL AIR PATROL

Mr. Dent. And one thing, too. I wanted to follow up on
Civil Air Patrol issues. For the past several Congresses, I
have been advocating the use of the Civil Air Patrol on the
border, the Southwest border. You have a shortage of assets
down there. It seems that if the Civil Air Patrol is willing to
help, they have been effective in the past helping us with
various security missions. What relationship does CBP currently
have with Civil Air Patrol?
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Dent, I know from the days in which I was
the U.S. Attorney that the Civil Air Patrol played a very
important role in assisting the Border Patrol in those years to
patrol. Because of the increase provided by Congress in the air
and marine assets of the CBP, we rely hardly at all now on the
Civil Air Patrol. And I do know of your interest. We do not at
this point, except in very spotty cases, regularly use them, in
part because the air and marine assets that have been provided
by the Congress and are at work, for example, in Arizona, are
on the order of 10 times what they were years ago. But I----
Mr. Dent. Are you amenable to establishing some type of a
working relationship with the Civil Air Patrol?
Mr. Bersin. Absolutely. Absolutely. Partnership with Civil
Air Patrol as with State, local, and tribal law enforcement
authorities is critical. Yes, sir.

BORDER SECURITY: SBINET

Mr. Dent. I would love to follow up with you on that
further. I think we could use them and it would be a cost-
effective way for us to develop some more effective aviation
assets.
And on SBInet, the Secretary announced I think on January
14, that they ended the SBInet program; yet it has endorsed the
integrated fixed towers that are at the heart of the SBInet and
indicated the Department intended to buy 52 more integrated
fixed towers for Arizona. That is on top of the 15 that I think
are already out there. So these additional towers are for some
of the most problematic areas, as you know. But you postponed
the purchase of these towers until fiscal year 2012, and
delivery isn't expected I think until sometime in early 2013.
Why aren't we moving aggressively in building on those towers?
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Dent, you have correctly described the
situation. The large-scale integration and the virtual fence
dimensions of SBInet were ended by the Secretary, and I think
to the general approval of Members of Congress on both sides of
the aisle. But where the Boeing-developed technology, so-called
block technology for the Ajo-1 technology, which integrates
video and radar works, is in the flat terrain, and there will
be need for it. Where there are canyons and mountains, that
technology is not very useful and the Secretary has directed
that we fill in the gaps in those areas with Mobile
Surveillance Systems and Remote Video Systems. And our agents
confirm that this is the best technique, together with aviation
ISR [Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance], the
ability to integrate from surveillance from air, aviation
platforms.
The reason, frankly, for the delay--and I believe we
started purchasing in 2012 and continue to purchase in 2012 and
2013--is that we need to fill in the gaps. We have in Arizona,
which is our area of greatest priority on the border, we have
the towers in place on the flat areas. But we need to fill them
in with the technology better suited for the canyons and the
mountains.
But you are right; we want more of those towers to use in
other places where the terrain makes them very useful. The
priority is one reason there is a delay until 2012. The second
is simply get the competitive bidding that will be required to
give companies other than Boeing an opportunity to compete for
this contract and to provide the fixed towers.
So we think, both as a matter of tactics but also good and
efficient business sense, that schedule will not do us harm
from a security perspective, and will get us a better product
in due course.
Mr. Aderholt. Mrs. Lowey.

AIR CARGO SECURITY: 100 PERCENT SCREENING

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome. And I just want to say, Commissioner Bersin,
we are very fortunate to have a person of your wisdom,
experience, and caliber in this position, and I thank you very
much.
And if you could just clarify in writing for the record, it
is my understanding that the 100 percent screening of cargo on
passenger airlines won't be completed until the end of 2011. I
don't think it can be done soon enough. I think it is urgent.
And I would like you to clarify that for us because I would
like to know why. And also--why it is not completed.
Mrs. Lowey. And I would also like to know if there are some
nations that are not being cooperative as we seek to implement
better screening procedures abroad, and what can we do about
it? Perhaps the first one you can submit to us in writing.
But the second, if you are aware of certain nations that
have not been cooperative, I would like to know about it.
Mr. Bersin. Yes, with regard to providing information on
both.
As you know, the legislation provides the extension,
although the deadline is coming up and I believe that the
Secretary, if she hasn't already, will be indicating the
further extension on the 100 percent scanning. And with regard
to----
Mrs. Lowey. I just happen to think on that issue it is
unacceptable. So I just want to know what you need, how much
money, how many people to get it done now.
Mr. Bersin. I understand. And then with regard to the
information on countries that have not been cooperative, no one
comes to mind. But I would need to consult with Administrator
Pistole with regard to the cargo screening from abroad. And I
will do that and supplement the record, if he so advises.
[The information follows:]

PORTS OF ENTRY: CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION OFFICERS

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
On another issue. I have recently heard reports about
staffing issues at Kennedy Airport, including that one quarter
of all Customs and Border Patrol officers (CBPOs) are handling
basic immigration work rather than searching cargo for weapons
or drugs. Perhaps more alarmingly, I have been told that 18
flights a day are arriving from known high-risk narcotic-
producing nations without searches by CBPOs due to staffing
shortages.
So I would like to know, number one, what steps are you
taking to ensure CBP is in fact searching cargo at Kennedy
Airport rather than performing administrative tasks? And,
secondly, what additional resources do you need from Congress
to achieve this mission?
Mr. Bersin. I was at Kennedy Airport on Friday, Thursday
and Friday of last week. We are constantly looking at the
staffing issues and also the allocation of duties. So at
Kennedy Airport, which has more CBPOs, Customs and Border
Protection officers, than any other airport because of the size
and the scope of its operations, we have just under 1,800 now,
with a staffing model that actually allocates both to the
processing of people, which we have to do to prevent dangerous
people from coming into the United States. But also
increasingly, we check obviously on screening of freight and
cargo coming into the United States, and Kennedy leads the way
in terms of outbound checks. We have more outbound checks led
by an extraordinarily experienced and good group of officers.
But I take your point that we always need to look at how do
we allocate scarce resources and when do we need more resources
for any particular function?
I believe that we can improve the situation at Kennedy, but
I am satisfied that the leadership and this new port director
at Kennedy, who I hope you will have an opportunity to meet:
Mr. Brian Humphrey, who was at O'Hare Airport, now in charge of
Kennedy Airport under Bob Perez's leadership at the district.
And I will make him aware of your concerns and confirm that he
is always looking at how best to allocate the resources among
the functions that we have.

BORDER SECURITY: WEAPONS SMUGGLING

Mrs. Lowey. I am not questioning anyone's ability. I am
just saying that I think it is important that we get the job
done. If you need more assistance, you should let us know.
In that regard, I have been to the San Diego entryway, and
I have spent hours there. And to me it looks like a needle in a
haystack. So I applaud you. I don't know how you do that work.
I also want to say, you talked before about the issues
involving our government and the Mexican Government. I have met
with Calderon, I have been there, I have talked with him. And I
think this has reached proportions that are just
extraordinarily dangerous. We know of the 35,000 lives that
have been lost there. And I personally think it is not enough
to say guns are going there and drugs are going there. I think
we have to push for an assault weapons ban, and I think we have
to do something about controlling our use of drugs here in the
United States of America.
What to do about the infiltration of the military,
infiltration of the security force with the cartels, because
the cartels pay more than the government, and the corruption is
another whole story for another hearing, Mr. Chairman. But I
appreciate your mentioning those issues, and I think we just
have to do something about it.
So thank you again for appearing before us. And I think my
time is up, so I will save my other question.
Mr. Aderholt. We would like to go now to Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Commissioner, thank you for being here. Thank you for
all the people in your Department that are doing very important
work to protect our Nation. Texans feel it probably more, or as
much--I would argue ``more'' than most in this country--as far
as what you are doing on our borders. We are very appreciative
of it.
My friend just raised the issue of the question that seems
to come up every time we address the border. We certainly are
aware of the violence coming from the south. And the question
then comes up, where do the weapons come from? And it seems to
be the finger gets pointed at the United States, that we are
allowing weapons to be smuggled into Mexico.
I don't know whether that is true or not. We assumed it was
true. We had this discussion in the last Congress. We thought
we had put adequate resources on the border to be able to
inspect cargos going south, but there are at least accusations
that we are failing in that inspection.
First and foremost, I want to make sure that is actually
true, and to learn something about the interdiction that you
may have had on weapons going south. The reason I question this
is because AK-47s are not American-manufactured weapons; they
are European-manufactured weapons, and that is what I see the
bad guys carrying. But maybe we are importing them into the
United States and then shipping them down there, I don't know.
I think that it is important that we do interdict weapons
flowing south if they are coming through the United States. If
we have a fault in this violence on the border, we need to
correct that fault. My Governor in my State has said he is
perfectly willing to assist with the resources of Texas law
enforcement. Would that be of assistance to you if Texas law
enforcement--and law enforcement of other States, was willing
to assist in the interdiction of weapons going south?
Second, do you have any weapons coming in from other
sources besides the United States of America?
Mr. Bersin. With regard to the source of weapons flow into
Mexico, I think we have to acknowledge that many of the weapons
do come from the United States. I think that has been
established by the work of ICE [U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement] and ATF [Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives] as they have traced weapons that are seized in
Mexico and traced back to sales in the United States. So I
think we should acknowledge that, because it is a fact.
I think the extent of it, though, is not certain. You hear
charges from certain quarters in Mexico that it is 98 percent.
Others say 90 percent. Others say it is 80 percent. I think we
should just acknowledge that it is an issue and we need to deal
with it in terms of a new situation.
At the same time, there is no question in my mind that
weapons are being smuggled into Mexico from the southern border
as well, through Central America, particularly some of the
heavier weapons that are there.
But, again, in keeping with this new relationship between
the United States and Mexico, we acknowledge the issue. And, as
you suggested, it is one we need to work on.
With regard to outbound operations, Secretary Napolitano,
beginning in March 2009, instituted for the first time in the
history of our border, not southbound checks of which there
were intermittent ones, but instead a regular systematic check,
not a 24/7 check, but a systematic, well-orchestrated effort to
intercept guns and cash going south.
With regard to the participation of local law enforcement,
they do participate now, all over the border from California to
Texas. Texas DPS [Department of Public Safety] is a big partner
of us, and Border Patrol agents speak highly of it, as do I.
With regard to local sheriffs and local police departments
in Texas and elsewhere, they are often involved in task forces
that are participating in southbound checks, and they share in
the forfeiture of assets that are seized and liquidated as a
result of those seizures.
So the answer is, yes, those partnerships are critical. And
they can always be improved, but they are very extensive, as we
speak.
Mr. Carter. We certainly are perfectly willing to be
involved in our State, and our Governor is speaking out
publicly that he is willing to share any resources you need to
protect our State. Because, quite honestly, we are very
concerned about the violence across the border.
I was with people from Laredo yesterday. We were talking
about how much we used to share a great celebration on our
borders, George Washington's birthday celebration, and it used
to flow back and forth between Nuevo Laredo and Laredo. That
flow now stops, and we have snipers protecting our meeting of
Governors on the international bridge. That is a dangerous
situation that shouldn't occur between friendly neighbors, and
it concerns Texas greatly that this is going on.
Mr. Bersin. It should concern all Americans, Mr. Carter.
And I will say that, for all the violence taking place in
northern Mexico, including Nuevo Laredo, the fact is that we
have not seen that spillover violence into the United States,
even from Juarez to El Paso. And, Mr. Carter, it is a major,
major mandate of CBP to see that that does not happen. Working
with DOJ [the Department of Justice] and with local law
enforcement, we need to make clear to the cartels, particularly
in the wake of the killing of a law enforcement agent in
Mexico, that we will not tolerate the widespread violence
coming over from Mexico into our country, and we will not
tolerate the killing of American law enforcement officers.
Mr. Carter. Well, my time is up. But I assure you the State
of Texas stands ready, willing, and able to assist you in any
way you request.
Mr. Bersin. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND IMPORTATION: ILLEGAL IMPORTS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Commissioner. As you are well aware,
protecting American businesses and American workers from
illegal imports is a key component of CBP's mission.
Unfortunately, the agency has been unable to prevent Chinese
shippers from evading paying dues on many of their shipments
into the United States.
In November, Senate investigators posing as business owners
easily found ten Chinese companies willing and able to sneak
merchandise into the United States to avoid paying duties which
have been imposed to protect more than 120 domestic companies
and 12,000 U.S. workers from unfairly traded imports.
Also, steel industry investigators recently discovered a
consignment of tubing bound for the Los Angeles market, used
books, again to avoid detection of their required duties.
This failure to address industrial smuggling, as you know,
is costing American jobs and robbing our Treasury of much
needed revenue. What is preventing CBP from doing a better job
of addressing this threat posed by Chinese illegal imports? And
what is it that you are doing to address this, and how can we
be helpful?
Mr. Bersin. Ms. Roybal-Allard, I would say that of the many
changes that the Secretary has instituted and that I am proud
to be implementing, one of the largest has to do with
reemphasizing the importance of our trade function at Customs
and Border Protection; in addition to securing the flow of
goods, we need to expedite the lawful movement of goods. And in
fact we see that expediting of lawful traffic as being entirely
consistent with and critical to raising our security profile.
It is only by expediting the movement of the vast amount of
lawful traffic that we can actually concentrate our attention
on the very small amount of traffic that prevents risks of harm
to our security. And we include in the definition of
``security,'' our economic prosperity and our economic
competitiveness.
So in fact we are revamping the relationship between our
ports and the trade function at CBP to see to it that trade
enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights, of various
antidumping provisions, has a new emphasis in our activities,
because we don't see that as being antithetical to our security
duties.
And I think you will see over the coming weeks and months a
focus on such industries as the textiles. As you see a focus on
the evasion and the defrauding on the basis of NAFTA [North
Atlantic Free Trade Agreement] distinctions, I think you will
see increased attention both from CBP and from ICE to
Intellectual Property Rights enforcement. These are important
objectives of the Secretary and ones that we see as completely
consistent with our mission of keeping dangerous people and
dangerous things out of the United States.

PORTS OF ENTRY: NEED FOR IMPROVED SECURITY

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Which brings me to my second question.
The National Immigration Forum and the Texas Border Coalition
have found that while billions of dollars have been spent
between ports of entry, such as the vast expansive desert along
the southwest border, by comparison DHS has spent little to
improve security at the ports of entry.
According to a white paper by the Texas Border Coalition,
the probability of a person being apprehended for criminal
activity between ports of entry is 70 percent, and only 30
percent at the ports of entry where the bulk of criminal
activity occurs.
This is a vulnerability, as has been discussed earlier,
that Mexican drug cartels have exploited. And according to the
2010 National Drug Threat Assessment, more than 90 percent of
hard drugs smuggled into the U.S. in 2009 actually came through
our border ports.
In addition, according to the Border Trade Alliance, which
is a network of leaders and business and government,
insufficient staffing at border crossings is creating
bottlenecks that seriously impede the flow of commerce vital to
the economy of both countries.
While I am pleased that your fiscal year 2012 budget
request includes additional funding to meet this need, it falls
far short of what is needed to combat drug cartels and
facilitate the flow of goods and people through our busy border
ports of entry.
I understand that earlier you spoke of efforts and of
success along a specific corridor in Arizona on the Southwest
border, and I applaud your efforts in that area. However, given
the reports that I referenced, can you please tell us what
strategies you have to address the threats at the ports of
entry? And wouldn't our country be better served if our
resources were directed towards these areas that appear to be
the main ports of illegal activity?
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard, your time is expired. But
go ahead and answer this question briefly. And then we will go
on. But go ahead.
Mr. Bersin. The issue is not a zero-sum game. And you are
exactly right; we need to see the border not as divided
irrevocably between the ports and at the ports, we have to see
it as a continuous border. And we do see it that way at CBP.
So in fact, as you noted, the budget asked for 300
additional CBPOs that are necessary to staff the new ports of
entry on the Southwest border. We have also received 250 more
CBPOs in the Southwest supplemental bill, in the 2012 budget
actually made a part of the base budget. But over time we do
need to address that issue. There is no question.
In fiscal year 2004, there were 17,689 CBPOs and there were
10,819 Border Patrol officers. In fiscal year 2011, there were
20,370 Border Patrol agents and 20,777 CBPOs. So while we have
seen growth in CBPOs, we have seen much greater rates of growth
in the Border Patrol.
We are conscious of the issue you raise, but we see it as a
continuum and believe that we can continue to grow CBPOs in a
way that will address more effectively the issues you raise.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Latham.

BORDER SECURITY: BORDER SEARCH AUTHORITY

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Commissioner. I have heard from different people
inside the Department and outside the Department on the issue
of contraband coming into this country, whether drugs, whatever
it may be, that maybe we are not using the kind of authority we
already have. I am talking about the border search authority.
There has been a change in the way the authority is used
according to some. If you would just tell us what your policy
is, and whether search authority is being utilized in the way
it should be.
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Latham, I can speak as a former prosecutor,
and assure you that there is no place in the American landscape
where American law enforcement has greater powers of search
without any reasonable suspicion or any probable cause but,
rather, as a matter of protecting the American Homeland at the
physical ports of entry. Those authorities are fully in use, in
fact are even in greater use with regard to matters of
questioning.
So, for example, in the wake of the assassination of Agent
Jaime Zapata in San Luis Potosi, we exercise those authorities
to the fullest, to question and hold in secondary anybody with
the remotest link to the Zeta group believed to be responsible
for the murder of Agent Zapata.
So I want to assure you as a prosecutor, also as the head
of CBP, that we understand our authorities. We understand that
they need to be used responsibly, but they also need to be used
fully, and they are being used to the fullest extent consistent
with our tactical objectives.
Mr. Latham. I don't understand why we keep hearing reports
that it is not being used as it should be, or as widely. Are
there any other agencies that you give that authority to?
Mr. Bersin. When people are cross-designated from ICE or in
fact from one of the DOJ agencies or in fact, as Mr. Carter
suggested, when local law enforcement is part of the task on
the outbound, if they are cross-designated they are actually
empowered with the same authorities of search to the fullest
extent permitted at the border, which is the widest permitted
under American law and jurisprudence.
So I think what would be helpful is when you are told that
a border authority is not being used, it is good to get the
case; and I would be happy to respond to the case, because I am
a very firm believer in the exercise of our authority at the
border, responsibly, but also fully.
Mr. Latham. So how does the contraband come in?
Mr. Bersin. Those authorities are not exercised on every
car that comes in across the United States border. We have
270,000 vehicles coming into the United States every day from
the northern border and the southern border, and what we use
are risk management, the experience and skill and knowledge of
our officers, which is not perfect. But the alternative is not
one that the Congress has ever commended to us, which is to
open up every trunk and subject every car to an X-Ray, which
would bring trade and travel into the United States, so
critical to our economy, to a halt.
But you are right, there is a decision that can be made. I
submit to you, sir, that we want to use our powers to the
fullest, but we want to use those powers where we have good
reason to believe that they will provide us with a secure
result and not represent an undue burden on lawful trade and
traffic.
Mr. Latham. Do we have any idea what percentage of the
amount of, say, drugs are being caught at the border?
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Latham, I have been involved in border-
related activities for 20 years, and I have heard a whole range
of estimates. And rather than provide one, all of which are, at
best, educated guesses, I would just as soon share my personal
view, not an official view, off line. I can't state it with any
official imprimatur and would hesitate to do that and thereby
mislead people that there is some more certainty to it because
of the position I occupy.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND IMPORTATION: BORDER INSPECTIONS

Mr. Latham. Ms. Roybal-Allard was talking about trade. A
lot of the companies in the U.S. have teamed up in a
partnership like the Customs Trade Partnership Against
Terrorism and importer self-assessment programs, but they still
seem to have significant delays. Apparently, there are 47
different agencies involved in some way in border inspections.
Are the programs working as they should?
Mr. Bersin. Sir, there are now more than 10,000 companies
that are part of the Customs-Trade Partnership Against
Terrorism. As I indicated in response to Ms. Roybal-Allard's
question, one of our major objectives consistent with
maintaining a high level of security and increasing security
levels is to restructure the relationship with the trade and
provide a more expedited passage for those members of the trade
community who are trusted shippers, who have engaged in the ISA
[Importer Self-Assessment Program], who have engaged in the
supply chain security matters.
And I think if you consult with the trade associations, you
will see, both in the air cargo area, where we have partnered
on the security measure having to do with freight, so too in
terms of this idea of what benefits can we provide to the
trusted shippers, to the trusted importers, to the trusted
customs programs. And we are working with the private sector to
enhance those benefits and to work with our partner government
agencies.
While there are 47 agencies for which we serve as the
executive agent and we take action at the border on their
behalf, seven agencies, including EPA [the Environmental
Protection Agency], FDA [the Food and Drug Administration]
notably, Agriculture, the Highway Safety Transportation, are
the main agencies for which we work, and that is where the ACE
[Automated Commercial Environment] program is critical. And I
look forward to discussing with the committee the work we are
doing with ACE that is critical to the issue you raise.
Mr. Aderholt. Let me yield now to Mr. Dent. I understand
you have a quick question for clarification.

CARGO SECURITY: CBP AND TSA RESPONSIBILITIES

Mr. Dent. Commissioner Bersin, just quickly. Could you
please clarify for the record the respective roles of CBP and
TSA with regard to screening and inspecting international air
cargo?
It is my understanding that CBP inspects arriving cargo at
ports of entry under its customs authority, but that TSA
inspects and screens U.S.-bound cargo overseas and departing
the U.S. because of its aviation security responsibilities. And
it is the only agency empowered to carry out such screening
overseas. Can you clarify that?
Mr. Bersin. Yes. That is generally correct in terms of
where the physical inspections take place, although TSA relies
on certified screeners in many cases abroad. But we are
involved very heavily in this work in partnership with TSA,
because the targeting work that takes place is done through the
National Targeting Center for Cargo in Herndon, Virginia.
So, for example, when cargo is placed on a commercial
airline or on an express carrier, there is a manifest filing
that is processed by CBP officers in Herndon, Virginia. We are
partnering with TSA, so there are TSA officers.
Mr. Dent. You are talking about the cargo manifest, not the
passengers' manifests?
Mr. Bersin. We analyze the passenger manifest as well at
the National Targeting Center for Passengers. But for cargo, we
co-locate with TSA so that the targeting is being done by CBP
at the NTC-C. But the actual screening, you are correct, is
being done by either TSA personnel or TSA-certified screeners.

CUSTOMS FEE ADJUSTMENT

Mr. Dent. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Let me turn now just briefly--and I know we
have very limited time, and I want to get to a couple more just
for a second round. But as you know, Commissioner, it has been
difficult in getting the customs fee changes enacted in the
past. And of course it is out of this Committee's jurisdiction.
But how will CBP make up that $55 million fee revenue
difference if the legislation is not enacted as we had
discussed earlier?
Mr. Bersin. Mr. Chairman, this is part of a larger issue
and challenge that faces CBP. So, for example, 37 percent of
our CBPOs, 37 percent of the 20,186 officers are actually paid
by user fees. So when we see a decline, which we have seen
during the height of the recession--in 2009 we saw a decline in
user fees of 8 percent--we need to make up the difference and
we do that in the appropriations.
It is not a satisfactory situation, which is why we have
asked for the help of the Congress in both repealing the
exemptions from the COBRA [Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act] fee to generate the $55 million in a period
of constrained budget resources.
But you are correct. If that relief is not there, we need
then to turn to our appropriations. And we do it in a way
consistent with the appropriations, but in a way that does not
permit the predictability or, as Ms. Roybal-Allard's question
suggested, with the growth projectory that we have seen where
there is an appropriation made in the case of the Border
Patrol, and we have seen a steady growth.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, as we mentioned earlier, it is about
truth-in-budgeting. We need a responsible request from the
Administration for operations, especially in light of the fact
that we have a shortage of officers at major airports. And
these are things that certainly we need to pay attention to.
At this time, let me go ahead and recognize Mr. Price.

CARGO SECURITY: CONTAINER SECURITY INITIATIVE

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Commissioner, I want to get into another of the 100
percent mandates you are dealing with from the 9/11 Act, this
one having to do with the scanning of U.S.-bound cargo
overseas. I will not have time to ask the full question and you
won't have time to fully answer it, so we will both no doubt
make submissions for the record.
But let me just flag this issue, because I think it is
important and I think there is a certain ambiguity in your
budget with respect to the 2-year intentions.
I have made it abundantly clear that I share the
Secretary's skepticism that the 100 percent mandate is
achievable, certainly within the 2012 time frame. She just said
it is not going to work. And I believe it would probably take a
prohibitive amount of resources to scan all cargo overseas at
any near point in time.
In any event, DHS has chosen a different path. I think you
have made that quite clear. You are using a risk-based
methodology, using advance information and intelligence to
target the high-risk, highest risk maritime cargo for scanning
overseas.
Now, in light of this, I want to ask you to elaborate on
your budget request and on the future, in particular, of the
Secure Freight Initiative program, which, as you know, is the
pilot program involving 100 percent scanning overseas, and the
Container Security Initiative which involves dozens of ports
overseas where the targeting methodology is being implemented
and perfected.
The earlier budget request that you made for 2011 seems to
envision certainly the scaling down, if not the phasing out of
the Secure Freight Initiative pilots in all places except
Pakistan. Yet your 2012 budget includes funding for two pilots
to test the 100 percent screening mandate. In essence, as I
read it, replicating the SFI model used in Pakistan in a
different high-threat corridor likely on the Arabian peninsula.
I do not understand the consistency of that request with the
path the Department has chosen and with your earlier funding
proposals.
And then, also, we need to know what the future of CSI is.
Is it really feasible to reduce the overseas physical presence
of your officers in these ports where this is a very difficult
thing to carry out? Is it really feasible to reduce that to the
degree that you are suggesting? And in any event, what is the
future of the CSI approach and the kind of pattern you
anticipate for continuing and enhancing this kind of work
overseas?
Mr. Aderholt. Commissioner, let me just say, we have that
joint session. If you could just briefly maybe answer Mr. Price
and then maybe submit the rest of your answer. I do want to let
Mr. Carter get one question in before we go to the joint
session. So if you will briefly answer that, and then we will
go to Mr. Carter.
Mr. Bersin. Yes, sir.
In a word, we should supplement the record, and we will,
because these are very serious issues. And with regard to the
Secure Freight Initiative (SFI), we think that the pilots have
demonstrated that we should restrict the application of that
model, which is basically getting X-Ray images taken abroad by
foreign service nationals and transmitted to Virginia for
analysis. We think that should be restricted to those
relatively few countries where American officers would not be
safe. So in fact, we do not have officers in Pakistan, and that
is why we have maintained the SFI in that form there.
The CSI [Container Security Initiative], frankly the
changes there--which we need to elaborate--are fully consistent
with the difference in circumstances between 2002 and today. So
in fact in 2002, we had no advanced data. We had no automated
targeting capabilities. We had no NTC. We had no Do Not Load
authority. We had a limited overseas presence. We had very few
international relationships. That situation has completely
changed 8 years later, 9 years later. And the CSI program,
still very critical, needs to evolve and is evolving, and this
budget reflects that.
But Mr. Chairman, if I may, we would like to supplement
that. And Mr. Price, if possible, I would like to have an
opportunity to go into much greater detail on what the new CSI
looks like and how it is consistent with the goals that you
have espoused and articulated.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Commissioner.
Mr. Carter.

BORDER SECURITY: STONEGARDEN GRANTS

Mr. Carter. Thank you.
We have a short time scheduled here. Operation Stonegarden
grants are in your budget. How are they being utilized? Has
there been any mention of that today? And is there anything
that is preventing them from being utilized?
Mr. Bersin. No, sir. What we have done is channeled and
funneled the Stonegarden grants, which were border related. We
funneled them to the area of greatest impact and need, which is
the southwest border. These funds permit local law enforcement,
sheriff departments from Texas, police departments in
California, to actually use their officers overtime in
operations that are related to border security.
The Secretary and I are great proponents of this program,
and that program will continue and hopefully be strengthened
over the years to come.
Mr. Carter. If there are ways to strengthen this program
let us know what they are.
Mr. Bersin. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Commissioner, for being here
today. We look forward to working with you on these issues. And
the meeting is adjourned.
Mr. Bersin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Thursday, March 10, 2011.

U.S. COAST GUARD

WITNESS

ADMIRAL ROBERT J. PAPP, JR., COMMANDANT, U.S. COAST GUARD

Opening Statement: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The Subcommittee will come to order. And
today we welcome Admiral Papp, the Commandant of the Coast
Guard, to what makes his first appearance before the
Subcommittee. Admiral, while I think it is safe to say that you
would rather be on the sea, we thank you for being here and we
look forward to your testimony on the Coast Guard's fiscal year
2012 budget request.
The Coast Guard is currently in the midst of one of the
most challenging periods in its 200-year history. On the one
hand, the Coast Guard has laudably responded to unprecedented
operational challenges such as the horrific Haitian earthquake
and the prolonged BP oil spill. At the same time, the agency is
showing real signs of stress and fatigue, to include a
troubling increase in preventible but fatal accidents, higher
maintenance costs, more frequent mechanical casualties aboard
aging cutters and aircraft, and proposals to significantly
scale back operational capabilities, active duty military
personnel, and critical acquisitions.
In the wake of these challenges I believe the Coast Guard
now finds itself at a tipping point between fulfilling its
statutory missions and the realities of our Nation's fiscal
crisis.
In fact, during last month's State of the Coast Guard
Address you stated: Quote, ``We may need to reduce the number
and range of capabilities we have added since 9/11 until
properly resourced, and this will be acceptable.''
Admiral, this statement is disturbing on many levels. It is
a stark admission that your budget does not sufficiently
address your mission needs. And perhaps most troubling, it
appears as though you are limiting the area of your budget that
you are examining for contraction to only post-9/11 security
capabilities. These are concerns that we must candidly discuss
here today.
This brings us to your fiscal year 2012 budget request.
Upon first glance this budget proposal appears fairly robust
and balanced, but on closer examination there are requests in
this budget that will significantly impact current operations
and Coast Guard features.
First, despite your assertions that the Coast Guard must
reconsider its mission priorities, your budget and its 5-year
projection continues to support a mission needs assessment that
was last updated in 2004.
Second, your budget proposes more than $140 million in so-
called efficiencies, administrative savings, and support
reductions that are not clearly defined. Considering the fact
that the Coast Guard claimed just last month that it needed a
budget adjustment of $107 million for operations just to make
ends meet and complete the current year, we need the details
behind these seemingly arbitrary reductions.
Third, the Office of Management and Budget is delaying the
fifth National Security Cutter by forcing you to fund closeout
activities before you can award a contract for the cutter
production this year. As a result of requesting funds for
activities that will not occur for several years, an even
greater strain will be placed upon your antiquated High
Endurance Cutters and the cost and schedule of the National
Security Cutter will grow.
And finally, you budget proposes to decommission one of the
two heavy icebreakers and further study the needs for polar
capabilities rather than confront the budget realities of what
are known mission needs.
Admiral, at a time when the threats facing our Nation are
as grave as they have ever been and our deficit spending is out
of control, the first thing we need is truth in budgeting that
gets our security priorities right. So the immediate and long-
term impact of your budget request and how it supports our
mission requirements are what we need to better understand here
in this hearing this afternoon.
Admiral, we know that you have a tough job. That is
precisely why we are relying on you to explain how this budget
moves the Coast Guard forward and does so in a way that is
fiscally responsible and appropriately justified.
Before I turn to the Admiral for his statement, let me
recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr. Price, of this
Subcommittee for any remarks he may wish to make.
[The information follows:]

Opening Statement: Chairman Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, welcome to the
Subcommittee. You assumed the Commandant's position just over 8
months ago and we are pleased to welcome you here today for
your first hearing, before us anyway, on the Coast Guard's 2012
budget request.
Over the past year, the Coast Guard has operated in a
number of challenging environments: From the earthquake in
Haiti, where you assisted in both humanitarian efforts and port
restoration, to the unprecedented Deepwater Horizon oil rig
explosion and cleanup where over 3,000 of your personnel
recovered more than 34 million gallons of oil-water mix and
performed controlled burns to remove more than 11 million
gallons of oil to protect our shorelines. Those were impressive
feats, and I commend all of the men and women of the Coast
Guard for your efforts.
While there have been these high notes, the Coast Guard has
also experienced some unfortunate events. Over the past 2 years
the Coast Guard has had too many accidents. I know you agree.
Accidents that resulted in the tragic loss of 14 aviators and a
Marine Safety and Security Team member. This accident rate is
unprecedented, and I know you are working hard to rectify it.
You have required aviation standdowns to review safety
operations and have implemented recommendations from these
assessments. We hope and pray that these efforts pay off and we
can avoid these type of mishaps during the remainder of 2011
and through the next fiscal year.
In total, the administration is requesting $8.677 billion
in discretionary resources for the Coast Guard in fiscal 2010.
This level is about 2 percent, or $135.5 million, above the
2010 enacted level. I am pleased to note that this request does
not include some elements with which this Subcommittee
disagreed last year: Significant reductions in manpower, for
example, or accelerated decommissioning of planes and ships
without the timely acquisition of new ones to replace them.
Admiral, your State of the Coast Guard Address of February
10th gave advanced notice of key aspects of your 2012 budget
request. You emphasized recapitalizing and building capacity as
well as crisis response and management capabilities. You are
requesting $1.4 billion to rebuild your aviation and cutter
assets so that you can replace aging and unreliable assets. The
budget also includes a substantial increase in shore facilities
to accommodate these new assets as they come online. There is
$22.2 million to hire new personnel to enhance your agency's
ability to prevent disasters in the Nation's waters and respond
to them when they occur. And the budget includes $39 million
for the polar ice breaking program, an activity that was
recently transferred from the National Science Foundation to
the Coast Guard.
At the same time the Coast Guard, like every Homeland
Security agency, has been asked to be good stewards of taxpayer
dollars and to find savings where possible. This budget
includes approximately $130 million in savings from management
efficiencies, administrative services, and the decommissioning
of aging assets that will be replaced by 2012.
I understand that these reductions will in no way
jeopardize your ability to update your ships, planes, boats and
shore facilities so the Coast Guard can continue to perform its
mission unimpeded. We will count on you to let the Subcommittee
know if this is not the case.
We hold the men and women of the Coast Guard in the highest
regard on this Subcommittee. To paraphrase your statement in
the Coast Guard address: You protect citizens from the sea, you
protect America from threats delivered by the sea, and you
protect the sea itself. All are distinct missions yet
interrelated and critically important.
Our job here today and through the appropriations process
is to ensure that your budget adequately resources the Coast
Guard to fulfill these missions. At the same time it is
important to note that no program or account is off limits to
scrutiny. I know you share that point of view, Admiral, and I
look forward to working with you again this year.
[The information follows:]

opening statement: admiral papp

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price. Admiral Papp, we look
forward to hearing your testimony.
Admiral Papp. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Price. Sir, you are absolutely right. I would rather be
at sea, but I got about 14 years of my career where I was able
to do that, and as an old sailor on a day like today when it is
rainy and cold outside, I welcome the opportunity to be inside
the room. But more than anything else, I am privileged to be
here so that I can try to provide that support that the people
who are currently sailing out there and protecting our shores
desperately need.
Over the past year Americans have seen the Coast Guard in
action like never before: In January, responding to the
devastating earthquake in Haiti and in April responding to the
Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion and oil spill. These
responses received a lot of attention and rightly so. But all
the while, thousands of Coast Guard men and women were also
performing our many other challenging and persistent maritime
missions.
This past week is typical. The Coast Guard Vessel Traffic
Service in Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, which is on the St.
Mary's River in Michigan, or what local mariners call Sault
Traffic, celebrated its 115th year of operation. Last year,
Sault Traffic helped 61,500 vessels to safely carry over 70
million tons of cargo with a value of over $3 billion. And our
Coast Guard ice breakers are up there now enabling the flow of
cargoes like iron ore and coal from the fields of Minnesota
being shipped to the steel mills in Indiana and Ohio, cargo
that is critical to American jobs and to our economy.
Just last week as well, eight members of a Coast Guard
Maritime Safety and Security Team from San Diego returned home
from a 4-month deployment in the Gulf of Aden in support of our
joint task force anti-piracy mission. The Coast Guard has been
training boarding teams to board U.S. Navy ships and conducted
three high-risk boardings of suspected pirate vessels. Also,
last week in the Gulf of Mexico, Coast Guard air and cutter
crews from Mobile, New Orleans, and Morgan City rescued oil
workers from their platform when it caught fire and then
monitored for pollution.
The 39-year-old cutter Midget, actually the youngest of our
High Endurance Cutters, returned from a counter-drug patrol in
the eastern Pacific, where the patrol detected and intercepted
a self-propelled semi-submersible vessel disrupting 2 tons of
cocaine and containing two suspected smugglers.
In the Straits of Florida, the cutter Ocracoke repatriated
14 Cuban migrants after they were interdicted along with two
suspected smugglers from a small vessel just north of Cuba. And
the cutters Bear and Kodiak Island rescued and interdicted 87
Cuban migrants who were bound for Miami and 6 brave lieutenants
and their crews onboard. Six Coast Guard patrol boats in the
northern Arabian Gulf continue to serve our country and provide
for the security of the country of Iraq working for the Central
Command.
These missions protect U.S. national interests. They are
missions that not only the Coast Guard has the authorities,
competencies and capabilities to do, but no one else can do
them. Our Homeland is safer and more secure because Coast Guard
men and women perform them so ably.
What concerns me is that our aging fleet of cutters and
aircraft continue to cost us both in dollars and in mission
performance. It is vital that we protect our waterways by
sustaining frontline operations while continuing to
recapitalize our fleet.
So as you noted, I reported in my State of the Coast Guard
Address our service is ready to meet mission demands, but we
are facing many challenges. Our fiscal year 2012 budget request
responds to these challenges. Given current fiscal realities, I
have directed management efficiencies and targeted reductions
in administrative costs and professional services totaling over
$100 million. We will reinvest these savings in frontline
operations. And my priorities for this budget are: first, to
sustain our frontline operations; second, to rebuild the Coast
Guard; third, to enhance maritime incident prevention and
response; and then last, to support our military families.
Now, in sustaining our frontline operations, the fiscal
year 2012 budget requests roughly $200 million over either the
President's request for 2011 or the continuing resolution. It
funds the military pay raise and increases in other benefits,
which enable our service to continue to maintain and attract
highly competent people. It also provides operating funds for
the new National Security Cutter, new patrol boats, new
response boats, new maritime patrol aircraft, and support for
our obsolete polar ice breakers. And it increases depot-level
funding to sustain our aging fleet of ships and aircraft.
In terms of rebuilding the Coast Guard, my second priority,
we are requesting over $1.4 billion for our ongoing
recapitalization effort, an effort that has already begun to
show operational impact.
As an example, during her first patrol, the National
Security Cutter Bertholf interdicted 12,500 kilograms of
cocaine with a street value of nearly $400 million and detained
nine suspected drug smugglers. Last week, one of our new
Maritime Patrol Aircraft, the Ocean Sentry, was instrumental in
disrupting two drug smuggling events in the Strait of Florida
and then diverted to assist a vessel that was taking on water,
all in a single patrol, and was able to do that because it has
twice the duration of flight over the aircraft that it is
replacing and carries a modern sensor package.
New assets like the National Security Cutter and the
Maritime Patrol Aircraft enhance our ability to keep drugs from
reaching our shores and literally save lives.
In terms of enhancing maritime incident prevention and
response, it is vital that we ensure the safe and efficient
flow of maritime commerce, protect our national resources, and
effectively manage incidents when they occur. The 2012 budget
does this by improving the capacity and competency of our work
force. $10.7 million is allocated for the hiring of additional
marine inspectors, investigators, and fishing vessel safety
examiners, and $11.5 million is provided to fund a new national
Incident Management Assist Team (IMAT). The IMAT will assist in
day-to-day missions and respond to large-scale events such as
spills of national significance, hurricanes, or other
disasters.
Then finally, supporting military families. You can't have
a strong military workforce without healthy families, and this
budget puts us on track to receive needed housing construction
monies and funds that will begin to close the child care gap
that we find compared to the Department of Defense.
In conclusion, for over 220 years the Coast Guard has
provided for the safety and security of American citizens and
our ports and waterways. As the lead maritime component of the
Department of Homeland Security, the fiscal year 2012 budget
will ensure that the Coast Guard is able to continue to perform
our vital maritime missions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions, sir.
[The statement of Admiral Papp follows:]

FLEET MIX STUDY

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Admiral. You have been very frank
about the reality of competing mission priorities in a world of
increasingly limited resources. Yet as I noted in my opening
remarks, your budget continues to support the mission needs
assessment that was done back in 2004. My understanding is the
Coast Guard has been working for years on an update as to that
2004 study known as the Fleet Mix Study, but has yet to submit
it to Congress.
Where is the Fleet Mix Study and when will it be submitted
to Congress?
Admiral Papp. Well, sir, there is nobody that feels more
strongly about getting the right tools out there to our people
than I do. Over the last 6 years, 4 of those years have been
spent on operational command assignments first in the Great
Lakes and then responsibility for the entire Atlantic area and
managing those very hard to maintain ships and watching the
very hard working crews that struggle to maintain those old
ships and keep them on station performing missions. So I am
absolutely desperate to get the new ships out there.
We continue to study this, we have conducted study after
study, which seems to confirm the direction which we are going
in, and we need to be about the business of building ships.
The fleet mix analysis that you asked for is in review. We
have completed the first portion of it, and it is with GAO
[Government Accountability Office] right now. I can tell you
that it does support the baseline approach that we are taking
in terms of recapitalizing our fleet and indicates that the
ships that we have already embarked upon building will perform
better than those that are out there, but we understand that
intuitively already.
What we are in the process of right now is doing the second
and third levels of that study, which impose cost constraints,
and then also look at unconstrained environments and what the
Coast Guard would need to fully perform our mission.
Mr. Aderholt. When do you think that you will be able to
submit a study to us here at the Congress?
Admiral Papp. As I said, sir, we have submitted it to GAO
right now. It is continuing to be reviewed by the
administration, and I am pushing as hard as I can to get it to
you as soon as we can because it supports our needs.
Mr. Aderholt. So right now you are pretty much at their
mercy at waiting to hear back from them?
Admiral Papp. I am working with the Secretary and the
administration to get it to you as quickly as we can, sir, and
I will redouble those efforts.

SECURITY-RELATED MISSIONS: CUTBACKS

Mr. Aderholt. What security-related missions are you
examining for either elimination or contraction?
Admiral Papp. Sir, I think some people who have listened to
my speeches have mischaracterized what I am talking about. We
have no intent to cut back on any of our security
responsibilities, and I firmly believe in the need to do most
of the things that we are doing out there.
When I talk about cutting back on some of our activities,
what I am talking about is looking at the full range of
activities that we have asked some of our units to do. And if I
could focus in just one area. We have Maritime Safety and
Security Teams. They are roughly about 80 people who are tasked
with providing fast response. We refer to them as sea-going
SWAT teams. They are located, as you know, around the country,
and they drive boats tactically. They have to be well-trained
and proficient in small arms use. And the original intent was
to have them provide fixed and moving security zones around
events of national significance and provide extra capacity in
ports when security warrants it.
Because of our general can-do attitude in the Coast Guard,
we have looked for other things for them to do as well. And
what we have done is we have added additional activities that
they have to become qualified to do, in some cases, things that
people haven't even asked us to do, but because we are
imaginative, enthusiastic, dedicated and hard working, we try
to train those people up to do those activities.
What I want to do now is look at the broad range of
activities that we have asked these units to do, and then
determine exactly what are the most important activities we
ought to do that get the most bang for the buck for security in
our ports, and then train these units to become absolutely
proficient in those activities. It may require us to drop a
couple of things.
For instance, one of the things we are doing right now is
training those Maritime Safety and Security Teams to do opposed
boardings, which is another level of expertise--for these
people to be able to go on ships where you have armed people
and, perhaps, opposing them as they try to board. I don't
believe these teams were ever intended for that specific
purpose, but if that is needed, then we need to provide the
proper resources, the proper training programs. And, in fact,
the one Coast Guardsman who was lost that, Mr. Price mentioned,
was involved in a training exercise for that specific
competency. And we are giving not only that case a thorough
review, but I have also taken one of my admirals, Admiral Paul
Zukunft, and he is in charge of undertaking a stem-to-stern
review, which is looking at all of our deployable specialized
forces and making a determination on what are the most
important things for them to be doing and then making sure they
are doing it absolutely right and in a safe and effective
manner.

ACQUISITION PROGRAM

Mr. Aderholt. The fiscal year 2012 budget notably proposes
a new budget structure to reflect the acquisition reform
efforts the Coast Guard has undertaken over the past few years
post Deepwater. However, this new budget structure does not
help Congress understand the scope, schedule, and cost of the
Coast Guard's recapitalization since acquisitions are no longer
framed under one umbrella.
What is the impact of the dissolution of Deepwater on the
planned recapitalization efforts in terms of acquisitions and
their associated costs?
Admiral Papp. Mr. Chairman, I think it should actually
assist the Subcommittee in having greater granularity on how we
are conducting this project. I am extremely proud of the
improvements and the progress that our acquisition program has
made. I was involved with then Rear Admiral Currier, who is now
our Chief of Staff of the Coast Guard, 4 years ago when I was
Chief of Staff of the Coast Guard, working with Admiral Allen,
to reform our acquisition programs, and we have come a long
way.
Parts of that is disassociating ourselves with a lead
systems integrator in the Deepwater project where all of these
things were lumped together and it was very difficult to
disaggregate and identify exact costs for each one of the
projects that was contained within. In other words, you did not
know necessarily exactly how much one of the national security
cutters was costing as opposed to a fast response cutter or a
patrol boat replacement or some of the aircraft in there.
Proper acquisition execution requires that you disaggregate all
of these projects, establish acquisition project baselines for
each one of them, set schedules, come up with predictable
funding streams, and then execute on a stable program.
The National Security Cutter, I think, is the one that I am
most proud of, and we have worked very hard over the last
couple of years to come up with now a fixed price contract,
handling that separately with the Coast Guard dealing directly
with Northrop Grumman to build the ships. We have come up with
a fair price for that ship now. It is a little more expensive
than we thought under the original project, but we can confirm
and we can validate what these costs are because we are looking
at them independently. Each one of our projects in the former
Deepwater project can be looked at in that manner now, and it
will enable me to better inform you in your oversight role as
we go forward over the next couple of years.
Mr. Aderholt. Under this new organization, how will you
manage and measure the Coast Guard's progress of
recapitalization?
Admiral Papp. Well, we have acquisition project baselines
where we have predicted individual projects, whether it is the
national security cutter or the fast response cutter or our
aircraft, and what years we intend to buy them. Of course, that
gets revised almost every year depending upon the limits of the
acquisition funding within our budget.
This year you made note of the fact that there was a delay
in awarding National Security Cutter No. 5. We were backed into
that situation because, as we took the time to properly
negotiate a fixed price contract before we awarded National
Security Cutter No. 4, we were dealing with presumptions upon
what we would need in the outyear budgets in order to pay for
the next in that series of ships. They came in a little bit
more than what we expected and now we are having to, in the
fiscal year 2012 budget, for instance, ask for $77 million more
to complete NSC [National Security Cutter] No. 5 before we can
award it. And because of that, and the requirement, as you
noted, to put the full price of any subsequent ships in a
single-year budget, we decided to alter some of the other
baseline acquisitions in that project: the fast response
cutter, our patrol boat replacement, for instance. We can move
some of those into fiscal year 2012 and perhaps buy out that
program a little more quickly to make room in our budget in the
outyears.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. All right. I think my time has elapsed.
Mr. Price.

COAST GUARD MISSIONS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, let me pick up
on the line of questioning the Chairman was originally
pursuing. We all have referenced your State of the Coast Guard
Address, a good address which received more than the usual
attention. You have issued a caveat here today that you are not
interested in unilaterally or summarily redefining the Coast
Guard's mission. We understand that. But at the same time I
think that address, many of those points, were well taken. And
certainly the overall assertion that the mission needs to be
defined very clearly and perhaps in key aspects reconsidered,
it seems to me those were serious points that deserve to be
followed up on.
You have historical responsibilities, search and rescue,
fisheries enforcement, drug interdiction, marine environmental
protection. You have some post-September 11th missions, or at
least that is mainly when they have come to the fore, maritime
and port security operations, inspecting high-interest vessels,
providing escorts for certainly military vessels. And at the
same time you have some responsibilities that are changing
before our eyes and that continue to be underdeveloped,
particularly in light of these changes. The one that most
obviously comes to mind is your role in the Arctic as the ice
recedes. This Subcommittee reviewed Arctic operations in Alaska
last year, and Admiral Colvin spoke very passionately and
persuasively about this changing and challenging mission.
So I want to ask you three interrelated questions. First,
can you be more specific? You have offered one illustration
here today, you might offer a little more elaboration about
what you were referring to in your speech. What do you believe
the core missions are? What is dispensable? What areas do you
think the Coast Guard should not be asked to work in? And
honestly, are there gray areas? Are there areas that really
deserve further deliberation and debate? They are going to need
to be performed possibly by someone somewhere in our military
or Federal establishment and yet there is some uncertainty
about where the responsibility should lie.
Secondly, specifically, about these post-9/11
responsibilities, what is your assessment of the Coast Guard's
capability and your assessment of what the mission going
forward should look like there? And if there is to be a
lessening or shifting of responsibility, who, if anyone, should
pick it up?
And then finally, to what extent is this hard look that you
are talking about reflected in your 2012 budget request? To
what extent have you been able to already act on some of your
convictions here, and to what extent is this a work in
progress?
Admiral Papp. Well, sir, in terms of balancing the
missions, and one of the questions I always get particularly as
a result of some of the times I speak and the State of the
Coast Guard speeches (``What missions are you going to cut?'')
I cannot cut any missions. All of our 11 mission areas are
statutorily mandated missions that we perform.
And as I stated in the State of the Coast Guard speech, we
have a requirement to perform those. But we can't perform all
11 statutory missions 100 percent any given day. The
Administration, the Congress, and the taxpayers through the
Congress, give us a finite set of resources to use and then our
operational commanders have to apply them. And that is what I
have been doing most of my career as an operator, and in
particular the last 2 years before coming here as the Atlantic
area commander. I was given only so many ships, so many people
and so many aircraft to carry out the mission. And, on any
given day--some of the persistent missions out there, as you
know: search and rescue, migrant interdiction, marine
environmental response, drug interdiction--you cannot do all of
those things every day. As an operational commander, you use
your staff, you develop priorities, you see where the risks and
the threats are from based on intelligence, and then you assign
those resources.
The Haitian earthquake is just a perfect example of what I
am talking about. We had cutters that were under way in the
Caribbean, in the Florida straits, and in the Windward Pass
either doing migrant interdiction, drug interdiction, or other
duties down there, and those were the priorities for that given
day, the day before the earthquake. When the earthquake
occurred in Haiti, there was a national need for us to provide
humanitarian response to those unfortunate people in Haiti.
So literally overnight we took our finite number of
cutters, cutters that were deployed on other missions, and
repositioned them to Haiti. And, in fact, the next morning, the
morning after the earthquake, we had two Coast Guard cutters
steam in there, immediately start doing reconnaissance by
surveying the damage and sending medical teams ashore. It
demonstrates the great versatility, adaptability, and
flexibility that comes with a Coast Guard resource. We can move
it from one mission to another.
But taking cognizance of the fact that when I did that--
when I directed those ships to go to Haiti, I was going to take
a short-term deficit in drug interdiction and in migrant
interdiction and some of the other duties that we do. But it
was a national priority. We responded to it. We do not have
Haitian earthquake cutters sitting out there. What we have is
multi-mission cutters, ships and people that can respond to
events like that.
So that is the type of decisions that our operational
commanders are confronted with on a daily basis out there.
Would we like to have the resources to do 100 percent in every
mission area? Of course we would. But we are also citizens of
the country and understand that we need to tighten our belts
and understand that resources are constrained, and so we do the
best we can and then identify the shortfalls in terms of
mission accomplishment and do our best to get the support. And
right now, as I said, the support is to try to replace some of
those old ships and versatile aircraft that we have got out
there.
You asked about post-9/11. I gave you the example of the
Maritime Safety and Security Teams. Perhaps one of the ones
that I am even more passionate about is our aviation program
within the Coast Guard. And I am passionate about that because,
as you note, we have lost 14 aviators in 2 years. That is
unacceptable. I have had to attend and speak at two memorial
services just in the time that I have been Commandant. And I
don't want to speak at any more memorial services in my
service.
We have essentially the same numbers of aircraft--let's say
helicopters--we have the same numbers of helicopters and pilots
that we did prior to 9/11. Yet we have added on additional
missions. Prior to 9/11, almost all that our helicopters and
pilots did was search and rescue. They trained very hard to go
out in the middle of the night in the middle of storms and
hover over broken-down ships and put swimmers in the water and
rescue people from certain catastrophe and death. And we have
the best pilots in the world doing that.
But since 9/11, we have picked up additional
responsibilities. We now do rotary wing air intercept (RWAI),
which is a mission to intercept low slow aircraft that might
have intent of doing a suicide mission on the Capitol or on the
White House. We have airborne use of force, where we train our
people to carry marksmen on the sides of helicopters and
potentially shoot out outboard engines on small boats that
might be coming to do us harm. We are doing vertical insertion,
where we are taking assault Coast Guardsmen trained for assault
who lower themselves out of helicopters on rope onto
noncompliant vessels.
All of these things place an added training burden upon our
people, and they are not necessarily complementary skills for
our pilots for the search and rescue mission. So right now,
where we used to devote about 40 percent of our flight hours
for training for search and rescue, we are devoting 60 percent
of our flight hours for training for various missions that
might not necessarily complement each other and, in my simple
sailor's estimation, dilutes the experience and proficiency
level across those mission sets.
No one asked us to do all those things. We took that on
ourselves in many cases, and I think it is incumbent upon me as
a leader who has lost people now to take a very serious look at
all those things that we are doing and say perhaps we don't
need to be doing all of that. Perhaps there are other agencies
that might do it better. Or if the Coast Guard is the best to
do it and there is a need to do it, then I need to go forth to
the Congress and the administration and say I need additional
resources to do it. So that is where I am coming from on that
aspect of post-9/11 duties.
And then the hard look at, yes, the third question was the
hard look at those missions and our security. I am convinced
that we are doing our best to provide for the security of our
country. On any given day if we are alerted to a threat through
intelligence, which is where we get most of our stuff, we will
redivert every force we have and put it on security operations,
neglecting and taking the short-term downturn in other
activities because that is what we do. We are a versatile,
adaptable force that can move between those mission areas. And
my operational commanders, we push that down as low as we can
in the organization to make those decisions, to make sure that
we are doing the highest priority mission on any given day for
our country.
Mr. Price. Let me simply commend you for your candor and
for your willingness to take on these significant issues
frontally. I hope and believe you will find on this
Subcommittee, on a bipartisan basis, ready partners in going
through this necessary exercise and putting our, not just our
budget, but our national security on a firmer foundation in the
future.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Frelinghuysen.

OVERSEAS ACTIVITIES

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, one of
your strongest advocates is my colleague from New Jersey, Frank
LoBiondo, who, if you will pardon the expression, has felt that
the Coast Guard gets the short end of the stick. And I have to
say, with the things that you are doing today around the world.
I worry that you are shunted off under the aegis of the
Department of Homeland Security. I see you in another venue. I
serve on the Defense Appropriations Committee, and I would like
to have you explore with the committee your involvement with
the Navy.
You get funding through the Navy's operations and
maintenance accounts for what some call the ``supplemental
overseas contingency operations,'' AKA, it used to be called
the war on terror. Can you talk about how those dollars are
spent and how you work with the Navy?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir, thank you. I for one, just because
you brought it up, I am a strong believer that we belong in the
Department of Homeland Security. Not every one of our mission
sets fits neatly or exactly and precisely, but nor did it in
the Department of Transportation either. There is always some
portion of our mission sets that is not an exact fit, but right
now we are fit in with a bunch of other agencies that have----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are you ever?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. But let me tell you why. And people
from time to time make the suggestion that perhaps we should be
in the Department of Defense. I think that we would be so small
in the Department of Defense that oftentimes we would get
overlooked there as well. And I think there is a value to
having an armed service that is not in the Department of
Defense because we do have those law enforcement authorities
that none of the other four services have.
And having said that, as I described to Secretary
Napolitano when I interviewed with her originally----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. With all due respect, I want to focus on
your connection. I think it is good for you to advocate to be
where you are. But I would like to know how you connect with
the Navy. I think a lot of people are unaware of what your
people are doing on the high seas. They may be aware of what
you are doing in the Caribbean and intercepting drugs that are
coming out of Colombia and other countries, but you are playing
an integral role in the overseas theater. And I would like to
know how you are sort of matching your assets, which are
limited, in terms of surface vessels, but what are you doing
over there that you could tell the committee that shows that we
have a good substantial investment?
Admiral Papp. Well, Sir, to give you the down-in-the-weeds
activities that we are actually involved in, as I mentioned
during my opening comments, we have a patrol boat squadron over
there. They [the patrol boats] have been over there nearly 8
years now, six of our island class patrol boats commanded by
lieutenants, and they are providing security operations for the
oil platforms off the coast of Iraq and also doing engagement
with the other emerging coast guards and navies within the
Arabian Gulf, working under the Navy component commander and
Central Command located in Bahrain.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Does the Coast Guard have a role in
training some of those foreign navies?
Admiral Papp. Absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. To take on some of these obligations--
and honestly maybe this is a mischaracterization--some of those
navies wouldn't be exactly what we would call the U.S. Navy.
They would be, in terms of their size and capabilities,
somewhat parallel to yours.
Admiral Papp. I can guarantee you, sir, that as I travel--
--
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are superior, of course.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir, absolutely. Almost every navy in
the world--there is no other navy except for perhaps China, who
is trying to build a large ocean-going navy, that is a peer
competitor of our United States Navy. So most of the navies and
coast guards around the world are actually more like the U.S.
Coast Guard. They are concerned about piracy, drug smuggling,
migrant smuggling, fisheries protection, and consequently we
are in high demand around the world. In fact, we just got an
inquiry this morning from the Indian Coast Guard that would
like to open up some exchange with us because they have
patterned themselves after us, and I have attended numerous
international forums where I have spoken with the CNOs or heads
of Coast Guards of other countries.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are involved in joint exercises? Are
you involved in providing some lead in terms of training?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir, we have operations that we do in
the Pacific where we deploy right now. Given the numbers of
cutters that we still have, we are able to devote one ship per
year to the European Command and Africa Command to do training
with navies. In fact, we have been involved in the Africa
Partnership Station, training the emerging navies of some of
the smaller countries in Africa.
We generally deploy one cutter out to the western Pacific
to work with, for the United States Navy, but to train some of
the smaller coast guards and navies and others. And we exchange
with China, Japan, Russia, South Korea. We also have forums
that we work in, the North Pacific Coast Guard Forum, for
example.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am for those exchanges. I hope you are
not doing any training of the Chinese. They are progressing
without any support from us.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, and I join my colleagues in thanking
you for your service to our country, and congratulations to
you.
Admiral Papp. Thank you, Ma'am.

SMALL VESSEL THREATS

Mrs. Lowey. Pleasure to meet you today. You referenced
small boats before, and in previous testimony before the
subcommittee, Admiral Allen has stated that the top maritime
threat we face was from small boats. [And in 2009, the
Inspector General found that the Nation's ports, waterways
and--I am coughing and you are drinking water. That is a
change.]
In 2009, the Inspector General found that the Nation's
ports, waterways, and maritime borders remain vulnerable to
small vessel threats.
Given that, when terrorists attacked Mumbai, they did so
using relatively small speedboats. If you could share with us
the Coast Guard's actions, activities to prevent similar entry
from occurring in the United States, particularly in New York
City, and what specific actions has the Coast Guard taken in
light of that Inspector General report and what more can this
subcommittee do to help?
Admiral Papp. Well, Ma'am, I caution to make too many
connections with the Mumbai attack. I have studied that in
detail. They [terrorists] used the conveyance of boats, but
that was driven to a certain extent because of the people
coming from Pakistan to India and the inability or the more
difficult problems they would have in terms of transiting a
land border there. It is interesting to study, and certainly
something we need to be concerned about, but the type of attack
that was carried out could be done in numerous ways; it just
happened to be landed by sea in this particular case.
Mrs. Lowey. However, didn't the Inspector General make a
statement, I believe it was 2009, that our ports, waterways,
maritime borders remain vulnerable to small vessel threats? I
am glad that after study that you don't think that is the case.
Admiral Papp. No, I didn't say that wasn't the case. I said
in the Mumbai attack that we can't draw a direct conclusion
that that type of attack would occur only by small boat. It
could, and I agree with the Inspector General's report that in
fact our waterways are vulnerable. One of the challenges that
we have is with the roughly 14 million registered recreational
boaters out there. It is very difficult to monitor all these
things.
So we do it to a large extent on the basis of intelligence,
watching trends and analyzing and following up on any leads
that we have. One of the best things we can do is simply
presence on the water. In that regard, we have, besides the
Maritime Safety and Security Teams, which are there for surge
efforts--Many of our stations, particularly in New York City,
have grown over the last 10 years since 9/11. We have gone from
about 45 people at Station New York to 90 people right now and
increased commensurately the number of boats there as well for
our Coast Guard people.
But also knowing that we can't do it all on our own, our
Sector New York Commander works through the Area Maritime
Security Committee, which brings in the city officials, Ray
Kelly's folks, the New York City police, their maritime units,
county officials and industry as well, to make sure that
everybody is aware, everybody is looking, they share
information, and they follow up on leads and inform each other.
Then we also have our Coast Guard Auxiliary that is out
there on a regular basis raising awareness in the ports,
speaking to recreational boaters out there and encouraging them
to report things that look out of the ordinary. So we are
working on many prongs out there to try to increase security. A
lot of it is just having presence, knowing the area, knowing
the people who should be there and who looks strange.
In fact, in the Mumbai attack, there was an Indian Coast
Guard boat that went through the area, and in the interviews
afterward, they had questions in their mind but did not follow
up on those and do a boarding and investigate, which might have
thwarted the attack. So having people presence on the water,
people who understand the operation area, who are familiar with
it, and know who is supposed to be there or not takes us a long
way toward providing that security and awareness.

SECURITY OF FRIENDLY PORTS

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you very much.
As events continue to unravel throughout the Middle East,
there is potential for a serious disruption of our efforts in
the region. Has any of the unrest to date affected or modified
your mission in the Persian Gulf? And what would the impact for
your personnel be if friendly ports such as in Bahrain were
suddenly with little warning unavailable to Coast Guard
vessels?
Admiral Papp. Well, we work for the Navy in Bahrain, and I
know having been over there twice myself, as the Atlantic Area
Commander--I went to Bahrain and Kuwait and Iraq twice and
spoke with the Navy commanders up there--we have contingency
plans on where boats could go to. Bahrain is actually fairly
secure even though there has been some noise there recently. We
have monitored the situation. We were concerned about the
security. There were a few riots, but that all seems to be
under control. Force protection efforts were put in place, and
we are confident that our people are taken care of.
We do also have Kuwait, where we can move our boats to. In
fact, our boats oftentimes, because Kuwait is on the way to the
Iraqi terminals, pull in there for logistics and supply. We
also have a port security unit in Kuwait, a team of about 110
people that provide security for the military onloads and
offloads that occur in the Port of Ash Shuaybah. So I am
confident that my Atlantic Area Commander, Vice Admiral Parker,
he has been over there recently as well--We are confident with
the security considerations and precautions that have been
taken, and I think we are in good shape for now.

RAILROAD BRIDGE PROJECT

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Latham.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a question
that is of great importance in the Midwest, in Iowa. Your St.
Louis District is overseeing a railroad bridge project in
Clinton, Iowa, and I would like to know what you can provide me
with regard to the way in which they intend to balance the
needs of water navigation and rail transportation.
More specifically, I am told that the Union Pacific
Railroad has a plan to build the bridge structure with its own
private resources, and they factored in a 300-foot span, maybe
a little more than that, with the doubling of the current
clearance. I am also told that the Coast Guard may want the
bridge span lengthened to as much as 450 feet. My concern is
that from the UP's standpoint the requirements could get to the
point where they may just wait until the Federal Government
pays for it rather than the private sector.
If you could tell me about your evaluation process--and you
may have to do this for the record, I understand--and what
Coast Guard will go through to ensure that the new bridge
requirements don't unnecessarily tip the expenses to the point
where the private investment would withdraw. Since the proposed
project right now is fully funded with private sector money, it
will generate a lot of jobs right in that area; I would just
like to know how quickly you can get approval, and maybe
accelerate the approval process for the project.
Admiral Papp. Thanks, Mr. Latham, and I am sorry I don't
have the level of detail and granularity that you might expect
of me, and we will provide that for the record. But in a
general response, I think that one of the many strengths of the
Coast Guard is the fact that we act as an honest broker between
the needs of the mariner and the needs of commerce, and we try
to balance those things. Sometimes it is difficult, sometimes
you are not going to please both parties. We do the best we
can. Ultimately we are concerned about the safety of navigation
on the waterway, but we fully comprehend and understand that
commerce has to flow through there as well and those are
oftentimes understandably competing priorities.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Latham. Okay. Well, it is obviously very, very
important. And I just, you know, make sure that you keep your
balance and that you are not just an ancient mariner, you are a
gold ancient mariner.
Thank you. That is all I have.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Crenshaw.

INTERAGENCY COOPERATION

Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You talked a little
bit about efficiency, being more effective, and that is kind of
the buzz word around this place. Everybody doing more with
less. And it is encouraging to hear that. One of the things
that I know a little bit about in my district in northeast
Florida, Jacksonville, there is a seaport, and the Coast Guard
works with the border and customs folks. They call it JMAST. I
don't know exactly what that stands for, but basically they are
working together in a very efficient way. It seems like it
ought to be a model of how two agencies under the same
department can work together in an efficiency and effective
way.
And I am told that the one thing they need, the next step
so to speak, is to be collocated together. They are kind of
spread out. They are still working together as best they can.
But if they were collocated then it would be even more
efficient.
And so I wanted to ask you if you are aware of that
situation, what are you doing to assist them. I don't know,
that was something I was going to ask the Secretary when she
was here, I didn't have a chance, but somehow talking to her
about how to coordinate this move and make it even more
effective.
And then the second question is just that kind of
interagency cooperation brings to mind other areas that maybe--
I don't know if aviation, somewhere, that you might work
together with border folks. So if you could talk a little bit
about that. Number one, how is that going, that JMAST program?
Is that moving ahead? Are they finding a place? And number two,
talk about how that might be a model for other areas of
cooperation.
Admiral Papp. Well, sir, that falls in line with exactly
what I have been talking about: first of all, identifying those
things that the Coast Guard can do, must do, do them well, and
then identify the shortfalls.
Sometimes resources for those shortfalls are not going to
be found within the Coast Guard appropriation, and sometimes
the citizens of this country have already paid for resources in
other ways that perhaps we can leverage. One of my four
principles when I became Commandant was strengthening our
partnerships, and part of that is looking out across the broad
expanse of the Federal Government and determining what other
partners could we work with to fulfill our needs and vice
versa.
The CBP [U.S. Customs and Border Protection] and border
protection is one of those great partners that is within our
own department. And in fact it is ironic that you asked the
question because Commissioner Bersin and I had an hour and 10-
minute breakfast yesterday comparing notes, seeing where we can
work more closely. One of the things I have been tasked to do
is come up with interagency operation centers (IOCs), which
would bring various Federal agencies together, local and State
agencies together, where we can share information in one
operation center to create a seamless response leveraging all
those various agencies to provide the security of our ports.
Jacksonville is one of the great examples of where we are
doing that. The challenge, as you have identified, is where do
you come up with the resources to consolidate and bring them
and collocate themselves together.
We are facing a similar problem in the Coast Guard. We have
restructured our shore commands, our legacy group offices and
marine safety offices. The promise 7 years ago was that we were
going to collocate them together for greater efficiencies. The
challenge, of course, is coming up with the appropriations to
build new buildings. And I think in the current environment, we
are not going to see too many new buildings built. We will
continue to identify those needs, but I think the tough part is
bringing them all together.
Mr. Crenshaw. Whose responsibility is that? Is that
something that Secretary Napolitano has to kind of bless or is
that GSA [General Services Administration] ? If that is a
better way to run the railroad and we will save money in the
long run, is there something that we can help you do to say
look, this is working. Let's move ahead. Because if everybody
is spread out you are not going to have the efficiencies that
it sounds like you understand that you could have when they are
together.
Admiral Papp. Absolutely. I would say yes to all. It has to
be a shared responsibility, and one that is not being mentioned
here is the U.S. Navy as well. What is the bulk of our security
work down there in Jacksonville? It is the ships coming into
the naval station at Mayport and the ships and submarines going
into Kings Bay. I have been down there on the water and watched
those escorts. It is a resource sink properly done of Coast
Guard resources, both on the water and in the operations
center, and I have been working with Admiral Roughead, and when
I was Atlantic Area Commander with Admiral Harvey, who is Fleet
Forces Command, to come up with a way to perhaps have the Navy
provide a building where we can come together.
Mr. Crenshaw. Has somebody talked to the Navy about that?
Admiral Papp. I am, sir, and it continues. Everybody is
facing the same challenges in terms of tightening the belt. But
I think this is what we have to be doing in order to provide,
first of all, the proper service to people and then also to
pool our resources to be able to do it in a more effective
manner. And as we identify those things, I am more than happy
to bring them to the subcommittee and ask you for your help,
sir, in pushing them forward.
Mr. Crenshaw. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.

ARCTIC: POLAR ICEBREAKERS AND OTHER CAPABILITIES

Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
Commandant. First I wanted to thank you and the U.S. Coast
Guard for all the great work you did at the Deepwater Horizon
in the Gulf. I visited there last August and I was very
impressed by your efforts. It was extraordinary.
Do you think if there would be an oil spill in the Arctic
do we have the infrastructure in place to respond quickly and
effectively?
Admiral Papp. No, sir.
Mr. Dent. That was--wow. So I guess the next question is,
heaven forbid, if there were a cruise ship or some other ship
in distress in danger up in the Arctic waters, could you carry
out those types of lifesaving responsibilities?
Admiral Papp. No, sir. But I will elaborate on this if you
don't mind. I think most of our focus over the last few years
has been on polar icebreakers, and we do need to have a
thoughtful discussion on where we are going with polar
icebreakers. But polar icebreakers is just a small part of the
capabilities that we need in the Arctic to carry out not just
Coast Guard missions but missions that are important to the
United States as a whole. We are an Arctic nation, but it is
tough to walk up to the average person on the street and
convince them that we are. But we have a lot of needs up there.
I went up there in August and spent a little over a week
traveling around Alaska. It had been 35 years since I had been
up there. I did my first tour in the Coast Guard in Alaska, I
spent time in the Arctic and the Bering Sea, and I wanted to go
back there and reacquaint myself. And I went back almost 35
years to the day when I had stood on the shore in Kotzebue,
Alaska, in July, and saw ice almost all the way up to the
shores. I flew into Kotzebue this time, and even from the
altitude in the jet I was in, I could not see ice. So there is
a lot of open water, and open water means Coast Guard
responsibilities, first of all, search and rescue, fisheries,
other things that will migrate into that area as we go forward.
Right now I have got zero resources to conduct those
missions up there. It is a zero sum game, and if I am needed to
carry out Coast Guard missions up there, they have to come from
some other place. So what we are doing right now is we are
doing a high latitude study. I think that--that has been, in my
estimation--In looking at it as it stands right now, its
primary focus is on icebreakers. I think it should be on the
broad expanse of Coast Guard duties that would be required in
the Arctic and what do we need to conduct that.
A ``for instance'' is, right off the top of my head, going
up there this summer, we need at a minimum a seasonal air
station up there that we can fly helicopters out of and
helicopters and crews to man them to be able to start to
conduct our duties. As drilling begins up there offshore, of
course, the Coast Guard will approve response plans for those
facilities. But in terms of Coast Guard ability to respond, as
I said in my first question, we have got none right now. We
need to be about the business of doing that, because that
business will come to the Alaskan waters, and it is my job to
identify to all of you what we need to do that. And we are
working very hard on that right now.

MARITIME SAFETY AND SECURITY TEAMS

Mr. Dent. Admiral, last year you requested the reduction, I
think, of five maritime safety and security teams. And I
understand that the Coast Guard is proceeding with the closure
of the MSST up in Anchorage. I guess that leaves 11 other teams
throughout the Nation.
What was the rationale for the closure of that team up in
Anchorage? And is that going to impact the other MSSTs?
Admiral Papp. Let me start off by saying how much I deeply
appreciate--I saw the Senate mark and the House mark last year
that restored those teams back to the budget. I know the budget
hasn't been approved but the continuing resolution has allowed
us to keep those teams going, and I am deeply appreciative of
that. I need each and every one of our Coast Guard people to
carry out the duties that we do.
Now on the Anchorage MSST, I support the decommissioning of
that unit. The truth of the matter is, because of the
conditions up in Alaska, they just aren't able to operate up
there year-round and provide the type of return on investment
that we would be looking for. They, most of the time, deploy
outside of Alaska, and it is very expensive to deploy them when
they go outside of Alaska. So we don't see an operational need
for them up there. And if there is a time when we need security
operations, we can deploy one of our other MSSTs up there.
What the proposal does besides decommissioning, it does
allow us to retain some of those people from the MSST, and we
are reallocating them into law enforcement detachments, which
we have a high demand signal for right now but a shortfall in
terms of our ability to provide them. So it is a win-win
solution for the Coast Guard in my estimation and perhaps a
short-term loss in terms of numbers of Coast Guard people in
Alaska. But I think we will be able to cover Alaska adequately,
and it is going to provide me some resources for higher
priority missions.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Admiral. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Judge Carter.

RIO GRANDE PRESENCE

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, welcome.
Sorry I was late. I had another hearing to go to.
I am going to start off with a question I got last night on
the phone from Texas. My Senator called me on behalf of the
Governor and asked me to ask the Coast Guard to put ships on
Falcon and Amistad Lake, put some kind of armed boat because it
has now become the international highway of drug trafficking.
Because of the killing on the lake we had up there a while
back, people are off the lake. And every night it seems like
there is just a parade of boats coming across the lakes and it
has become, quite honestly, a major drug smuggling corridor.
Would it be possible for that? And would you have a type
boat or ship that you could put on the lakes to patrol those
lakes if we could find you the resources?
Admiral Papp. Mr. Carter, I agree with you. And what we
have done is we have actually done some pulse operations. We
have trailered boats up there and put them out, particularly
after the unfortunate killing that occurred up there. We
immediately surged Customs and Border Protection. The Border
Patrol has put boats out there. None of us have the dedicated
resources for Falcon Lake right now, but we can pull them from
other places for the surge operations that we do. The return on
investment has been very small when we have been up there
because, as you know, once we put a presence up there, they
will go into hiding. As soon as we leave, they will resume
their activities. So perhaps some level of persistent presence
is required on Falcon Lake.
We have to look at that in terms of balancing resources
with the Border Patrol, us, and perhaps looking at State and
locals as well. But I guarantee you that our Eighth District
Commander, Rear Admiral Landry, has that on her radar scope
front and center and we will do our best.
Mr. Carter. My Governor would like actually a presence on
the Rio Grande from its mouth as far up as you can get. I would
recommend an air boat. In some places, it is a little shallow
on the river. Because I have the highest respect for the Coast
Guard and their ability to accomplish their mission, I think
you would be a great resource on the southern border if we
could do some planning to figure out a way to get you there.
That is kind of an off-the-wall question. But when the Governor
calls, you ask the question.
Admiral Papp. Sir.
Mr. Carter. You know, talking about Alaska, I happen to
have had the great joy of going up and being with the Coast
Guard for an extended length of time two summers ago, and I can
personally testify that you are operating with some real
antiques up there. Some of them might even be called museum
pieces, but those Coast Guardsmen are out there doing their job
every day on those things. And the President's budget proposes
a 22 percent reduction in the Coast Guard's Deepwater program.
It is my understanding this pushes back the completion of the
eight National Security Cutters to 18. And does this also cut
the in effect funding for the new Offshore Patrol Cutter? If
so, how much does this put cash back in the OP acquisition
timeline? And more importantly, how many of these resources
were scheduled for that really fierce environment that you have
in Alaska? And you really are short of some pretty major
equipment needs up there.

NATIONAL SECURITY CUTTERS

Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. Absolutely. This was nowhere more
evident than a trip I made just a couple of weeks ago out to
San Francisco where at the same pier we had our new National
Security Cutter, the BERTHOLF, and then two of our 40-plus-
year-old High Endurance Cutters that were there. My heart aches
for the Coast Guard people who are trying to keep those 40-
year-old ships going. They are struggling working on engines
that you can't even get spare parts for anymore. They are
keeping systems working all because of their dedication and
patriotism, and they are getting out there and they are going
up into dangerous environments like the Bering Sea and
conducting some very challenging missions up there for our
country, protecting our fisheries, rescuing fishermen and other
activities. So the sooner we get the National Security Cutter
out there, the better.
The second National Security Cutter, the Waesche, was
deployed off San Francisco. I got up at first light one
morning, flew out by helicopter and spent the entire day
basically from sunrise to sunset seeing that ship being put
through its paces. There are some people that would make the
case that it is an extravagant ship that the Coast Guard
doesn't need, and I will debate those people until the end of
the day. It provides us with adequate improvements in terms of
capabilities, sensors, and systems, allowing us to do our job
better and in a safer manner and in a way that respects our
young patriots who step forward to serve their country by
putting them into something with a little bit more comfort to
live in rather than the 30-person, dark, dank berthing areas
that you find on the 40-year-old ships that were built when we
used to draft people instead of looking for volunteers to
patriotically step forward. So we need to get those ships built
as soon as possible.
Now to the core of your question (``Why aren't we building
them faster?''), I think if I will paraphrase, is we had
problems with this acquisition project 4 years ago, and it has
taken us a long time to straighten out our acquisition
practices and come up with a predictable, fair, fixed price for
the ship going forward. The delay in coming up with that fixed
price set us behind, and I am now under a new constraint of
full pricing in any given year for follow-on ships. So in other
words, I have to get the long lead material costs, the
production costs, and the post-production costs all in one
budget, which takes up a rather significant chunk of a 1-year
acquisition funding.
So when I looked at the balance across the next couple of
years, [and saw that] we needed to come up with the funding to
complete No. 5, which is in the 2012 budget, I could not fit
the full price for National Security Cutter No. 6. Even though
I would like to move forward on that, I could not fit it within
our acquisition budget without starving out a lot of other very
valuable projects, like our patrol boat replacement, our
maritime patrol aircraft, our response boats that go out to the
search and rescue stations.
So I am confronted with a lot of difficult choices and
decisions. I made the best reasoned choices in terms of our
acquisition projects for this given year based upon the rules
that I have to operate under.

ARCTIC: RESPONSE TO INCIDENTS

Mr. Carter. Well I, for one, would like to see this
committee do everything they can. When I was up there, they
pointed out that the famous Northwest Passage, which people
spent a couple of hundred years looking for, is now open
basically and that there are cruise ships that are actually
advertising being the first to go through the Northwest
Passage. And the Coast Guard explained to me that once they
pass the top of Alaska and start around on the Canadian side
there is basically nobody, neither the Canadians nor our Coast
Guard, that have the ability to get to them with the resources
they would need should they have a disaster strike on that
cruise ship. Literally, our helicopters at a point can't get
there before they run out of fuel. So we are in the Arctic, and
we need to deal with the resources.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. I met 2 weeks ago with Commissioner
Gregoire, who is the Commissioner of the Canadian Coast Guard.
We were discussing our mutual issues in the Arctic. Canada had
a 600-passenger cruise ship and an oil tanker both run aground
in separate incidents but very close in terms of timing last
summer. Commissioner Gregoire and the Canadian Coast Guard were
roundly criticized because they were only able to respond
within a matter of days. I think in one case 2 weeks. In our
case, we would not be able to respond, period.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Admiral.

UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Admiral. What we are going to do
is, I think we have votes that are coming up pretty soon. So we
will do a quick second round of questioning.
Let me shift to the unmanned aerial systems, follow up on
that. Your fiscal year 2012 budget request nor your 1-page 5-
year capital investment plan includes the funding for a cutter-
based Unmanned Aerial System, or UAS. Yet the Coast Guard has
continually stated that the NSC will not be fully mission
capable without the UAS.
Considering you have been testing cutter-based UAS for
years with the Navy, why doesn't your budget include funding
for the unmanned aerial systems?
Admiral Papp. You are absolutely right that to get to full
capability of the system, you do need a tactical ship-born
unmanned system. But there are other components to the system
as well. Maritime patrol aviation, which we are investing in;
your small boats that you run out of the ship, which we are
investing in; and manned helicopters, which we continue to
invest in, are carried by those ships as well. So when you look
at the entire system, the only thing that we are not asking
funding for right now is the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle [UAV]. And
that is primarily because it is a cost avoidance for us right
now. There is just so much we can fit into the budget. And when
I look across the government, the Navy is experimenting
primarily right now with Fire Scout as a UAV. And I think it is
a prudent measure for us to watch the progress that the Navy
makes when they make a determination on the system that they
are going to use. Then we will have identified one that is
interoperable with us, one that the Navy has invested in that
we didn't have to invest in, and I think for the Coast Guard
that is a good route for us to take and a proper route for
someone who is enforcing fiscal stewardship as well for our
service.
Mr. Aderholt. So, right now this is basically just a cost
avoidance issue. So you don't have a certain timeline?
Admiral Papp. And because the Navy, in their
experimentation, has not finalized and has not firmly decided
that Fire Scout is the system that they are going to go with.
So I think it is prudent for us to leverage off the Navy's
expertise in this, watch where they are going. And there are
all kinds of things that will save us costs because the Navy
will set up training systems for this. The Navy will have
logistics and supply lines set up for whatever they choose. And
the Coast Guard will avoid all those costs and be able to take
advantage of the Navy's work and save us a little bit of money.
Mr. Aderholt. What is the impact on the NSC's interdiction
effectiveness without the Unmanned Aerial System?
Admiral Papp. Sir, I am not sure I can fully quantify that
because there is so much that goes into interdiction of drugs,
ranging all the way down to basic on-the-ground intelligence.
So you have to look at the entire picture. We have invested
heavily in our intelligence programs. We are working on
bilateral and multilateral relationships with the South and
Central American countries. We are leveraging Department of
Defense assets that go out and gather signals intelligence and
human intelligence. And then we still have our maritime patrol
aircraft. We put helicopters that deploy on our ships.
So if you are looking at the aggregate of all those
systems, I would say, maybe without a UAV, we are only
performing at 90 percent. I am reluctant to say an exact number
on that. What I will say is we are not performing at 100
percent. Would I like to get a UAV? Of course I would. It makes
us all that much better. But I think where we are making our
investments is the wise area to go right now. And then, as I
said, we will leverage off the Navy and see what they come up
with.

DRUG INTERDICTION

Mr. Aderholt. As the Mexican drug war rages on I don't have
to tell you that the Coast Guard's effort to interdict drugs
being smuggled from the source and transit zones is absolutely
vital to our security. To use a football analogy, I see the
Border Patrol as defending the goal line and the Coast Guard
and other agency playing offense deep in enemy territory.
However, it appears that some aspects of your fiscal year 2012
budget will actually diminish your current drug interdiction
capabilities. Your fiscal year 2012 budget proposes to both
decommission another High Endurance Cutter and extension of the
delivery schedule of the replacement NSCs. Won't the
combination of these decisions decrease the Coast Guard's drug
interdiction capabilities in fiscal year 2012 and for the next
few years?
Admiral Papp. Sir, I would say it could decrease. What I am
going to do is work very hard to make sure that it doesn't
decrease. Once again, going back to what I talked about, my
experiences as the Atlantic Area Commander, those decisions are
being made on a day-to-day basis, and we will continue to give
a high priority to drug interdiction. And right now, as
projected, we are going to meet all the demand signals that
JIATF [Joint Interagency Task Force] South is asking for in
terms of Coast Guard ships and aircraft to provide patrol
capabilities down there.
We will also continue to leverage the Navy to the extent
that we can, to get Navy ships down there with Coast Guard law
enforcement detachments. And I don't look at this just from my
role as Commandant of the Coast Guard. One of my other
collateral duties is I am the Chairman of The Interdiction
Committee [TIC]. I report directly to the Chairman of the
Office of National Drug Control Policy. I bring the interagency
together to work on these issues. And in fact we had our recent
TIC meeting where we brought in General Fraser from SOUTHCOM.
We are looking at various means of making sure that we keep our
assets up down there and continue to work with the Central
American countries in terms of bilateral agreements and working
with their coast guards and navies. I have made a trip down to
Mexico City to talk to Admiral Saynez of the Mexican Navy to
continue our cooperation there.
But you are absolutely right, the Coast Guard and our
partner agencies need to interdict those large 5- and 6-ton
loads as they leave Colombia and go up the coast of Central
America so they don't reach Mexico and then get broken down
into those small loads that the trafficking organizations are
fighting over and bringing across our southern border. So to
the extent that we can pull out the large loads, it helps our
Border Patrol colleagues in fighting the more intense war that
is going on on the land border.

HIGH ENDURANCE CUTTERS

Mr. Aderholt. Just briefly before I go to Mr. Price, what
is the current status of the Coast Guard's High Endurance
Cutter Fleet?
Admiral Papp. I was going to use a sailor's term there. But
I will just say it is poor, sir. In fact, probably if I got to
the second and third order responses of the question that you
gave, the fact of the matter that we are decommissioning
another one of them in this budget does not break my heart
because right at this point, across the fleet of the 12 High
Endurance Cutters we have got, we have got about a 75-percent
availability, which means we are basically losing four ship-
years just because of unplanned maintenance. So we are only
getting about eight to nine ships worth of time on station out
there as it is. So the quicker that we decommission these,
devote our resources to getting the National Security Cutters,
which will be more reliable out there--I need reliable ships on
station.
We could keep the High Endurance Cutters going, but they
are just unreliable at this point. I had one that I had to pull
off station. They have four engines. They have two gas turbines
and they have two diesel engines. One ship was down there on
one engine left, trying to maintain station off the coast of
Colombia, and two out of the three electrical generators were
broken down. They had an emergency generator left. In order to
launch the boat, they had to shut off the air conditioning and
the refrigerators in the ship just so they could launch the
boat. That is unacceptable. We have got to get those ships
replaced soon.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Price.

ARCTIC: POLAR ICEBREAKERS, BUDGET FOR

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to turn,
Admiral, to marine safety and environmental response. But,
before I do, I want to quickly revisit the matter raised by a
number of members today; that is our Arctic capability. I was
listening carefully to what you said, and I appreciate fully
your response to the effect that this is not just a matter of
icebreaker capability, that the implications are much broader
than that in terms of what kind of missions the Coast Guard
might be required to perform. But I wanted to go one step
further in terms of specificity with respect to this budget. I
am glad, I think the Subcommittee is glad, to see the transfer
of that $39 million and 180 FTEs from the National Science
Foundation back into an entirely DHS-funded program. We have
been encouraging that for a long time.
However, the budget appears to fund reduced icebreaking
responsibilities. It assumes the decommissioning of the Polar
Sea in 2011, leaving us with only two polar icebreakers in the
future. The second large icebreaker that can be used in
Antarctica, the Polar Star, is being refurbished and not
expected to return to service until 2013. Even with the
refurbishment, the Polar Star will only last for at most 10
more years. That means the future will have only one heavy
icebreaker, the Polar Star, when it is back in service and the
more limited Healy which can really only operate in the Arctic.
Now other countries have much larger icebreaking fleets, 25
for Russia, as I understand it, 18 for Canada. Ours is quite
small. I am not sure that is the appropriate point of
comparison though. But I do need some help in matching up the
kind of minimal icebreaker capabilities that I think we are
hearing you say you need with this budget request. And you may
want to elaborate on this for the record. This is a very
detailed question. And also elaborate to the extent you can on
what the future minimal capabilities are likely to look like,
assuming that the present projections are going forward.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. Well, just as a point of
reference--and I have studied this extensively. The United
States put ships through the Northwest Passage back in 1957.
They were three Coast Guard cutters, ice-strengthened vessels
that circumnavigated the North American continent. They had
been up there working off Alaska. People say, ``Well, why did
they go through the Northwest Passage?'' It is because our
country had a national imperative at the time. Each summer, the
Navy formed up a squadron of icebreakers and Coast Guard
cutters to resupply the DEW [Distant Early Warning] Line. We
had a reason to be up there at that time. And Coast Guard
cutters and the Navy--and at the time the Nation owned six
polar icebreakers, four that had been transferred to the Coast
Guard from the Navy and the Navy was still operating two.
Ultimately, the remaining two were transferred to the Coast
Guard. But they were all World War II vintage. And over time
and because of Coast Guard budgets, we ended up decommissioning
them until we were able to build the Polar Sea and the Polar
Star in the early 1970s. Now the Polar Sea and the Polar Star
are more than 30 years old and are either due for replacement
or very, very significant renovation.
So I am pleased, happy, delighted that we are getting the
money transferred back into the Coast Guard budget to take care
of these ships because there is another aspect to this as well.
We are losing our competencies. Because the National Science
Foundation has not been transferring the funding to use Coast
Guard icebreakers, we are starting to lose our expertise. We
are running out of people that have been involved up in the
Arctic doing icebreaking and in the Antarctic, and that is a
perishable skill. Fortunately, we have still got a few people
around that can do it.
But what I am confronted with is balancing the resources
that we have. And with the $39 million, it is not enough--and
in fact we have been directed to decommission Polar Sea. Given
the amount of money that I have, I see that as a wise decision
at this point even though there will be a gap before we can
bring Polar Star back in service in 2013. But I cannot see
pouring more money to repair Polar Sea right now to maybe get a
couple of years out of that ship. I would rather divert the
funds to the reactivation of Polar Star, which I know we can
get at least 10 years and, between you and me, I think probably
a couple of years beyond that, which will give us time to
complete this high latitude study and confirm what the Nation
needs.
Ultimately, the answer might be that the Nation wants to
lease icebreakers. I don't know. If that decision is made, I
will say, ``Fine,'' and we don't have to train Coast Guard
people for it anymore. I think the Coast Guard can do it
better. But then again, I am a Coast Guardsman and that is sort
of our attitude. So we will do the best we can with the
resources that we have been given. And in my estimation, my
best judgment, our best course of action, Healy is in good
shape. We can keep her running, and we have got sufficient
budget authority. We will take the crew and the operating funds
from Polar Sea and make sure we do a good reactivation of Polar
Star to give this Nation a sound heavy icebreaker for at least
another decade or so while we are making those decisions on the
way ahead.
Mr. Price. Thank you. We really are short on time now, so
let me ask the question very quickly. I am referring back to
your State of the Coast Guard speech. You noted that, ``We need
to ensure we have a sufficient number of inspectors,
investigators, and prevention officers, and that they are
keeping pace with the maritime industry.'' Now your budget
request includes $22.2 million to enhance maritime safety and
environmental response activity. That includes $192 new
personnel, as I understand. Now this appears to be a well-based
request. However, after action reports from the Deepwater
Horizon spill are still ongoing. Can you specify again--and you
might want to elaborate on this for the record--what concrete
needs were identified after Deepwater Horizon? How do the 192
new personnel and the $22.2 million increase address these
gaps? And with after-action reports still being finalized, do
you believe there are other areas of concern that could affect
the Coast Guard operations and could shape future budget
requests?

DEEPWATER HORIZON TAKEAWAYS

Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. I think the biggest take-away for
me from Deepwater Horizon was what I knew already, was that we
lacked the capacity to put on a sustained response to a
disaster like this. And if I can elaborate, if there is a
hurricane, generally we ramp up for the hurricane. We deploy
Coast Guard forces to respond to it.
A hurricane passes over and it is over in relatively short
order, and we do the necessary repairs and then we can flow
Coast Guard people back to their regular jobs. We sent 3,000
people down to the Gulf of Mexico for Deepwater Horizon. Those
aren't 3,000 people that we held in garrison to sit around and
wait for disasters to happen. These are people that have
regular jobs in the Coast Guard. So there were many jobs that
were not done during that 6- to 8-month period that we had all
those people deployed. We got set back on a number of
initiatives that we would like to be working on because the
Nation had a higher priority at the time, and we flowed Coast
Guard forces down there.
So one of the take-aways--and in this budget what we are
asking for is something called an Incident Management and
Assist Team. And this is going to be 87 people. It is part of
those 192 people that you are talking about. That will form the
nucleus of a group that would deploy and do the initial setup.
In other words, these will be our people in garrison. They will
have jobs to do. But when there is a hurricane or an oil spill
or some other natural disaster, these are the people who we
will immediately deploy down there, put them in place to form
the nucleus of those incident command posts that we set up in
response to the disaster.
So this is something we desperately need. We may need more.
And if we do, I will come back to you and let you know. But I
think this is a good start in terms of responding to incidents.
Out of that 192, the remaining 105 is part of a marine safety
performance plan that we have already identified. We are into,
I think, our fifth year of this. Because of the growth of the
marine industry, the increase in regulations, and the
acknowledged shortfalls we have had in our marine safety
personnel, we have had a 5-year plan to restore us up to the
point where we can adequately respond to the concerns of the
marine industry. So 105 of those 92 go toward the continuation
of the marine safety plan, and then 87 of those go to this
incident management assist team that I talked about earlier.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know we are out of
time. As to the future projected plans and the remaining after-
action reports, I would appreciate your elaborating on that for
the record.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Aderholt. Well, thank you, Admiral, for being here
today. Just to follow up, you had mentioned the revisions to
the APBs. And I just wanted to follow up on the APBs. If you
could submit these to the Committee, it would be very helpful.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. We would be glad to.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you again for your presence here before
the Subcommittee, and we look forward to working with you on
the fiscal year 2012 budget.
Admiral Papp. Me, too. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. The Subcommittee is adjourned.

I N D E X

----------
Page
U.S. Department of Homeland Security.............................     1
Advanced Imaging Technology:
Model Types..................................................    40
Passenger Education..........................................    40
Aviation Security Fee Increase:
Feasibility in FY2012........................................    32
Justification for FY2012.....................................    35
Biography: Secretary Napolitano..................................    30
Border Security:
National Guard Assistance....................................    42
Chemical Facility Security.......................................    39
Cybersecurity:
Agreement with Department of Defense.........................    37
Authority over Private Sector................................    37
Disaster Relief Fund.............................................31, 34
Government Shutdown: Potential Impact on DHS.....................    33
H.R. 1:
Impact on DHS Funding........................................    34
Opening Statement:
Chairman Aderholt............................................     1
Chairman Rogers..............................................    14
Ranking Member Price.........................................     8
Ranking Member Dicks.........................................    15
Secretary Napolitano.........................................    15
Transportation Security Administration:
Employee Turnover............................................    41
Personnel Cap................................................    36
Urban Areas Security Initiative:
Funding......................................................    38
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP).........................   163
Air Cargo Security:
100 Percent Screening........................................   194
Efforts to Strengthen........................................   187
Biography: Bersin, Alan..........................................   182
Border Security:
Border Search Authority......................................   202
Civil Air Patrol, Use of.....................................   193
Illegal Immigration..........................................   185
SBInet.......................................................   194
Stonegarden Grants...........................................   210
United States-Mexico Cooperation.............................   184
Weapons Smuggling............................................   198
Cargo Security:
CBP and TSA Responsibilities.................................   204
Container Security Initiative................................   206
Customs Fee Adjustment...........................................   205
International Trade and Importation:
Border Inspections...........................................   204
Illegal Imports..............................................   201
Opening Statement:
Chairman Aderholt............................................   163
Commissioner Bersin..........................................   173
Ranking Member Price.........................................   169
Ports of Entry:
Customs and Border Protection Officers.......................   198
Need for Improved Security...................................   201
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)..........................................   277
Acquisition Program..............................................   303
Arctic:
Polar Icebreakers and Other Capabilities.....................   317
Polar Icebreakers, Budget for................................   324
Response to Incidents........................................   321
Biography: Papp, Robert..........................................   301
Coast Guard Missions.............................................   305
Deepwater Horizon Takeaways......................................   326
Drug Interdiction................................................   323
Fleet Max Study..................................................   302
Friendly Ports, Security of......................................   311
High Endurance Cutters...........................................   324
Interagency Cooperation..........................................   316
Maritime Safety and Security Teams...............................   319
National Security Cutters........................................   320
Opening Statement:
Admiral Papp.................................................   288
Chairman Aderholt............................................   277
Ranking Member Price.........................................   283
Overseas Activities..............................................   308
Railroad Bridge Project..........................................   311
Rio Grande Presence..............................................   319
Security-Related Missions: Cutbacks..............................   302
Small Vessel Threats.............................................   310
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.........................................   322

