- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          ED PASTOR, Arizona
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Rob Blair, Joseph Levin, Angie Giancarlo,
Loraine Heckenberg, and Perry Yates,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 5
U.S. CORPS OF ENGINEERS
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
PART 5--ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
?

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          ED PASTOR, Arizona
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Rob Blair, Joseph Levin, Angie Giancarlo,
Loraine Heckenberg, and Perry Yates,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 5
U.S. CORPS OF ENGINEERS
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-034                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 9, 2011.

U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS FY 2012 BUDGET REQUESTS

WITNESSES

HON. JO-ELLEN DARCY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY FOR CIVIL WORKS
LIEUTENANT GENERAL ROBERT VAN ANTWERP, CHIEF OF ENGINEERS, U.S. ARMY
CORPS OF ENGINEERS
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I would like to bring the meeting to
order. Thank you all for your patience. Good afternoon,
everyone.
Our hearing today is on the Fiscal Year 2012 budget request
for the Civil Works Program for the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. I would like to welcome our witnesses:
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works Jo-Ellen
Darcy, thank you for being here.
Chief Engineer Lieutenant General Robert Van Antwerp, thank
you.
Mr. Loew, Major Grisoli, thank you as well.
General, I understand your tenure as chief comes to an end
in May so this likely will be your last hearing with us. I
wanted to thank you for your service to our nation and the
Corps. You have performed your duties admirably. The motto:
Duty, honor, country, comes to mind, and you have lived it.
So, too, the committee would also like to salute others of
you in uniform, and those civilian Corps employees (all
volunteers), for your key roles in the War on Terror supporting
construction and combat efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq. While
civil works are this committee's prime focus, we are all
mindful of your service and thank you for it.
As I mentioned at our hearings last week, I want everyone
who appears before this subcommittee to understand that it is
highly unlikely there will be any new funding in fiscal year
2012 for our subcommittee. Our subcommittee must do its part to
reduce spending and bring down our deficit.
However financially limited, we must find the right balance
of investments into our most critical infrastructure needs,
with an eye towards those that protect our nation, and support
and improve our economy, and yes, provide jobs!
I firmly believe that the projects and activities
undertaken by the Corps of Engineers fall into this category of
spending necessary for a robust and thriving economy. A
centerpiece, of course, is the civil works program responsible
for maintaining our inland and coastal waterways in support of
navigation. In 2009 alone, U.S. ports and waterways handled
more than 2.2 billion tons of cargo, including more than 1.15
trillion dollars in foreign commerce as well as 16 percent of
all domestic freight.
At the same time, this year, the Administration proposes to
divert the harbor maintenance tax revenues--collected for the
very purpose of dredging these waterways--to other uses. I
don't see how diversions of this magnitude will support the
President's focus on American competitiveness or his goal of
doubling exports by 2015 and keep our ports and waterways
dredged.
The President's budget request before us today represents a
$298 million, or 6 percent, cut from the fiscal year 2011
Continuing Resolution level. Historically, the Administration's
budget request comes in lower than the level for the year
before and Congress takes on the task of finding the additional
funds necessary to meet our nation's water resources needs.
In these times of focusing on cutting such additional
means--not increasing--spending, it will be much more difficult
for Congress to find any additional money for the Corps. That
makes it even more important for Congress to understand how the
Administration prioritizes Corps projects. This hearing will
hopefully aid in that process.
Again, I'd like to welcome our witnesses to the
subcommittee. Secretary Darcy, please ensure that the hearing
record, questions for the record, and any supporting
information requested by the subcommittee are delivered in
final form to us no later than four weeks from the time you
receive them. Members who have additional questions for the
record will have until close of business tomorrow to provide
them to the subcommittee office.
With that, I'll turn to Mr. Pastor for his opening
comments.
Mr. Pastor. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very
much.
Good afternoon. Ms. Darcy, welcome. It is good to see you
again; I appreciate your time here today.
General Van Antwerp, I would associate myself with the
Chairman's comments. We all very much appreciate the leadership
you've brought to the Corps. I'd like to point out to those who
don't know--your service to the nation is especially notable
because you could have retired 3\1/2\ years earlier had you not
accepted the challenge to lead the Corps. I'm not sure that
everyone in that position would have chosen the path you took,
but I'm glad that you are heretoday.
To the matter at hand, the Corps 2012 budget request.
The Congress has historically appropriated funds for the
Corps in excess of the budget request--adding an average of
$450 million each year over the last 17 years--and the
Administration has historically asked for less than what is
necessary knowing that Congress would pick up the slack. As the
Chairman noted, this has happened regardless of the party in
either branch of government.
The budget situation that we find ourselves in today is
different from any other in recent memory--constrained funding
and no congressional earmarks. Today we consider an agency
budget that has been characterized as nothing more than a
collection of earmarks. In this case, they are Presidential
earmarks, but they are earmarks none-the-less.
The Chairman has noted in every hearing this year that it
is highly unlikely that any agency will receive funding in
excess of the budget request. I am concerned that the
circumstances of the new budget reality have not yet caught up
to the Administration's budget process for the Corps. Ms.
Darcy, I do not expect, nor do I want, you to follow in Mike
Parker's footsteps, but I fail to see how this budget request
meets the nation's needs for water resource infrastructure.
I understand that the Administration had to make difficult
choices in a constrained fiscal environment, but providing
adequate and efficient navigation channels and flood control to
the nation are vital to our economy, and are a factor in
maintaining and adding jobs. We will have to make difficult
choices as a nation to reduce the deficit and everyone will
have to do their part. Though I think, perhaps more than an 800
million dollar reduction from 2010 may be a little more than
what should be the Corps' share.
Investing in our future must not be sacrificed in the
pursuit of fiscal austerity. As we saw on the gulf coast, the
costs of rebuilding after a disaster far exceed the cost of
prevention, and maintaining our marine navigation system is a
necessary condition for the imports and exports that drive our
economy. This budget request does not provide the resources
necessary for these objectives.
Ms. Darcy, General Van Antwerp, I will be interested today
in hearing your defense of the choices made in the Corps'
budget request, current execution and overall Corps management.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman for the time.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
I am very pleased that the full committee chairman is here,
Chairman Hal Rogers from Kentucky.
And I welcome you. Thank you. I know you have some remarks.
I suspect you have some questions. And I would like to yield
the floor to you. Thank you for being with us.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And congratulations on your selection to chair this
important subcommittee. I know you will do a great job, as you
have done in the past.
Welcome to all of you for being here with us. This is a
truly historic time. I don't need to tell you that the nation
is finding itself at a crossroads. Over the last 2 years, we
have increased discretionary spending by 24 percent. If you
include stimulus funding, it has been increased by 84 percent.
We find ourselves now in the red; for the year, it looks like
around $1.7 trillion. We are borrowing 42 cents of every dollar
we spend. So we have truly reached not just a crossroads but I
think a crisis.
So we have got to get serious about reducing spending and
putting a dent in our record setting deficit. I think we can
all agree with that.
We have got some tough choices ahead of us. We look forward
to hearing from you today about the Administration's
priorities. I am pleased that the budget contains $132 million
for ongoing repairs to Wolf Creek Dam in my congressional
district. But I have got to state my dismay after continued
delays and cost overruns that have been a perennial challenge
where this project is concerned. The resultant drawdown at Lake
Cumberland by 40 feet has wrought havoc on the economies of the
surrounding counties. That lake, as you know, is 100 miles long
and covers a lot of economic ground.
Corps decisions have virtually shuttered some marina
operations, jeopardized the livelihoods of their employees
throughout the region, not to mention ancillary tourism-related
businesses, like the houseboat manufacturing industry, which is
practically gone.
I need two more hands to count the number of times Corps
officials have committed to raising that lake back to historic
levels. And yet 5 years later, here we are behind schedule and
over budget. We were told at the outset this might take a
couple of years. We are into year 5 now and way over budget.
So I am extremely interested in hearing your take and
hoping for your commitment to getting this important dam safety
project back on track. But I am not going to hold my breath as
I have in the past.
I also look forward to obtaining your thoughts on the
Corps' regulatory responsibilities under section 404 of the
Clean Water Act. Your budget request includes a $6 million
increase for that purpose, but I have to ask myself whether
this truly will make a difference. For months, dozens of mining
permits have been held up in the so-called Enhanced
Coordination Process with the EPA. Since 2009, in my
congressional district, the Corps has issued two individual
permits; 190 were requested. You issued two. Two years, two
permits.
So what is so enhanced about that process? These delays are
costing my people their jobs. It is costing the nation a lot of
energy. More than half of our electricity is produced by that
coal; 92 percent in Kentucky. And yet here we are. You have
approved two permits.
Under the law, the Corps is the lead agency for issuing 404
permits. You all have been in this business for decades. And
yet now you have capitulated, in my judgment, to the
politically driven regulatory agenda of an out-of-control EPA.
The common perception in my region is that the Corps is simply
being steamrolled. And I, along with Congresswoman Capito,
introduced legislation yesterday that would limit the EPA to a
60-day review period of your permit recommendations. No longer
would they be allowed to sit there interminably on your
recommendations, in effect vetoing one that you would approve.
Procedure and control of substance. We want to end that. I am
anxious to hear your thoughts on whether such a change to
section 404(c) would expedite the permit review process and
eliminate this backlog that is killing jobs in Kentucky and
across Appalachia.
With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think the chairman would like a response, but maybe,
Madam Secretary, you could give your remarks. I would recognize
you. Thank you.
Ms. Darcy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
today to present the President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget for
the Civil Works Program of the Army Corps of Engineers. I will
summarize my statement and ask that my complete statement be
included in the record.
The budget requires new appropriations of $4.63 billion. In
keeping with the Administration's program to put the nation on
a sustainable fiscal path, this is $836 million or about 15
percent below the 2010 enacted amount of $5.445 billion. It is
about 6 percent below the 2011 budget for Civil Works.
The budget concentrates funding primarily in the three main
Civil Works programs: commercial navigation, flood and coastal
storm damage reduction, and aquatic ecosystem restoration. The
2012 budget continues the Army's commitment to a performance-
based approach to budgeting in order to provide the best
overall return from available funds in achieving economic,
environmental, and public safety objectives.
The budget provides $50 million for a comprehensive levee
safety initiative to help ensure that Federal levees are safe
and to assist non-Federal entities as they address safety
issues with other own levees. The Operation and Maintenance
Program also includes a new environmental and energy
sustainability program to reduce energy consumption at Corps
projects and buildings.
The 2012 budget places priority on collaboration with other
Federal agencies in the development of funding allocations for
aquatic ecosytem restoration. In 2012, this collaboration is
reflected in five ecosystems: the California Bay Delta, the
Chesapeake Bay, the Everglades, the Great Lakes, and the Gulf
Coast. The budget provides for use of $758 million from the
Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund to maintain coastal commercial
navigation channels in harbors.
The Administration plans to develop legislation to expand
the authorized uses of the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund so
that its receipts are available to finance the Federal share of
other efforts in support of commercial navigation through the
nation's ports. No decisions have been made yet on what
additional costs would be proposed to be paid from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust fund.
Inland waterways capital investments are funded in the
budget at $166 million, of which $77 million is financed from
the Inland Waterways Trust Fund. This is the total amount that
is affordable in 2012 with the current level of revenue coming
into the trust fund. The administration plans to work with
Congress and stakeholders to authorize a new mechanism to
increase the revenue paid by commercial navigation users of the
inland waterways.
The Administration also plans to work with Congress and
stakeholders to explore ways to support broader
recapitalization of the Corps' aging infrastructure,
modification of its operations, or deauthorization as
appropriate, consistent with modern-day water resources
principles and priorities.
Last year, President Obama established the America's Great
Outdoors Initiative to promote innovative community level
efforts to conserve outdoor spaces and to reconnect Americans
to the outdoors. The Civil Works Recreation Program is closely
aligned with the goals of America's Great Outdoors Initiative
and includes a variety of activity to reconnect Americans,
especially our young people, with the nation's outdoor
resources.
We continue to strengthen the Corps' planning expertise,
including through greater support for our Planning Centers of
Expertise and continued support for the development of revised
water project planning Principles and Guidelines. A number of
lower-priority programs and activities received reduced or no
funding in the 2012 budget. For example, funding for
maintenance of navigation harbors and waterway segments that
support little or no commercial use is reduced by about half.
Also, no funding is provided for small projects in several of
the Continuing Authorities Programs. The budget proposes to
reprogram $23 million of prior year funds from these lower-
priority programs to finance ongoing phases of projects in
higher priority Continuing Authorities Programs.
In summary, the President's 2012 budget for the Army Civil
Works program is a performance-based budget. It supports water
resources investments that will yield long-term returns to the
nation.
Mr. Chairman, and members of the subcommittee, I look
forward to working with you in support of the President's
budget.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.008

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for your testimony.
General Van Antwerp.
General Van Antwerp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, Mr. Rogers.
I am honored to be here today to testify with Ms. Darcy. If
you would permit me, I would like to just introduce the
commanders behind me so you know where they are from.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Let me, for the record, it is Major
General Grisoli. I apologize. The record shall so stand.
General Van Antwerp. Major is a very good rank. We like
that, too.
I would just like to introduce the Commanders behind me. We
have nine divisions in the Corps of Engineers. We have eight of
the Commanders behind us. The ninth, who is not here, is the
Commander of the Transatlantic Division, Major General Ken Cox.
They do all military overseas. That is why he is not here.
If you could just raise your hand. This is John Peabody. He
is with the Lakes and Rivers Division, Major General John
Peabody. Major General Mike Walsh, he is with the Mississippi
Valley Division. He has Katrina recovery and some of those big
efforts. This is General Duke DeLuca. He is out of the North
Atlantic division in New York. This is General John McMahon
with the Northwest Division out on the West Coast in the great
Northwest. And then off to my left, your right, is Major
General Todd Semonite. He is with the South Atlantic Division
out of Atlanta, Georgia. Then we have Colonel Ed Kertis out in
Hawaii, the Pacific Ocean Division, and he is doing a lot of
great things in the Pacific, to include about a $12 billion
program in Korea, which is little known but is a great effort
for us. This is Colonel Bill Leady. He is the Commander of the
South Pacific Division. And then on his left is Brigadier
General-Select Tom Kula, who is the Commander of the Southwest
Division of the Corps of Engineers. Bill is with South Pacific,
if I didn't mention that.
That is our eight division teams here. Who is doing the
work while these guys are up here? Well, they have great
districts. We have 45 districts in the Corps of Engineers that
do the heavy lifting for the Corps. The program is about $40
billion altogether, counting Military Programs.
The fiscal year 2012 Civil Works budget is a performance-
based budget, focusing on projects and activities that provide
the highest net economic and environmental returns or direct or
address significant risks to human safety. The budget funds 92
construction projects, including 55 flood and storm damage
reduction projects, 3 of which are budgeted for completion this
year; 16 commercial navigation projects; 19 aquatic ecosytem
restoration projects. Two of these construction projects are
new starts.
The budget supports restoration of nationally and
regionally significant aquatic ecosystems with emphasis on the
Florida Everglades, the Gulf Coast, California Bay Delta, the
Great Lakes, and Chesapeake Bay.
The budget includes $104 million for activities in the
Investigations Account. It funds 58 continuing studies and 4
new studies. Funding is also included for the Water Resources
Priorities Study, which is an evaluation of the nation's
vulnerability to inland and coastal flooding. The budget
supports our continued stewardship of water-related
infrastructure. The Operation and Maintenance Program for the
fiscal year 2012 budget includes $2.314 billion and an
additional $131 million under the Mississippi Rivers and
Tributaries Account. The focus is on the maintenance of key
commercial navigation, flood and storm damage reduction, and
hydropower facilities.
Corps teammates continue to respond wherever and whenever
needed to help during major floods and other national
emergencies. The budget provides $27 million for the
preparedness for floods, hurricanes, and other natural
disasters, including $4 million in support of the Levee Safety
Initiative with States, called the Silver Jackets.
A quick update on the Corps' preparation as we look at
potential spring flood events, and we are looking at some
straight in the eye. Several of our Commanders have been
involved this last week in looking at those, like Mike Walsh
out in North Dakota. We are working with FEMA and the National
Weather Service to monitor the high probability of spring
flooding, especially in the great Northwest and North Central
United States, specifically the Red River of the north, the
upper Mississippi River, and the Minnesota River. Based on
these projections, our commanders have already requested
advanced planning dollars and are taking advanced measures. We
have verified the availability of key flood-fighting materials
already on station. They are engaging State to State, local,
and Federal authorities, in a couple of words, I would say we
are as ready as you can be for what is on the horizon.
On the international front, I am very proud of our work on
missions in Afghanistan and Iraq. Men and women from across the
Corps, all volunteers and many of whom have served on multiple
deployments, continue to provide critical support to our
military and humanitarian missions. Currently we have 1,168
Corps employees, mostly civilian, deployed to Iraq and
Afghanistan.
Last month, Ms. Darcy and I traveled to Afghanistan, and we
both witnessed the amazing work that these folks are doing and
their dedication and commitment. In Afghanistan, the Corps is
spearheading a comprehensive infrastructure program for the
Afghan National Army, and also aiding in critical public
infrastructure projects.
The Corps of Engineers is committed to staying at the
leading edge of service to the nation. We are committed to
change that ensures an open, transparent, and performance-based
Civil Works Program.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my comments.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.015

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for your comments.
Again, we thank you for the work of certainly those in
uniform as well as your civilian programs, truly dedicated in a
very hostile and dangerous environment over there. We
appreciate it and recognize it.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield to you. I think maybe
you deserve some responses from the Corps relative to some of
the issues you raised. I would like to yield to you 5 minutes
or as long as you wish to do it.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that kindness. I
don't want to interfere with the regular operation of the
subcommittee.
But could you respond to the Wolf Creek Dam question I
asked or points that I made? This dam was said by the Corps to
be the biggest potential disaster we had on our hands at that
time. I can believe that because we have already spent $600
million on it. What can you tell us?
Ms. Darcy. I can tell that you that in this year's
Presidential request for Wolf Creek Dam, our request is to fund
that to capability, which is $132 million. I understand that
that will help both phase 1 and phase 2. We also will have to
deal with that before we can raise the pool level. So I think
we are looking out to 2013, but I might defer to the Chief or
to General Peabody.
Mr. Rogers. 2013 before what?
Ms. Darcy. Raise the pool.
Mr. Rogers. Back to historic levels. I have been hearing
that for 4 years now. What makes you think I ought to believe
this one?
General Van Antwerp. First of all, the foundation of this
dam is very complicated, and we are finding it is much easier,
as in a building, to build a new one than to restore an old
one. No question there have been serious issues and problems as
we have looked inside that dam. And we are doing our level
best. We have learned a lot on this. I wouldn't say hold your
breath until 2013, but I will say we are pretty certain that we
are going to make that date. When we talk to the local boat
owners and others in our town hall meetings, that is what we
are telling them, too. And we have good confidence with this
budget that we can get there.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I am told that the important part is what
they call critical area one, which is apparently where the
earthen and concrete dams meet. I gather you are going full-
blast ahead on solving the problems at that particular part of
the dam, is that right?
General Peabody. That is correct.
Mr. Rogers. When do you expect to finish critical area 1?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. For the record, General Peabody.
General Peabody. It is the long pole in the tent. We had
delays last year while we did slope stability studies because
when we did the low mobility grouting in critical area one, we
had indicators of movement/cracking. We have resolved that
issue. We are modifying the construction technique to ensure we
don't have slope instability or soil failure while we are
executing the construction there. We are negotiating with the
construction contractor for cost and time extension due to
these delays. The critical area one will be the last element of
the construction project that is completed. And we are
projecting that to be December, 2013. As the Chief indicated,
that is a soft date, but that is what our current estimates
tell us when we will complete.
Mr. Rogers. December of 2013. So it is really 2014.
General Peabody. Fiscal year 2014, that is correct.
Mr. Rogers. That is with everything happening, good.
General Peabody. It is possible it could move back to the
left, but that is our best estimate.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I don't need to repeat to you the
terrible economic problem this is causing my whole region, with
the tourism shot to the head because of the 40-foot draw down
of the lake; and houseboat manufacturers going out of business,
loss of hundreds of jobs, and the marinas having the same
difficulty. So, you know, and I have told you a thousand times
how important it is economically what you are doing there.
But I understand the difficulty, and I know it's a long
lake, and it is a long dam, and it was built on caverns in the
first place. That is another thing we could talk about one of
these days.
Secondly, Madam Secretary, the 404 permit process, who
actually decides whether or not to issue a 404 permit? Is it
you or the EPA?
Ms. Darcy. The Army Corps of Engineers issues 404 permits.
Mr. Rogers. Well, can you tell me why you have only issued
two in the last 2 years.
Ms. Darcy. In June of 2009, the Army Corps of Engineers
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the
Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Interior
to do what you mentioned in your opening statement, which was
to develop an enhanced review procedure for 79 permits. And in
doing that, it has delayed some of those permits; you are quite
accurate on that. Some of the permits that were part of that
enhanced program have been withdrawn. I believe that we
currently have 26 pending permits. We just issued a permit in
Kentucky on the 3rd of March, I believe it was, a permit for
the Czar Mine. It is taking longer to review the permits.
Ultimately, the decision to issue a 404 permit lies with the
Army Corps of Engineers.
Mr. Rogers. Well, that is all fine and good but the MOU
that was entered into in 2009 practically handed over the
judgment on whether or not to issue a mining permit to the EPA.
And they have held back approving your recommendations now for
these 2 years. They have issued two permits or allowed to be
issued two permits out of 190 applications in the last 2 years.
And I have got coal mines closing and people being laid off.
And they say, why can't you do anything about the EPA and the
Corps of Engineers? So what should I tell them?
Ms. Darcy. Sir, we are trying to review the permits as
expeditiously as possible. As I say, with the enhanced review
process, it is taking longer because the consultation process
is taking longer. Some of these permits have now gone to the
State level, and sometimes that takes additional time.
Mr. Rogers. Enhanced review process is an accurate
description of what is happening because you have practically
stopped issuing permits. So companies that mine coal are
shutting down, moving out, laying off people, and they stop
buying local products. That is a huge, huge impact on my
district, which has at least 20,000 direct employees in mining,
with another 150,000 probably in indirect work around coal
mining. This Administration, I think, has decided to shut down
Appalachian coal mining. I don't understand that. Can you help
me with that?
Ms. Darcy. Sir, the enhanced permit review process is
designed or the intent of it is to have stricter environmental
review on some of those permits. It is not designed to shut
down coal mining. It is designed to improve the environmental
output from the coal mining.
Mr. Rogers. Well, Lisa Jackson has taken over the Corps of
Engineers; the EPA.
Ms. Darcy. We are, as I said, in an agreement with the EPA
and the Office of Surface Mining at the Department of Interior
to review these permits.
Mr. Rogers. It isn't an agreement. It is a surrender. I
think you have surrendered to the EPA on issuing permits. And
that is sad. And we will find a way to correct it. But you are
making it awful difficult.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Somewhat apropos to the chairman's remarks, I have a few
questions for you.
Madam secretary, your budget request seems to place a very
high priority on environmental projects, especially within the
Investigations Account, where the only new starts and the only
completions are environmental projects. How did the Corps
determine that these new starts for environmental projects were
a higher cost benefit return to taxpayers than a construction
project like the Chickamauga Lock?
Ms. Darcy. Within----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Which in this committee we had quite a
focus on over the last 10 years. Having been there, I am
familiar with that project.
Ms. Darcy. Yes, sir.
Within our priorities for our budget, we consider each of
our mission areas, including navigation, flood and storm risk
management reduction projects, as well as environmental and
ecosytem restoration projects. Our ecosytem restorations
projects are viewed as helping to correct some environmental
impacts from a Corps project.
So, in doing that, we evaluate each of the projects within
their project mission area, weigh them against other competing
uses and other competing interests, and make our decisions
based on that. In this budget this year, the two new starts, as
you mentioned, one is--both of them we consider also have to
have impacts on risks to life and safety issues because they
are also flood risk management and reduction projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. By what criteria do these environmental
projects rank higher than dredge deepening projects, which are
all about bringing in cargo to our ports and are all about jobs
and the economy?
Ms. Darcy. As I said, within each of our mission areas, we
take a look at all of the projects that are out there and
determine within that area which of those meet the criteria. In
the construction account they have to meet a 2.5 or better
benefit-to-cost ratio. And within the funds that we have, we
make determination of the priorities within that group of
projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So why do the environmental projects
seem to be your primary focus? We have about a $60 billion, $79
billion, $80 billion backlog here. With all due respect, we
ought to be focusing on making sure that we have navigable
rivers, ports. Why this shift in focus on so many environmental
projects?
Ms. Darcy. Sir, the Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration portion
of our budget is about 18 percent of our budget this year. I
would not characterize it as a shift. It is a priority, along
with our navigation mission as well as our flood risk
management mission. And we also think that in these ecosystem
restoration projects, we also are going to find other benefits,
economic benefits, so that they are weighed that way. The
ecosystem restoration projects are not valued or calculated in
the same way because they do not have a benefit-to-cost ratio
as the other projects do, such as the flood risk management
projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just for instance, the new Panama Canal
lock is scheduled to open in 2014. As a country, are we ready
to receive ships coming through the canal or actually the next
generation of ships?
Ms. Darcy. I think we are poised to do that. We have two
ports right now which are being dredged to 50 feet because the
Panamax ships, it is anticipated the largest one coming through
the Panama Canal will need a 50-foot depth. And we have two of
our ports, we have New York-New Jersey as well as Sacramento
Deepwater Ship Channel in California. We also have ongoing
studies for deepening some of our projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Where does the cost-benefit ratio relate
to job creation and keeping, let's say, America open for
business?
Ms. Darcy. Well, it has the benefit-to-cost ratio.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Vis-a-vis these environmental
restoration projects. We are sympathetic towards those
restoration projects. But where is the benefit to our economy?
Ms. Darcy. Of benefit to the economy for the ecosystem
restoration projects, they restore the ecosystem to its
function, its original function, hopefully. It also creates
jobs in the projects. For example, in the Everglades.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So you have metrics here that would show
that eco-restoration jobs or systems would have X numbers of
jobs and keeping ports open for business and dredging would
have--certainly, there must be overwhelming evidence that most
of our ports generate tens of thousands of jobs compared to the
type of jobs that would be involved with those types of
restoration projects.
Ms. Darcy. We do use a metric for each of the types of
projects. I don't know the answer to what the number is for the
jobs generated for ecosystem versus jobs generated for
navigation. I would have to get back to you on that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, I think many of us feel that a lot
of the Corps' historic responsibilities have somewhat been
neglected and put on the back burner in favor, should we say,
of a new wave of environmental restoration, just speaking for
myself.
I am happy to yield to Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The question asked frequently by other members is the
continuing resolution--we have one for 2 weeks, and I guess
next week we will deal with how long we extend it. And we
stripped all the earmarks. In your work, and you said you have
a lot of projects, some are about to be done and construction
is about to terminate. Some are halfway. Some are starting. You
have some investigations going on. What are you going to do
with that abundance of projects that you have, and how are you
going to deal with them?
General Van Antwerp. I will address that first, if I may.
First of all, during the short-term continuing resolution, we
are continuing all projects that were funded in the prior year,
fiscal year 2010, in this case, to accomplish either the
budgeted scope of the work as included in the FY11 Budget or at
the lower of the House or Senate amounts that were in the
reports for fiscal year 2011. So we are looking at fiscal year
2010 funding levels in fiscal year 2011, in keeping those
projects going.
All projects, therefore, may continue at some level, except
for those that received zero dollars in the House and Senate
reports in fiscal year 2011. As you know, that is one of the
issues of funding that is over a period of years and extends
out the projects. But we are trying to keep the projects going.
We are also talking about what would happen if H.R. 1 would
pass and the first priority would go to those projects that are
in the fiscal year 2011 budget. We would continue those first.
And then, as we had additional money, we would go to the other
projects. There are a lot of projects that were in the ``add''
category in the fiscal year 2010 appropriation.
I don't know if that answers your question.
Mr. Pastor. It does. It gives some parameters. It is
dependent on how much the continuing resolution is carrying an
amount of money and how deep the cuts are. The parameters, I
guess, that you set for yourselves that were in the 2010-2011
reports that you are still trying to figure out, to the best of
your ability, how much money can they sustain and be able to be
carried?
General Van Antwerp. Right. All of our District Commanders
and Division Commanders, we look at the projects. We look for:
Is there a phase that could be constructed preferably some
usable increment? But sometimes you are not able. The worst
case for us would be to have to button them up and close them
down and tell the contractor to go away, if we thought we were
ever going to come back, because that is a very expensive
proposition.
Mr. Pastor. Especially if you are halfway through, to
button it up would probably cost you more or be more expensive.
General Van Antwerp. In the long run, no question.
Mr. Pastor. Ms. Darcy.
Ms. Darcy. I concur with what the chief said.
Mr. Pastor. I am sure that other members are going to ask
on the budget so I am going to take a different tack here.
Recently, I have been reading more on climate change. And I
am one of the guys who believes it is occurring. From what I
have read, it is either mitigation of the carbon footprint or
adaptation in how we adapt to the changes that are coming. One
of the things that several authors have pointed out is that
Federal agencies sometimes know of the models that can be used
and what the effect of climate change will be and what will be
the consequences and timelines, et cetera--and that Federal
agencies sometimes in their planning or looking to the future,
even though they have these models, that there is a reluctance
to adapt or an unwillingness. Or, if they do adapt, it is
probably minimal.
And I guess the question that I have, is the Corps looking
at the various models, and is adaptation something that you are
considering, especially in the coastlines and areas that may be
diminishing in terms of as we look out to the future?
Ms. Darcy. The Corps of Engineers is part of the
Administration's Climate Change Adaptation Task Force. And what
we are doing is working with other Federal agencies to see what
each agency is doing to adapt to climate change. We, in the
Corps of Engineers, acting through our Institute for Water
Resources as well as our research lab down in Vicksburg, are
doing lots of modeling to determine how we can use adaptation
in our planning process so that when we are looking at planning
for a project, we are looking long term at the possibility of
sea level rise, at the possibility of storm surges as a result
of climate change. And we are incorporating that into our
planning process so that we are able to, within the project
development phase, adapt it as climate change evolves.
General Van Antwerp. One practical example of that is down
in the New Orleans Hurricane Risk Reduction System. We are
looking towards what the sea level rise would be while building
the levees today, knowing that probably 25 years from now and
then 50 years from now, we are going to have to put additional
height onto the levees. So that is accounted for as we got the
real estate and as we built what we have there, that it could
be added to, with the knowledge that there will be some sea
level rise. It is already measurable. That is on the screen.
Mr. Pastor. I know that the Florida Everglades has problems
currently right now. But looking to the adaptation, it is kind
of the bridge to nowhere that a lot of the models use as an
example. In some of the examples I have seen, basically, it
said that even though we are investing billions of dollars for
the restoration, if you look at the models, that all that money
being invested is going down the Everglades because sometime in
the future, all of that will be inundated and will all be
underwater.
What is your model on the Florida Everglades in terms of
adaptation and whether or not the investment we are doing today
is in fact a good investment?
General Van Antwerp. I would say the investment we are
putting in there today is a good investment. I think our models
are showing more towards the lower end. You have a wide range.
The gradient on the Everglades is so small, the slope is so
small, that a small amount of sea rise does affect a large
area, especially as you get down into the Florida Keys.
Way off to my left is a gentleman, Dr. Jeff Holland, and he
is our director of our Engineer Research and Development
Center. They have extensive studies. We feel we have a good
feel for how it is going to be. But, some of it is speculation,
depending on snow melt and other climate change adaptations.
We think what we are doing today is well spent and will
have a long life, so to speak, and a good benefit of doing it.
And that goes into our benefit-cost ratios. We take time
factors and other factors into consideration there.
Mr. Pastor. I yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Alexander, thanks for your patience.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon to all of you.
Secretary Darcy, in response to something Chairman Rogers
asked about a while ago, you were talking about enhanced
reviews. Is that the result of congressional action, or was
that a decision made inhouse?
Ms. Darcy. It was a memorandum of understanding between the
three agencies: the Corps, EPA and Surface Mining at the
Department of the Interior.
Mr. Alexander. So you can't blame that on us.
Ms. Darcy. No, sir.
Mr. Alexander. Talk a little bit about harbor maintenance
funds. Tell the committee where those funds come from, what
they were intended to be used for, what they are being used
for. You said there was a suggestion that those funds be used
for something else. Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Ms. Darcy. Sure. The Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund was
established in 1986, and it is a tax, an ad valorem tax, that
exporters pay. Sorry, importers pay. The export tax was ruled
unconstitutional in the Shoe case back in 19--I forget what the
year was. But that money is collected. It goes into the trust
fund. The purpose of the trust fund under the legislation was
to help with navigation and maintenance of coastal channels and
ports.
Currently, in this year's budget, $738 million from that
trust fund--$758, excuse me--is in the President's budget for
that use. The balance of the trust fund goes to the general
treasury. It is anticipated that this year we will probably
have $1.4 billion come into the trust fund. And the President's
budget recognizes $758 million for the purposes of maintaining
and navigation channel. The balance of the fund, as I say, goes
to the Treasury.
Mr. Alexander. Okay. A couple more questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Alexander. Sure.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It goes into the general fund. But how
many billion dollars is in there now with the designation from
the method of, shall we say, taxation that caused it to be
there?
Ms. Darcy. About $6 billion.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So $6 billion--if the gentleman would
give me some leeway here--you are planning to expand, give
other agencies the ability to come in and take some of that
money?
Ms. Darcy. What the Administration is considering is to
have some other uses for that trust fund money for the ports.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just for the ports?
Ms. Darcy. The Federal share of the cost for the ports.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So it actually will continue to be
dedicated to the ports and issues that relate to navigation in
those ports?
Ms. Darcy. Navigation and ports, as well, whatever port
requirements there are. As I said, this is under consideration
within the Administration. No decisions have been made. As you
know, it will take legislation in order to change the dedicated
purposes of the fund.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If the gentleman will continue to yield.
So there aren't sufficient dredging problems out there, so
you have to go looking for more ways to spend that money? I
don't understand it. Surely, there is a dredging backlog. There
is annual dredging, and then there is a variety of other types
of dredging. Isn't there a whole backlog of things that need to
be done across the nation, ports, rivers?
Ms. Darcy. There is some backlog, sir, but within the
current budget and fiscal environment, the Administration
believes $758 million from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
should be used for those purposes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I think we will be involved in helping
you make the right decision.
I thank the gentleman for yielding. I yield back to you.
Mr. Alexander. I am not nearly as stupid as I look. I will
yield to the chairman any time.
You all know how concerned I have been, as others are,
about where we see FEMA advancing with their flood maps. They
are going to be drawing flood maps, we assume, in some areas as
if the levees don't exist. We know that is going to create a
burden for those out there that have never had to buy flood
insurance before. Now they will be told that they have to buy.
It is going to devalue property, personal and commercial
property.
Our concern is that you may take another 100 years to get
flood maps redrawn if those levees are indeed built back up to
what we consider they need to be, the level they need to be to
be safe. How are you all working with FEMA and trying to help
us solve a potential problem that I think is going to be a lot
larger than some would like to think?
General Van Antwerp. That is a great question. The National
Flood Insurance Program that is administered by FEMA requires
that you have a levee that has the ability to withstand a 1
percent chance event or a 100-year event. And based on the
condition of the levee and its ability to carry that load is
whether or not it is certified for FEMA purposes. If it is not,
the maps will be drawn as if that levee is not present.
But we are taking a very reasonable person approach here, I
would say, and we are working with FEMA. We have about three
different ways, all the way down to the Silver Jackets at the
States, where if there is a plan to get it done and we are
starting to move in that direction, we are all going to take a
real reasonable person approach.
The flip side is what if it is not certified and the map is
drawn that way and you have flood insurance, what if after
that, you come in and build that levee back up? We are talking
with FEMA about how quickly can we get restored for the flood
maps so that there is credit for that.
The important end right now is how do you get your levees
to the condition, if they are not there already, to make sure
that levee is recorded on the flood map and you are protected?
But our biggest obligation is to make sure of the public safety
and that there are not people who think they are protected at
the 100-year event and they are not. So that is the hard part.
Mr. Alexander. In my opinion, it is somewhat misleading to
the public to tell someone that lives out there behind the
levee system, okay, this levee is not safe, but if you buy a
flood insurance premium and pay us for it, your family is safe.
That is not right.
General Van Antwerp. A flood premium to me does not say you
are safe. It says that your property will be covered in an
event. But I would move to higher ground when that water starts
to come in. I guess that would be my approach to it.
Mr. Alexander. I just think it is going to be a problem
that is going to be unbelievable if we get to that point.
One more question about dredging on the Mississippi River.
What do you need to do the job that needs to be done now? How
much money do you need? How much are you spending? The lower
portion of the Mississippi River contains a lot of that dirt I
suggested we do DNA testing on so we can tell what State it is
coming from. We would get more help then from States up north.
General Van Antwerp. I am going to just open this and then
I will turn to General Walsh here, because that is his
territory. I get a report daily on the condition of Southwest
Pass, for instance, at my level. We are looking to make sure we
have the 45 feet of depth; what the width is; what is the Coast
Guard doing?
Right now, we are in good shape. We just actually awarded a
contract for a third dredge down there. But I will let General
Walsh take a shot at this, if you don't mind. He is the expert.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. General, keep it short. Then we are
going to go to Mr. Olver.
General Walsh. Typically, in the last 2 years, we spent on
average about $85 million to dredge the mouth of the
Mississippi. The project was appropriated $63 million. The
previous 2 years we have looked at reprogramming funds from up
river to keep the mouth open. This year, what we are looking at
is to keep the dredging at the $63 million, working from a
navigability perspective, so that we may not be able to get
full width and depth, but keep the width and depth with the
funds available.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver, thank you for your patience.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am trying to get my hands around this budget. As I look
at it, you are a little over $4.5 billion. The largest single
piece of that is for navigation purposes; maybe close to 35
percent. There is a little bit less than a third that is
apparently for storm damage reduction. And then, as I see it,
there is 15 percent or so has to do with environmental kinds of
remediations directly. I think that is the case.
Now, navigation, we had a little bit of questioning about
that. I am not sure it is in your testimony, but I have in
front of me the idea that deep-draft ports move 99 percent of
U.S. overseas trade by volume and only 64 percent by value. I
am surprised that the value of overseas trade isn't higher than
the percent of the trade that is moved by volume. But I don't
want to dwell on that.
Deep-draft ports, how deep are those? What is the minimum
definition of a deep-draft port?
Ms. Darcy. Forty-five.
Mr. Olver. Forty-five feet. The question was earlier asked
about 50-foot ports, and I think that you said it was New York
and New Jersey, and then was it Stockton, California?
Ms. Darcy. It is Sacramento. I misspoke.
Mr. Olver. Are there other 50-foot ports planned, and if
so, what ones are planned? Which ones are in your horizon, your
already-planning horizon?
Ms. Darcy. Let me just find my list because I have a list
of the ongoing studies.
I will tell you what is ongoing and what is planned.
Mr. Olver. I well, ongoing is before planned. The ones that
are already complete are the Sacramento and the New York-New
Jersey. They are being enhanced--I am not sure whether I ought
use that word any longer today--but to go along with the New
York-New Jersey and Sacramento. What were the ongoing ones?
Ms. Darcy. We currently have 50-foot channels at Norfolk
and Baltimore, and the construction of New York-New Jersey will
get us to 50 feet by 2014. So we will have three East Coast
ports at 50 by 2014; 2014 is the date that Panama is expected--
--
General Van Antwerp. East Coast. There are West Coasts
ports also.
Mr. Olver. There are other 50-foot ports already in
operation in the West Coast. Sacramento is in the final stages?
Oakland is 50. On the West Coast, Oakland is 50.
Ms. Darcy. Then we have 45-foot channels currently in
Houston, Galveston, Corpus Christi, Freeport, Mobile Harbor,
Charleston, Morehead City, and ports located on the Mississippi
River between Baton Rouge and the Gulf of Mexico. Delaware
River to the Port of Philadelphia is currently under
construction to 45 feet.
Mr. Olver. Look, obviously, a lot of trade goes there; a
lot of jobs go into the navigation that goes into the trade
that comes from those locus points. I may well ask you for what
ports are at what levels, and you could easily chart that out
as to which ones for which levels are going to be coming down
the road if you are successful.
Madam secretary, in your original comments, you mentioned
that there were three projects that you expected to complete
this year? These were projects over the whole range of the
things you do. Which ones were those? And that depends, of
course, on the funding. What were the three that you had
mentioned would be completed this year?
Ms. Darcy. I know there are two. If you give me a minute, I
can tell you.
Mr. Olver. There must be somebody that has that quickly
because I don't want to take up all my time.
Ms. Darcy. We will provide that before we leave here today.
Mr. Olver. All right. My question was going to be, in your
overview, you point out that water resources infrastructure
projects produce high economic and environmental returns. Well,
the economic returns can come from the flood damage benefits
and also from the navigational benefits. The environmental
benefits come from whatever you have been doing in that 15
percent of the budget.
You then mentioned five major areas, which include the
California Bay Delta and the Chesapeake Bay. I would like to
pinpoint and ask you, because I have a sense we have lots of
ports, and you just said so--Norfolk and Baltimore are 50-foot
ports. They have high capacity ports. They are associated with
the Chesapeake Bay area. And the Great Lakes, of course,
everything that comes out the St. Lawrence Channel comes from
some of those.
I wonder if you could tell me what is the balance of
environmental and economic benefits, as you see it, and maybe
some of the description of what some of those would be for the
Chesapeake ones and for the Great Lakes ones that are of high
interest in what you are doing. Probably that is something the
key people for those regions, whoever wants to answer it.
Ms. Darcy. You specifically want to hear about the Great
Lakes region?
Mr. Olver. The Great Lakes and the Chesapeake Bay.
Ms. Darcy. The question is, what benefits do we see coming
out of those ecosystems?
Mr. Olver. What is the balance of environmental and
economic benefits there, and are these--would I find that, of
your projects, your three projects or others that may be in
stages, are actually part of a much larger group of projects
that come out of the Chesapeake Bay and out of the Great Lakes
region? You are not going to finish the Great Lakes program all
at once at any time.
Ms. Darcy. No.
Mr. Olver. Or the Chesapeake Bay, I think.
Ms. Darcy. The large ecosystems that you are referring to,
we, the Corps of Engineers, have projects ongoing in each of
those areas, and we are in collaboration with other members of
the Administration, the Federal family, to come up with an
ecosystem approach for those programs. For example, in the
Great Lakes, the Fish and Wildlife Service has ongoing projects
in that area, and what we are trying to do is maximize the
Federal interest there by collaborating with each of the other
Federal agencies in order to get an economic benefit as well an
environmental benefit.
Mr. Olver. Right. But they have their own budgets. You have
budgets which are related to the Corps' operations that have
economic or environmental interests. And that is the balance
that I was really seeking to understand.
It can't be done in a short answer, I think. I have
probably already used my time in trying to ask the question. So
maybe these could be answered in some form for the committee.
Ms. Darcy. Congressman, could I just tell you the two
completions that I couldn't find that we are budgeting for in
this budget? One is in Crookston, Minnesota; the other is the
Dover Dam in Ohio.
Mr. Olver. Those are not huge projects, although the one in
Minnesota probably has something to do with the Mississippi
River, I take it. So these are individual projects which might
be part of a much larger overall program.
Ms. Darcy. Yes. I am not sure if the Santa Paula Creek is
part of the Bay Delta or not. I would have to look to my
Division Commanders.
Mr. Olver. I am sorry. I didn't get a lot of information.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. For the record, there are 92
construction projects in the President's budget.
Ms. Darcy. Correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And outside that we have got hundreds of
other projects that are not in the President's budget which of
course are of keen interest to this committee.
Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. There are 92 projects specified in the
President's budget request?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. Do you call these earmarks?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Certainly, I wouldn't think of it. Yes.
They are Presidential earmarks.
Mr. Rogers. I thought we did away with earmarks.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You don't get equal time.
Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up somewhat along the line of questions
Mr. Alexander asked, regarding cooperation with FEMA and flood
maps. Mr. Alexander was referencing FEMA maps as it relates to
levees. In Mississippi, we have those issues on the western
part of the State; but on the Gulf Coast, we haven't found a
levee that will keep the Gulf of Mexico out of our State yet.
And then we have other flood mapping issues throughout the rest
of the State that may not necessarily involve levees.
So how does the Corps cooperate with FEMA in this flood map
modernization project?
General Van Antwerp. Well, our part with FEMA is we have
some inspections that we perform, and we actually have a part
of the program where we have Corps-built and Corps-operated
levees. So they are also in that program. They do provide
protection and risk reduction for people. So we are also part
of that program. But we have about 14 percent of the levees
that are in that category. There are many, many more levees
that are owned and operated by the local entity. And that is
really where the issue comes on this.
Those where they are under National Flood Insurance
Program, they have to meet the 100-year level of protection.
And many of those levees do not or they did at once when they
were built and they don't any more because of seepage problems
or things over time that happen. Just because that levee has
been there and been there for 50 years, there is a likelihood
or a possibility that that levee could not be certified at what
it was built for.
General Grisoli. Representative, if I may offer an
additional comment. Your question referenced, how we work with
FEMA. I would offer we try to work with them in several ways,
taking a look at when the mapping is due. First of all, we have
established an interagency task force that is led by FEMA and
with the Corps of Engineers participating to take a look at
flood plain management, et cetera. We have intergovernmental
efforts, where we work with the States and the local entities
to make sure that information is out there. There was a lot of
confusion, so we wanted to make sure that we are looking
horizontally across the Federal Government and then vertically
down through to the local entities to make sure they understand
better. It is a challenge. And we are still trying to get that
word out.
The Silver Jackets Program also provides information to
States so folks understand if you have a particular levee, as
the Chief mentioned, whether it is Corps-built and maintained
or Corps-built and locally maintained, what does that really
mean to you as far as your responsibility as a local community
to get your levee accredited as far as the FEMA program itself?
We have worked very hard to work with FEMA and the other
Federal agencies to get the information out. It is not all
there yet, but we continue to work it.
General Van Antwerp. My experience with them thus far is,
if the local community has a plan and they have a funding plan
to get it done and they know what they are going to do, that we
are taking a very reasonable approach as a group of agencies.
Mr. Nunnelee. Obviously, you want the flood map to be an
accurate representation of the risk involved. But I get calls
on a regular basis from constituents that don't feel that the
flood map is an accurate representation of the risk involved,
and I just don't understand what the problem is.
General Van Antwerp. There is a forum for that. And we
would encourage and we can go out and touch them. If we get the
people that are saying that, we can go and touch them. Part of
the Silver Jackets program in States was to make sure that they
have a voice that is being heard and that has a forum. We are
part of that. FEMA is part of that. So that we do hear those
things. And we will investigate. Because FEMA doesn't want to
draw a map that is not accurate. We want the most accurate. But
we want to reflect for the public's safety benefit what is
really there.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We had an excellent opportunity to view some of the labs
over the weekend in New Mexico, and I appreciate the
opportunity and the trip. I learned a lot.
The Army Corps is doing an extraordinary amount of work
here at home, but you also are doing work abroad. You have over
1,100 employees in Iraq and Afghanistan. When do we think that
their work is going to wrap up?
General Van Antwerp. I will take the two big countries.
Iraq has a December 2011 timeframe to come out, unless
something changes between now and then.
Mr. Fattah. Afghanistan?
General Van Antwerp. In Afghanistan, right now the mark on
the wall is 2014 to turn security over to the Afghan people.
That is not an exit time, however, for us. Traditionally, if
the Iraq experience is anything, right now we are in there
closing bases. We have gone from over 500 bases down to 75
bases. That is engineer work.
Mr. Fattah. You are doing a great job. I just wanted to
know what the timeline was.
General Van Antwerp. The timeline is December 2011 for
Iraq.
Mr. Fattah. December, 2014.
General Van Antwerp. 2014 for security turnover to the
Afghans. That is not a pull-out date.
Mr. Fattah. Let me move on.
I was at the 75th anniversary meeting of the Mississippi
Flood Control Council. The Corps has done extraordinary work
over many, many years. And attempting to manage Mother Nature
is a significant challenge. So, your work is deeply
appreciated.
However, let me focus on New Orleans. Are we going to meet
the 100-year requirement?
And if you could, for the committee's purposes, can you
provide us some information in writing on the unobligated
dollars? Are we going to meet this requirement, and when?
Ms. Darcy. The 100-year flood protection for the city of
New Orleans is on schedule to be completed to be able to defend
against a 100-year flood by June 1 of this year. That is the
beginning of hurricane season. And we are on target, on
schedule, to be able to complete that.
Mr. Fattah. In one of your other trust funds, I note that
in the New Hampshire Engineering Lab you are going to be
purchasing some property.
Ms. Darcy. Correct. That is in the budget proposal.
Mr. Fattah. It is in the President's budget proposal. I
would love to get some background material on that activity
because I am very interested in being supportive of the lab's
work.
Let me get closer to home. In Philadelphia, we have the
Delaware River Basin Compact. The Federal Government is a
member. There is no money in the President's budget for the
Federal participation, even though there is a statutory
requirement in the 2007 Act for the Secretary of the Army to
make provisions. If you could take a look at that and provide
some information to my office, that would be helpful.
Ms. Darcy. We can do that. We serve on that Commission.
Mr. Fattah. We get 60 percent of our water in Philadelphia
through the Delaware River and the other 40 percent through its
major spinoff, which is the Schuylkill River. So we have a lot
of interest in this matter. Of the ports on the East Coast that
you mentioned, did you say Philadelphia?
Ms. Darcy. I didn't say Philadelphia in the 45- or 50-foot
range, sir.
Mr. Fattah. What range would Philadelphia be in?
Ms. Darcy. The Delaware deepening project I believe is 45-
foot.
Mr. Fattah. I am sorry the chairman left. This is a perfect
example why we shouldn't assume all the wisdom----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The chairman is still here.
Mr. Fattah. The chairman of the full committee. I am sorry.
That we should not believe that all the wisdom exists in the
executive branch. The fact that they get a chance to decide 99
percent of the funds means that we should probably have
retained our 1 percent ability in this committee. I think by
working with the Corps over the years a lot has been done.
So I want to thank you for your work. I would like to
follow up appropriately about the Compact and about the
Philadelphia port. I am all for returning to the time in which
Congress would exert some authority in these matters.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are going to try to exert as much
authority as we can, given, shall we say, the new rules of the
House relative to earmarks.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Simpson, a fellow traveler.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I apologize for missing your opening statements. I walked
in on the middle of a conversation that I want to pursue a
little more because some of these might already have been
answered.
Two of the accounts that I have always had a great deal of
interest in are the Inland Waterway Trust Fund and the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund. The Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund has
funds, $5.5 billion. You are proposing to expand the type of
activities that could be funded out of that trust fund. Do we
know what type of activities you are talking about yet?
Ms. Darcy. No, we are still developing that proposal, sir.
Mr. Simpson. Do you have a plan, a 5-year, 10-year, 20-year
plan for which harbors we are going to dredge, what dredging
needs to be done, what the backlog is of dredging needs, and so
forth?
Ms. Darcy. I believe we do.
General Van Antwerp. We know what the current backlog is.
We know the dredging needs, as authorized today, but we have a
number of studies ongoing to see if those ports and harbors
should go to a greater depth with what is predicted in the
future. We have a number of studies ongoing also.
For instance, for a port like in New Orleans, it has a
certain authorized width and depth. When we dredge, that is
what we try to get to. A lot of our ports and harbors are not
to the authorized depth or the authorized width. We prioritize,
and we try and do the best we can with funds available.
Mr. Simpson. Are you suggesting that we couldn't use the
$5.5 billion in dredging? Do we have to find another use for
it? The reason I ask this is I have noticed on this committee
every year when we talk about dredging, particularly with
industry folks that come in in the Great Lakes, every community
that is located on the Great Lakes has a harbor that they want
to dredge deeper to make them more competitive. We are
obviously not going to dredge every port throughout the Great
Lakes. Is there a plan on which ones we are going to dredge to
take the deeper ships and so forth or the larger ships and that
type of stuff, and how those connect with the railroad system
and the highway system and other things? Is there any overall
plan in this country of why we do what we do?
I know you ask that of Congress all the time. I am just
wondering if there is a plan to address--and this is the
frustrating part to me--a lot of times, back when we did
earmarks, we would put money in to dredge a port of whomever
the favorite Congressman was there, not knowing whether that
was a good investment versus the overall system or not. Do we
have a view of where we want to be?
I get concerned when we are taking money out of the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund and using it for other purposes when I
don't yet know what the needs are for dredging around the
country.
Ms. Darcy. I don't believe that we have a comprehensive
long-term plan that you are talking about. Through our study
process we are looking at deepening various harbors around the
country and what those needs will be post-Panamax and what we
should be doing. But as far as what I think you are describing,
a comprehensive plan for the entire navigation system and what
the future needs are, I don't believe that we have a national
vision of what that is.
General Van Antwerp. I would just like to add, just to make
a slight distinction; there is deepening, which would be a new
project to go to a deeper depth. But there is maintenance
dredging. The Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund pays for the
maintenance dredging part of it.
Mr. Simpson. It doesn't do any of the deepening?
General Van Antwerp. No.
Mr. Simpson. Doesn't pay for any of the deepening.
General Van Antwerp. Deepening would be a construction
project. For example the New York-New Jersey Harbor is in this
budget funded in the construction account to do the deepening
of the harbor.
Mr. Simpson. So the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund just
maintains current levels.
General Van Antwerp. That is its purpose.
Mr. Simpson. I would think we would know what the backlog
is of maintenance requirements.
General Van Antwerp. We know what the dredging need is for
the authorized depth and width. We do for each harbor.
Mr. Simpson. Do we have a total?
General Van Antwerp. We could provide that total to you. I
will just give an example that we looked up. Of our 59 ports
that transport 90 percent of the U.S. commercial cargo in this
country, we are at authorized depth and width only about 35
percent of the time. We prioritize those. We work with
industry. Sometimes you can be of less width if you are at
depth, you just bring one ship in at a time instead of pass two
in the night. Those are the considerations. They don't like to
be out on anchorage. They want to get in. They want to offload.
They want to load and get back and steaming. Sometimes they are
not able to do that as efficiently because we don't have the
width or depth.
But we work with the industry, and we are trying to do the
best we can with the resources we have. We know what it takes.
We know what it would take to get all to authorized width and
depth.
Mr. Pastor. I was going to ask you to yield for a question.
Mr. Simpson. Sure.
Mr. Pastor. We are talking about the Panama Canal, and we
give the date 2014. I heard that New York-New Jersey, I guess
we are going to deepen it to be able to receive enhanced----
General Van Antwerp. Not every ship that goes through the
Panama Canal will take 50 feet of draft.
Mr. Pastor. I understand that.
General Van Antwerp. So every port doesn't have to be 50
feet. But if you wanted to take a fully loaded Panamax ship at
50-foot depth, you are going to have to have 50 feet underneath
your keel or the waterline.
Mr. Pastor. You also have harbors that are a lot closer to
Panama that may have the infrastructure--Miami, Jacksonville. I
don't know whether or not Brownsville would fall in that
category. New Orleans. I guess my question is, what criteria
did you use to determine New York-New Jersey as compared to
Jacksonville, Miami, and some of those ports that are also in
the range to receive more cargo from the Panama opening?
General Van Antwerp. They compete using performance metrics
which ultimately comes down to a benefit-cost ratio. It has to
do with other modes. Once you offload ships, do they have the
ability to handle it? What is the volume of the port now? What
is the expected volume in that port? It isn't necessary that
you are the closest one to the Panama Canal to be the deepest
necessarily, because it depends on the distribution systems
maybe coming out of that port. There are a lot of factors that
contribute to a benefit-cost ratio.
Ms. Darcy. Could I just add, in the deepening projects as
opposed to the maintenance, if you want to deepen, the Corps of
Engineers needs to have a cost-sharing sponsor for that
additional depth.
Mr. Pastor. The reason I ask that, I think last year,
Miami, they were hot and heavy, and they were cost sharing.
They were also very interested in getting traffic from the
opening of the Panama. And I didn't hear that mentioned.
Obviously, today they have some capacity because they are
taking in a hell of a lot of containers coming from Central and
South America.
General Van Antwerp. I think Ms. Darcy hit on a very
important point. You have to have a cost-sharing partner. It is
not just that you want that port to go to depth. You are going
to have to bring your share to do it. And they are very
expensive projects.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Just out of curiosity, what would it take to
put together a master plan, transportation plan, in this
country where we connected our harbor system, our inland
waterway system, our railroads, our highways so that we knew
when we were lifting load limits on highways, that we were
offloading things at a certain port, that there was rail
transportation that could handle it and roads that could handle
it with the weight systems and that kind of thing?
I feel like--not because of you or anything--but because of
what we have developed over the years that I am kind of putting
Band-Aids on things and trying to patch together, instead of an
overall plan where we want to be 20 years from now. What would
it take to put something like that together? It would include a
lot of different entities, obviously.
Ms. Darcy. A lot of different entities, not only government
entities but the stakeholders and the shippers and the rail,
the barge owners. It is a major undertaking. You are exactly
right on the way you describe it. It is having to look
holistically at the country, not just the water transportation
system.
Mr. Simpson. It is fascinating--something needs to get
done. And I don't know how to proceed with trying to develop
something like that. I would think the stakeholders would be
interested in that. I would like to know when I unloaded a ship
that I brought into harbor that there would be something to
pick stuff up, that it makes sense.
General Van Antwerp. In some cases, it is like ``Field of
Dreams.'' If you build it, they will come. The shippers know
where they can go in, get offloaded quickly, have the depth,
don't have other requirements. That can drive the system in
some ways.
Mr. Simpson. That would help us as an appropriations
committee when we are deciding, well, we want to make sure we
maintain these harbors or we want to deepen these harbors
because of the larger ships or whatever. Right now, I kind of
feel like we are just kind of going at it, and I am sure that I
have got a simplistic mindset of this, but we are just going at
it kind of haphazardly. I don't mean that to criticize what you
are doing or anything else. But without some goal of where I
want to be, I feel a little frustrated sometimes in how we do
things here.
Inland Waterway Trust Fund, broke, pretty much, right?
Ms. Darcy. We do not have enough revenue in there to meet
the needs.
Mr. Simpson. The Bush Administration made a proposal to go
to the lockage fee away from the diesel fee? The shippers
rejected that; came back with a proposal; you rejected that.
Where are we?
Ms. Darcy. Where we are, sir, is that we are committed to
work with the stakeholders to try to come up with a funding
mechanism to help fix this trust fund.
Mr. Simpson. When?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How hard are you working on that? Do you
have a group put together on this?
Ms. Darcy. We are setting up a meeting--we haven't set it
up yet, but we have reached out to the industry. We recognize
the fact that the mechanism currently is not funding
efficiently or going to meet the needs, and we need to address
it.
Mr. Simpson. Would it be helpful to have language in an
appropriations bill directing this conference to occur and come
up with a solution or a proposal for Congress to consider?
Ms. Darcy. That is always a possibility, sir, but we are
reaching out, as I say, to the industry right now to try to
develop it within the Administration and the stakeholders.
Mr. Simpson. I hope that industry understands that we are
serious that we need a solution. Hopefully, it is a solution
that both the government and industry can agree on. If not, it
will be a solution that is imposed, which nobody really likes.
So we hope you are successful in that regard. And if there is
anything we can do to help spur that along, I would be more
than happy to do it, I am sure.
One last question. I appreciate the work that has been done
on the Columbia River and the deepening projects there that
have been finished. It has been a great success in the area.
What about the jetties that need to be fixed in the area to
maintain it?
Ms. Darcy. As part of the Columbia deepening, sir? I am not
sure of that status. I will call on General McMahon, our
Division Commander.
General McMahon. I am John McMahon, the Commander of the
Northwest Division in Portland, Oregon. There is an 8-year,
$250 million plan that is predicated on funding in 2011 to be
determined and consequently in 2012 or subsequently in 2012, to
begin to purchase rock, big rocks, to reconstruct the jetties
at the mouth of the Columbia River, which there are three. This
plan is well thought out. It is an 8-year effort. But it is
predicated on doing some things between now and then.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I appreciate the work you do. I know
that the Army Corps does fantastic work, and sometimes we have
tasked you to do things that aren't really in your scope just
because we think you do good work. We appreciate that. And
thanks for all you do.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
Last year, the subcommittee, when Mr. Pastor led it, became
aware that there were some inconsistencies across the districts
in terms of updating the cost-benefit ratio projects. Where do
we stand in terms of that issue, and where are we moved toward
in terms of consistency and accuracy?
Ms. Darcy. We identified 36 projects where the benefit-cost
ratios had not been updated in accordance with our policies. It
does not mean they were inaccurate. It was just that they
hadn't been updated. So, as a result, what we have done is we
identified which projects must have updated BCRs for the fiscal
year 2013 budget, and we have also initiated an Engineer
Inspector General investigation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are well prepared, I can see.
Ms. Darcy. And to provide some feedback. We have identified
a couple of problems. One of the problems is that the guidance
was unclear. We are going to redo the guidance so that our
districts and divisions will know just exactly what is
required.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So without waiting for the guidance, how
has the information you have obtained changed the way you
formulate your budget request?
Ms. Darcy. I am not quite sure----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That is not your budget for a project
that falls below a certain BCR, even if it is 80 percent
complete. Is there some sort of a percentage?
Ms. Darcy. Do you mean if we discover an 80 percent
completed project is going to fall below a certain BCR? That is
less than unity or less than the 2.5 for this budget. I think
that is ongoing, and we will help develop that in the guidance.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, at some point here, you could
terminate projects, too, if they didn't meet criteria, is that
right?
General Van Antwerp. If they fell below--basically, we have
four levels.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What percentage would it be?
General Van Antwerp. Well, right now, for a new start, the
benefit-cost ratio required was 2.5. But we have four levels.
Some of them have just minor things that have changed, but
there are some of these projects where the conditions have
changed. So those you need to go back and do a new benefit-cost
ratio to make sure you are on target and you are properly
prioritizing. That is really what this is about, is to make
sure we are properly prioritizing. By fiscal year 2013, under
the new system, all of these projects will have the BCR ratio
done that way. The draft guidance is out. It is not like we are
not doing anything.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Under the new starts and investigations
category--I think we talked about this--you are initiating four
new studies.
Ms. Darcy. Correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. All environmental.
Ms. Darcy. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What is the criteria that you use to
select those studies? Because there are a lot of other studies
out there, what, 50 or 60? What were the criteria you used to
choose those, and new ones, and we have a backlog of old ones?
Ms. Darcy. These were selected in competition with others,
but we selected these because we felt that they were of the
best and the most value to the nation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What do you mean by competition?
Ms. Darcy. Well, as you said, there are many studies out
there, many study requests, from all of our project and mission
areas, and these were the four that were new start purposes for
this year, were the priority for this Administration.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What is the criteria? We have a
competitive process. Is there a consistent application across--
what is the criteria?
Ms. Darcy. We look at each of the study requests and then
base it on what we think is the ultimate value to the nation.
In our new studies, like thosing ongoing, we need a cost-
sharing partner. We have identified partners as well.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, for the record, would you provide
a ranking of all projects by account and program line
considered for the fiscal year 2012 request? This ranking
should clearly show the criteria by which the rank was
determined. And for the record, please clearly outline the
cutoff line below which funding was not allocated for projects.
Can you say something about capability funding? We talked
about it earlier.
General Van Antwerp. The capability estimate for each study
or project is the estimate of the most that we could obligate
efficiently. If you added all those up, though, if we funded
everything to capability, and it went to all these Commanders,
it would probably overload the system. But for any given
project, it is that amount that we could efficiently fund and
move toward completion of that project.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Getting back, we haven't heard the term
shovel-ready lately. Could you just give the committee a
summary of what you accomplished with the stimulus money that
you were given?
Ms. Darcy. Sure. The Corps of Engineers got $4.6 billion in
stimulus money. We had over 800 projects; 400 of those projects
are complete. The other 400 are ongoing and expect to be
completed soon. We have expended $3.1 billion of that $4.6
billion. We have done a number of projects. As you know, the
legislation gave us more latitude in some areas. For example,
the legislation directed us to spend at least $200 million on
water infrastructure, something that the Corps of Engineers and
the Administration have not budgeted. So we were able to work
on some of those projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Were any of those projects left stranded
at the moment?
Ms. Darcy. No.
Mr. Pastor. I want to follow up on your cost-benefit ratio.
I think last year we heard the cost of a project is reviewed
frequently and at least on a yearly basis, so we know ongoing
what the cost is going to be. The cost-benefit ratio was done
periodically or a longer period of time. And in the different
divisions, obviously, there were inconsistencies. Some
divisions did it one way. Now you have guidance. I don't know
what the guidance is.
It is my belief that this is a political process. As much
as we don't want to admit it, it is. So you can have the cost
of the projects and the benefit. Obviously, you can use various
models. In whatever model you use, there will be some
subjective processes that come in. So we try to be as objective
as we can, but obviously, the models aren't perfect and people
are going to determine how much a particular benefit this is
and somebody may interpret it a little bit different.
In your answer to the chairman, especially on these
investigations, what four were chosen and how were they chosen,
I think there are all these cost-benefit ratios. There are
costs and then benefits to the nation, which is pretty
significant--I mean, pretty subjective. And so, in many cases,
I believe the benefit to the nation is who has requested it and
who is it at OMB asking for the project. So I don't blame the
Corps for that. I don't blame the Corps for that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are not suggesting the system is
political here. I mean, they are Presidential earmarks and
House and Senate earmarks.
Mr. Pastor. I started with that: this is a political
process. I think every administration does it.
General Van Antwerp. If I could clarify one thing. There is
a difference between construction and planning. The
construction projects that are new starts, the two in here,
have gone through the entire process and have a benefit-cost
ratio. A planning project, it does not have a benefit-cost
ratio yet. It will get one later, and then it will either be
thrown out because it is below unity or it will stay in the
process.
Mr. Pastor. But you can be in construction and
circumstances change, so that the cost-benefit ratio changes.
So, then, obviously, then you have to start making different
determinations.
General Van Antwerp. Generally, we would like to go to
completion.
Mr. Pastor. What I am saying is even if--whether you are on
construction or investigations, the process, you can use
different models, benefit-cost ratios, how much money the
agency that you are dealing with is going to share the cost. I
mean, I asked that question, why wasn't the Port of Miami
chosen, and you said, well, cost-benefit ratio and other
factors.
General Van Antwerp. And other factors.
Mr. Pastor. That is what I am talking about; the other
factors.
General Van Antwerp. There is a methodology on that.
Mr. Pastor. I am not laying blame on the Corps. But in
making these determinations, there are a lot of subjective
factors that come in. And so it is very difficult to ask the
agency because they probably had very little input into making
that decision. Obviously, they gave their models. They gave
their cost-benefit ratios, and all that. But some decisions
basically are based on more subjective benefit to the country.
Well, okay. Good luck in defining that one.
So I think frankness and honesty go a long way. And I
appreciate the answers. I am a country boy from Claypool,
Arizona. I know the process. And sometimes we respond to your
answers, but we understand there are other factors that enter
that cause the determination.
One more and then I am going to quit. But I am going to
talk about the 404; my experience, anyway. The Corps goes
through this process of reviewing the permit, and they pick up
data, and they make conclusions. So the Corps is about to make
a recommendation.
General Van Antwerp. We also consult with the other
agencies, too. They are in the game, too.
Mr. Pastor. But let me get to the consulting part.
Basically, you take the data and you have recommendations based
on your personnel, your staff, of where it ought to go. And
then you take it to consult. And then, obviously, there are
other factors that other people different from the process
begin saying, well, I don't agree with this; I don't agree with
the data, or I don't agree with the conclusion. And then what
happens, there is an impasse. But out here, you have people who
are waiting for this 404 because it is time and money. And I
guess some of the frustration that the people out here,
including us, that we face, is that the resolution, because
there is a difference of opinion on the data or the conclusion,
sometimes just gets interlocked and there is no movement. I
guess at least for me, it would be if there was a way to have
resolution of that difference of opinion, whether it be on the
facts or on the conclusion, because sometimes they are at
loggerheads with the other agency and your determination, that
things don't move, and that causes a lot of frustration.
So I don't know, when you become deadlocked, how you deal
with it when you did that memorandum of understanding. But that
is a real--that causes a lot of frustration. And so questions
you get about the 404 are usually because people have a 404
process, and we are getting called; you know it has been a
year, it has been 2 years. And it is interlocked and a
difference of opinion between the two agencies that just causes
that to not move forward.
General Van Antwerp. Part of what we are changing and
trying to change under enhanced review, which has been used a
lot here, is to start consultation very early in the process.
So those are being identified in parallel. Then, as you go to
public forums, you are really fleshing out what the issues are
that could loggerhead you later and try and get those resolved
a lot earlier in the process. That is part of what we are
trying to do. It is hard.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Simpson.
Then we are going to wrap up after that.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I sympathize with Mr. Pastor. We tried to get the cost-
benefit analysis to work out for that Port of Phoenix, but we
could just never get it. It was far too costly to get those
ships there.
Mr. Pastor. We will trade those big rocks from Arizona for
some of the water in the Columbia River.
Mr. Simpson. The Army Corps will buy them.
A question that might seem a little strange in this
hearing, but I am the chairman of the Interior Appropriations
Committee. The administration has come out with America's Great
Outdoors Initiative, one that I happen to support. Within the
Federal Government, the Corps of Engineers is the number one
provider of outdoor recreation. Most people don't realize that.
I didn't realize that until I read that.
Ms. Darcy. Three hundred seventy million visitor days.
Mr. Simpson. That is surprising. You have proposed or in
your budget there is a proposed 7.5 percent cut in funding for
recreation contained within the budget request. How is that
going to affect your ability to advocate this America's Great
Outdoors Initiative? Will it close any parks? Where will these
cuts come from within your recreation program?
Ms. Darcy. The $259 million in this year's budget is about
$21 million below fiscal year 2011. Yes, we are going to have
to maybe close some parks. We may have to have shorter hours.
We may have to have fewer summer hires than we usually do. But
you are right in the recreation program the Corps of Engineers
provides to the whole country. We have more than 422 recreation
sites around the country. And the reason we have so many
visitors is most of them are close to urban areas. People can
get to them. They are part of another project--a reservoir for
flood control--for example, but provide benefits such as
fishing, camping and recreation.
We are trying to highlight that. And we also recently
developed, for the first time, a 5-year strategic plan for how
we are going to spend our recreation dollars and where we
should put them.
Mr. Simpson. Do we have a priority list, if we are going to
close parks, which ones are we going to end up having to close,
or have we gotten that far down the road yet?
Ms. Darcy. We have not gotten that far yet.
General Van Antwerp. A lot of parks have multiple
recreation areas, so we wouldn't close the whole park. We might
close one boat ramp and keep two open. The last resort would be
to close the entire thing.
Mr. Simpson. I will be interested next year during this
hearing to find out how that worked out and what the impact was
of closing that. Because I think the administration has a good
initiative here that I support. I just never thought about it
that the Army Corps was the number one provider of recreation
within the Federal Government. That is something most people
don't think about.
Ms. Darcy. I tell Secretary Salazar that every time I have
a chance.
Mr. Simpson. I will mention that to him the next time I see
him, say, you know what I heard. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. On that note, I want to thank our
witnesses for their time and the men and women who back them
up.
Again, General Van Antwerp, good luck in your retirement.
I would also like to recognize Gary Loew, seated at the
table here, retiring after 40 years of service. It is a hell of
a long time.
General Van Antwerp. For as young as he is.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. On behalf of so many people who may
never know who you are, I would like to enter into the record
that we thank you for your dedication to obviously many
administrations and to the people of the nation for what you
have done. With that, we stand adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.113

Thursday, March 10, 2011.

BUREAU OF RECLAMATION FY 2012 BUDGET

WITNESSES

MICHAEL CONNOR, COMMISSIONER, BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
REED MURRAY, DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL UTAH PROJECT COMPLETION ACT OFFICE
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I'd like to call this hearing to order.
Good morning, everyone. Our hearing today is on the fiscal year
2012 budget request for the Bureau of Reclamation and the
request for the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA).
I'd like to welcome our witnesses, Michael Connor,
Commissioner of Reclamation, and Reed Murray, Program Director
for the CUPCA Office.
As I have mentioned at all of our hearings this year, I
want everyone who appears before this subcommittee to
understand that it is highly unlikely there will be any new
funding in fiscal year 2012 for our subcommittee. Our
subcommittee must do its part to reduce spending and bring down
our deficit.
Our task this year is really no different than any other
year, however we must find the right balance of investments
into our most critical needs, with an eye towards those that
protect our nation, and support and improve our economy and add
jobs.
It is clear that water and power remain fundamental to the
economy of the western United States, and the Bureau of
Reclamation's activities are critical to meeting these needs.
Reclamation's fiscal year 2012 budget request reflects a
reduction of 3 percent from the fiscal year 2011 Continuing
Resolution. Within this overall funding, however, water and
energy management activities continue to be cut
disproportionately when compared to funding for fish and
wildlife activities.
Your mission clearly states your primary responsibility is
to meet the water demands of the West while protecting the
environment and the public's investments in these structures.
While I have been a long-time supporter of environmental
conservation programs, I'm not sure now is the time to be
making this shift of priorities away from your historical
mission of water and power.
These tight budget times make it even more important that
we use every dollar efficiently and effectively. The
subcommittee will take a hard look this morning at the
criteria--both quantitative and qualitative--used to develop
the specifics of your budget request. We may end up agreeing
with the Administration's decisions or we may not, but we will
not know until we fully understand your rationale.
Again, I'd like to welcome our witnesses to the
subcommittee. Mr. Connor, please ensure that the hearing
record, questions for the record, and any supporting
information requested by the subcommittee are delivered in
final form to us no later than four weeks from the time you
receive them. Members who have additional questions for the
record will have until close of business tomorrow to provide
them to the subcommittee office.
With that, I'll turn to Mr. Pastor for his opening
comments.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Connor, Mr. Murray, welcome back to the
subcommittee. I look forward to your testimony and thank you
for joining us today.
The Bureau of Reclamation is responsible for providing
agricultural, municipal and industrial water supply in the
West. Economies, ecosystems, and communities all rely on the
availability of clean water. At a time when demand is
increasing and many regions have been hit by extended drought,
the Bureau is being asked more and more to provide solutions to
the West's water needs while being good stewards of our natural
resources. I hope to hear today how the fiscal year 2012 budget
request reflects this responsibility with a reduced budget.
Reclamation's budget request for Water and Related
Resources is a 12 percent reduction from that of 2011. We are
all interested in finding appropriate places to cut, and as the
Chairman has said, it will be especially important that we
understand the specific methodology in arriving at this
particular set of projects and activities. I am principally
concerned that this request does not adequately provide for two
important programs within the Water and Related account: dam
safety and rural water.
Much of the Bureau's infrastructure was built nearly a
century ago--in fact, over half of the Bureau's dams are more
than 60 years old. It is critical that Reclamation maintain
this aging infrastructure, and I hope today to explore how the
budget request provides funding levels that meet the Bureau's
responsibility to keep Americans safe while maintaining its
dams in proper working order.
Reclamation plays a vital role in delivering water to
tribes and rural communities that could not otherwise access
clean water. The rural water budget request is a significant
cut to this activity, and today I look you, Mr. Connor, to shed
light on how the Administration's proposal addresses our water
supply commitments to tribes and meets the needs of rural
communities.
We are all interested in ensuring that every dollar is
spent effectively and efficiently, I look forward to your
testimony today on how Reclamation and CUPCA plan to accomplish
this task.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman for the time.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Pastor. Mr. Connor, good
morning.
Mr. Connor. Good morning.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thanks for being with us.
Mr. Connor. I think I might rather be here today than
outside.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes.
Mr. Connor. That's a strange thing.
Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Representative Pastor, and
members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss the
President's FY 2012 budget request for the Bureau of
Reclamation. With me today is Bob Wolf, Director of Program and
Budget, with respect to Reclamation's testimony.
The 2012 discretionary request for Reclamation is
approximately $1 billion. I have submitted written testimony,
which presents a detailed summary of the request. Overall, the
budget reflects a comprehensive set of actions and initiatives
to support Reclamation's mission. The budget continues to
emphasize working smarter to address the water needs of a
growing population in an environmentally responsible and cost-
efficient manner, and assisting states, tribes, and local
entities in solving contemporary water resource challenges.
Certainty and sustainability, our primary goals with
respect to the use of water resources, requires Reclamation to
take action on many fronts and our budget proposal was
developed with that principle in mind. The FY 2012 budget
request for Reclamation focuses on six priority areas, which I
briefly want to touch on in my remaining time.
Infrastructure. Overall, our budget continues to support
the need to maintain infrastructure in a safe operating
condition while addressing the myriad challenges facing water
users in the West. Approximately 51 percent of our Water and
Related Resources budget, or $407 million, is dedicated to
operation, maintenance and rehabilitation activity. These
activities include the Dam Safety Program, Site Security
Program, and RAX, which is shorthand for Replacement,
Additions, and Extraordinary Maintenance.
WaterSMART is the second priority area in our budget. We
have established as a high priority goal, approving and funding
actions, to increase available water supply for agriculture,
municipal, and industrial and environmental uses in the Western
United States by 490,000 acre feet by the end of 2012.
WaterSMART concentrates on expanding and stretching limited
water supplies in the West to reduce conflict, facilitate
solutions to complex water issues, and meet the needs of
expanding municipalities, the environment, and agriculture.
Reclamation proposes to fund WaterSMART at $59 million in
FY 2012. The three ongoing WaterSMART programs include the
WaterSMART Grant Program, Basin Studies, and the Title XVI
Water Reuse Program. In FY 2012, WaterSMART will also include
the ongoing Water Conservation Field Services Program and a
pilot project to initiate the Cooperative Watershed Management
Program, which was authorized in 2009.
Ecosystem restoration is the third priority area. In order
to meet Reclamation's mission goals of producing power and
delivering water in a sustainable manner, we must continue to
focus on the protection and restoration of the aquatic and
riparian environments affected by our operations.
Ecosystem restoration involves a large number of activities
including our Endangered Species Recovery programs. Simply put,
healthy aquatic ecosystems have a wealth of benefits and are
fundamental to Reclamation's ability to continue water and
power operations for the benefit of our customers.
Approximately 20 to 25 percent of Reclamation's FY 2012
budget is allocated to activities in support of ecosystem
restoration. This amount includes the request for operating,
managing, and improving California's Central Valley Project.
CVP-related funding will support completion of the Red Bluff
pumping plant and fish screen on the Sacramento River, the
Trinity River and San Joaquin River Restoration Programs, and
protecting and enhancing California's Bay Delta region, an area
that is critical to the water needs of millions of
Californians.
Our budget request also supports ongoing implementation of
the Lower Colorado River Multispecies Conservation Program, the
Platte River Endangered Species Recovery Implementation
Program, and the Upper Colorado and San Juan River Endangered
Fish Recovery Programs. Additionally, funding requested for the
Columbia/Snake River Salmon Recovery Program will implement
required biological opinion actions associated with the Federal
Columbia River Power System.
Finally, funding is also sought for the Klamath, Rio
Grande, and Yakima projects to support extensive initiatives to
improve habitat, water delivery systems, and overall operations
to address the competing demands of agricultural, tribal,
municipal, and environmental needs.
Cooperative Landscape Conservation and renewable energy
production, a fourth area of focus, are Departmental
initiatives in which Reclamation is actively engaged. As a
threshold matter, we are developing and implementing approaches
to understand and effectively adapt to the risks and impacts of
climate change on Western water management. The Basin Studies
Program is part of Interior's integrated strategy to respond to
climate change impacts on the resources managed by the
department and is also a key component of the WaterSMART
program.
In FY 2012, the Basin Studies Program will continue West-
wide risk assessments focusing on the threats to water supplies
from climate change and other sources. We will also continue
responsive actions with the Department's Landscape Conservation
Cooperatives.
Included within Reclamation's Science and Technology
Program is research targeting improved capability for managing
water resources under multiple drivers including climate change
and invasive species. Reclamation is also working in
partnership with the Department of Energy and the Corps of
Engineers in identifying opportunities to address the
President's Clean Energy Goals through the development of new
sustainable hydropower capacity as well as integrating
renewable energy into our operations.
A fifth initiative I wanted to discuss is a very important
one for the Administration. Reclamation has a longstanding
commitment to the Secretary's goal to strengthen tribal
nations. The request includes funding for ongoing settlement
activities such as the Animas-La Plata Project, Avogal Project,
and other settlement needs in Arizona.
On December 8th of last year, the President signed the
Claims Resolution Act, which authorized four new Indian Water
Right Settlements. The primary responsibility for developing
water infrastructure on these settlements was given to the
Bureau of Reclamation. Mandatory funding was provided to the
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and Reclamation for a portion of
the funds obligated under the Act. We anticipate that
Reclamation will begin expending some of this mandatory funding
in the future to work with all parties to begin implementation
of these settlements.
I would also note that the FY 2012 budget request also
requests $36 million for ongoing, authorized rural water
projects. Several projects benefit tribal nations including Mni
Wiconi in South Dakota, the Garrison Diversion Unit in North
Dakota, Fort Peck Reservation/Dry Prairie in Montana, Jicarilla
Apache Reservation in New Mexico, and Rocky Boys in Central
Montana.
Finally, Youth Employment is the sixth area of focus.
Consistent with the Secretary's priority for youth employment,
Reclamation is working to engage young men and women, aged 25
and under, in conservation careers either through internships
with Reclamation or as part of a conservation work crew in
conjunction with a partnering organization. Further,
Reclamation will seek ways to expand opportunities for youth
engagement through ongoing activities in partnerships.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my verbal statement. I am
happy to answer questions at the appropriate time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.122

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Connor. Mr. Murray, good
morning. I see you are a child of this project. I see from your
resume you started back in 1982, is that correct?
Mr. Murray. That's correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah, so we are going to learn something
from you as to what you are up to.
Mr. Murray. Right. I hope so.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Pastor, my name is Reed Murray. I serve
as the program director of the Central Utah Project Completion
Act Office under the Assistant Secretary for Water and Science
in the Department of the Interior, and I am pleased to provide
the following information about the President's fiscal year
2012 budget request for implementation of the Central Utah
Project Completion Act.
The Central Utah Project Completion Act provides for
completion of the Central Utah Project by the Central Utah
Water Conservancy District. The Act also authorizes funding for
fish, wildlife, and recreation mitigation and conservation,
establishes an account in the Treasury for deposit of these
funds and other contributions, establishes the Utah
Reclamation, Mitigation, and Conservation Commission to
coordination mitigation and conservation activities and
provides for the Ute Indian Rights Settlement.
The Department has established an office in Provo, Utah
with a program director to provide oversight, review, and
liaison with the District, the Mitigation Commission, and the
Ute Indian tribe, and to assist in administering the
responsibilities of the Secretary under the Act.
The 2012 request for the Central Utah Project Completion
Account provides $33 million for use by the District, the
Mitigation Commission, and the Department, to implement the
Act, which is $9 million less than the 2010 enacted budget.
The decrease in funding for the 2012 budget is due in part
to accelerated funding of $50 million provided in 2009 through
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and in part to the
Administration's effort to reduce the deficit.
The request for the District includes $28.5 million to fund
the design, specifications, land acquisition, and construction
of the Utah Lake System and to implement water conservation
measures. The request includes $2 million for the Mitigation
Commission to implement fish, wildlife and recreation
mitigation and conservation projects and to complete mitigation
measures, all of which are necessary to allow for CUP
operation.
Finally, the request includes $2.5 million for the program
office for endangered species recovery and operation and
maintenance costs associated with instream flows and fish
hatchery facilities and for program oversight and
administration.
This concludes my statement. I appreciate the
subcommittee's support and this opportunity to testify before
the subcommittee, and I would be happy to respond to any
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.124

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, thank you. Thank you both. I was
looking over your resume, Mr. Connor, and you have been at this
for a long time.
Mr. Connor. I have.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Working for the Senate and then working
for the Department of the Interior for a number of years, so
you are indeed--I guess both of you--resident experts. So, I
hope you use this opportunity to educate us.
We spent quite a lot of time yesterday with the Army Corps
of Engineers trying to get a handle as to how they prioritize
the criteria that they use to move ahead with their projects,
and as you know from your time in the Senate, there's a keen
interest. Every member of Congress has some relationship with
the Corps in their congressional district. And the House and
the Senate appear to be sort of forsaking earmarks, but my
focus initially here is to figure out from you how you
prioritize your budget. Could you explain to the committee the
methodology you use to determine what projects to fund and at
what levels?
Mr. Connor. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Could you sort of give us a rundown of
how you do it?
Mr. Connor. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. It is not entirely
formulaic or an exact science with respect to our budget
preparation, but there is a thoughtful set of criteria that we
use to allocate between our different program areas and then
within the program areas themselves.
So, I think we start off primarily by looking at what is
fundamental to operating and maintaining our facilities, the
physical operation maintenance.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And you are responsible for 58 power
plants or something, I read.
Mr. Connor. Fifty-eight power plants.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And a lot of other----
Mr. Connor. Like 476 dams, large dams, diversion dams and
structures, canals, et cetera. In a lot of those instances we
have contractors who are responsible for paying for a good
share of the O & M. In a lot of those cases there is also a
Federal obligation to pay for a portion of the O&M, which is
our piece. And even in some cases where contractors are
responsible for some of the O&M activity, we have to pay it
first and then we get reimbursed, so that comes out of our
appropriations.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are some of the communities involved
here sharing in those costs as well?
Mr. Connor. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, it is not unlike the Corps in some
ways.
Mr. Connor. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. People step up to the plate.
Mr. Connor. Yes, some of our stakeholders are stepping up
to the plate. Some of them prepay a lot of the O&M, so that is
very helpful from an appropriations perspective. That is kind
of the fundamental place that we start. Then we look at our
infrastructure needs, our infrastructure programs. Beyond
typical maintenance, annual maintenance activities, what are
the large-scale rehabilitation activities we have to do? Dam
safety? What are the security fortifications that we need to
do, and what are what we call extraordinary maintenance? Things
that we do not do on a year to year basis but over time for
which we have to do some major rehabilitation?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Dam safety is a critical mass, is it
not?
Mr. Connor. Absolutely. Dam safety is a substantial amount
of our $1 billion budget. This year we are in the $84 million
range for our Dam Safety Program. We have been up to $100
million in past years, so it has really taken an upswing over
the last five to eight years.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If you had to have a pyramid, would dam
safety be right up there?
Mr. Connor. It is right up there.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah.
Mr. Connor. Operating and maintaining, those fundamental
needs, and we look at our infrastructure needs and we do risk
assessments and that is how we come up with our budget request.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, do you have a benefit to cost ratio
and do you do sort of a percent complete? And where do things
like Endangered Species Act compliance come in and other
factors?
Mr. Connor. All right, so let me----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How do you put it all together?
Mr. Connor. Let me separate those. I will kind of go
through the different program areas and then I will talk about
cost-benefit, schedule to completion, et cetera, which I think
is how we look at different categories.
So, after we get through operation and maintenance type
activities, infrastructure needs, then we look at legal
requirements. Legal requirements are things from the Endangered
Species Act compliance, those things, that as I mentioned in my
testimony, are fundamental to our water operations and power
delivery generation. So, we need to comply with the ESA through
those programs in order to maintain water deliveries and power
generation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But the ESA in the overall scheme of
things is a more recent obligation, or legal obligation.
Mr. Connor. I think more--yes. Relative to the ongoing----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. To the traditional----
Mr. Connor. To the traditional----
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. View of the BOR.
Mr. Connor. Certainly. And a lot----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am not minimizing it, but there were
historic responsibilities of the BOR----
Mr. Connor. Which impacted----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are interested in making sure,
obviously, you keep your historic responsibilities, you know,
primary.
Mr. Connor. Right. It is relatively new, but I think it is
fundamental to those responsibilities, quite frankly, the
Endangered Species Act protection activities.
Other legal obligations we have, which typically have tight
deadlines to maintain, implement and successfully carry out the
settlement as opposed to allowing it to fail. We have other
legal obligations such as court orders, such as responsibility
to implement drainage systems in the San Luis unit, and the--
project, so that is kind of a third area.
Then we go to, I think, the good water management----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You have Indian Water Rights here, too?
Mr. Connor. Yes, absolutely. Indian Water Rights
Settlements are fundamental to the legal obligations that we
look at.
Then we look----
Mr. Womack. My next question is more toward personnel--and
a number of Federal agencies have shown that over the next
decade, there will be a number of people entering retirement.
Does Reclamation have that----
Mr. Connor. Absolutely. We have aging. In addition----
Mr. Womack [continuing]. Aging employees?
Mr. Connor. An aging workforce.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Let me help you out.
Mr. Connor. And it is something over time, just with
respect to how we are staffing. Let me just put it on the
record that our staffing level at the Bureau of Reclamation in
1993 was 7,239. In 2000, it was 5,632. In 2004, it was 5,750.
And in 2011, we estimate it to be 5,116.
So, from my perspective, the Bureau of Reclamation has been
on a downward trend as far as our FTEs. We are very cognizant
of the need, in particularly tight budget times like this, to
be very prudent to look across the board, not just at our
program activities, but our administrative costs in the level
of administration that we have.
Now, as we move forward, the discussions that we're having
are about the aging workforce because of the talent and
expertise and experience we have, particularly in our Denver
Technical Center, which supports a lot of our dam safety and
infrastructure activities.
But at the same time, we want to be realistic about what
our long-term expectations are. And we are thinking
strategically about, as people retire, what do we really need
to do as far as replacing that expertise, and where do we think
we might be able to rely on external contractors in some of
those forums.
So it is something that we have a great and deep
experience, a talent pool that exists. But I think we have to
recognize that budgets are only going to get tighter in the
future. And as people retire, we will look very judiciously
about how to replace them, and whether to replace them.
Mr. Womack. So is it safe to say that in your succession
planning, that outsourcing, which is the term I use; I think
you just said ``external contractors''--some means of
outsourcing may be part of that strategy?
Mr. Connor. Yes.
Mr. Womack. Okay. Any specific areas of expertise that we
are having trouble finding in today's climate?
Mr. Connor. I think we've done a lot of review about that.
And I think that is a good one for me to expand on in the
record.
I would just say--you know, some of the expertise we have
in dam safety, a lot of folks have been involved in
construction of dams and the ongoing maintenance of that. And
that is a skill level that, I think, over time there are less
people out there.
There has been a--just talking about our work with the
Corps of Engineers. There has been some level of competition
between ourselves and the Corps with respect to that talent
pool. Rather than to handle that inefficiently, we are looking
very closely at integrating our risk management services with
the Corps of Engineers, and seeing if we can't partner up and
do things a little bit more efficiently overall. But that is
one area that I would identify that we have concerns about
ongoing expertise. There are probably others that we have
looked at, so if I can expand upon that for the record for you.
Mr. Womack. Sure. I appreciate that.
And, finally, you had indicated earlier in some of your
programs that you evaluate risk, which is a key component of
your decision-making criteria. I am assuming--I am sure you
would agree--that aging personnel, and the loss of
institutional knowledge also plays somewhat into that risk,
does it not?
Mr. Connor. Absolutely. Yes. And for that reason, part of
our succession planning is not only looking to those things
that we can possibly outsource, but also how we are developing
younger engineers, and giving them exposure to these very
experienced folks in trying to develop them in-house.
Mr. Womack. Thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
I read a very interesting article in the New York Times
entitled ``Danger Pent Up Behind Aging Dams.'' I assume you saw
that. Is the Lake Isabella Dam in California one of yours?
Mr. Connor. Lake Isabella?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Doesn't ring a bell. Okay.
Mr. Connor. It is a State dam.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I was interested in what they said here.
Of the nation's 85,000 dams, more than 4,400 are considered
susceptible for failure according to the Association of State
Dam Safety Officials.
How many dams are you responsible for? And how many would
be on this watch list?
Mr. Connor. We have----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I assume--this is obviously a highly
legitimate group, I assume, that do these analyses.
Mr. Connor. Yes. We're responsible for--and, quite frankly,
in our data I have seen two figures, which I am still trying to
get to the bottom of--476 dams or 480 dams. And, as I
mentioned, a lot of those are diversion dam structures, very
small dams, low-risk dams from that standpoint--but a lot of
very major facilities.
And I think, once again, we are very concerned about the
safety of our dams. We've had this ongoing safety of dams
program.
Certainly Folsom Dam in California has been up there as a
high-risk, because of the circumstances surrounding the
Sacramento River and the condition of the facility. We are
addressing that. I think Glendo Dam in Wyoming is another one
we are concerned about its condition.
And a lot of it is--our primary concerns, given the fact
that we have done a good job, overall, of taking care of this
infrastructure over time, are operational conditions, changes
in information in hydrology that have affected our view of how
those dams might perform--like Glendo Dam in Wyoming. We also
have a dam in Utah that we are looking at.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, some are on the list that this
article refers to. I assume there is an annual. Or, you know,
there is a look-see by this group.
Mr. Connor. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And I would be interested in knowing,
for the record, how many are on--of the 476 to 480----
Mr. Connor. Absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. To 480.
Mr. Connor. We will get you an answer for the record.
Reclamation currently maintains 476 dams.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We have heard from some of our members
some concern about the WaterSMART grants, the type of projects
that are being funded, that sometimes we aren't getting the,
shall we say, the best bang for the buck.
Can you describe the type of projects that have been
funded? And what are some of the benefits of these projects?
Mr. Connor. Well, the WaterSMART program, the grant program
that has been going on for, I think, about the last five or so
years does a lot of water conservation activities within
irrigation districts. So a lot of opportunities to improve the
efficiency to which we can deliver agricultural water. So canal
linings, taking out of service open canals and having piping
and pressurized systems, those types of activities.
We have also had some very good municipal water
conservation programs. We have helped support southern Nevada's
water authorities, their very aggressive conservation program.
So we have participated in the agricultural sector, the
rural sector, in rural communities, as well as the large
communities, the municipal sector.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So have there been some differences
among members of Congress in these areas about the
effectiveness of some of what we have been doing here, in terms
of these grants?
Mr. Connor. Well, I have heard some of the debate. I
actually think that our WaterSMART grant program, and the water
conservation activity that we support through it is probably
the most successful way that we have to generate new water
supplies.
Over time, over that last five, six year period, with
respect, we have invested, overall, the Bureau of Reclamation,
$93 million in WaterSMART grants. We have leveraged $232
million of non-Federal funding to partner up with that $93
million. So overall, we have invested $325 million.
And our view is that we have secured a yield of about
700,000 acre-feet of water through the water savings activities
associated with those grants. So that makes WaterSMART grants--
if you average it out, we are investing and paying $455 per
acre-foot. You look at it----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That is a significant achievement, but
that is one of the underlying criteria.
Mr. Connor. That is absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes.
Mr. Connor. So we are trying to generate water, and we are
trying to do it as efficiently as possible. So $455 per acre-
foot. You compare that with Title XVI, which is widely
implemented in water-short areas--because I think the water
managers for municipal districts view that as a very good
investment, and it is a good investment.
But over time, we have invested $542 million in Title XVI
projects. We have leveraged, overall, $2.168 billion in
funding. We have got a yield of 260,000 acre-feet. And the
total cost per acre-foot is $8,340 per acre-foot--substantially
more than the WaterSMART grants. But still, viewed from the
water manager's perspective, is a very good investment.
You start talking about new storage and the cost per acre-
foot with respect to new storage--now, granted, new storage may
be important in many basins over time. But even the Black Rock
Reservoir in Washington State that we looked at and did a final
EIS and feasibility study for within the last two years, that
project was going to cost $6.1 billion for a yield of 366,000
acre-feet. So that is $16,727 per acre-foot. So that is over--
--
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I think you win the statistical battle.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Connor. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are the second largest producer of
hydroelectric power----
Mr. Connor. That is correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. In the western United
States, with 58 power plants.
Are you involved in the issue of who pays for what, in
terms of those who consume that power?
Mr. Connor. Ahh----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I mean some of us in the northeast grind
our teeth endlessly about, you know, power marketing, and lack
of competition, and things of that nature.
Are you involved in that?
Mr. Connor. Typically, not.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Because, obviously, if you are providing
this essential service, you basically own the operation. You
are responsible. And, you know, a lot of money has been put
into these power plants for their upkeep.
Assure me that you can extract for me, as you did with the
other issue, that the people in other parts of the country
where there is, shall we say, a more competitive environment
are not, you know, paying for, shall we say, somewhat
subsidized power in these areas?
Mr. Connor. With respect to----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Without having a whole avalanche of
members come on my case after this.
Mr. Connor. [Laughs.] Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is a tricky area.
Mr. Connor. I do not want to get into, you know, Bonneville
or anything. Like my prior experience in the Senate Energy
Committee----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You know, it is one of these things that
really makes some of our blood boil, up in our neck of the
woods, you know. I look more to the TVA than I do to you.
But just educate me.
Mr. Connor. With respect to--
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Then I will go to Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Connor. Yes, sir.
With respect to our power operations, there are two aspects
of it. There is the marketing of the power on an annual basis,
which we actually do not involve ourselves in. We provide--
generate the power, we put it on the market to Western Area
Power Administration, and Bonneville Power. And they assess the
rates, which involves the public power piece of that, in the
annual costs associated with paying for the electricity.
We do, though, from Reclamation's standpoint, are still
securing repayment of the original investment for our
facilities--the dams and the infrastructure and the
hydroelectric facilities, et cetera. So we have allocated the
costs for that to our customers, and that part--that goes into
the cost equation. So we view ourselves as receiving repayment
over time for the initial investment in those facilities. And
that part of the cost structure that exists.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So does that--is that payment really,
how would you characterize that payment? Is it, shall we say,
up to speed?
Mr. Connor. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is based on the original cost of
those----
Mr. Connor. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. Investments. But I assume,
if we were to continue to substantially improve the viability
of these different power plants, through new technology and
whatever, that would be reflective in whatever information you
pass on.
Mr. Connor. Yes----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. To those who are----
Mr. Connor. It is reflective, the initial rate structure
and the repayment is over time, with interest. That is
correct--on the power sector. So we are recouping that
investment.
But as you note, we are continually making new investments.
We are upgrading and operating our facilities. So, another
quick statistic. Over the last 30 years, through our efficiency
and upgrade program, we have created an additional 1,800 to
2,000 megawatts of capacity. That is the equivalent of a Hoover
Dam.
But those investments are typically paid by the power
sector up front. Not all the time, but typically. So we are
working with customers to get new investments to pay for those
upgrades on those facilities, to increase efficiency, et
cetera.
So we do think that we are up-to-date in allocating the
costs to the beneficiaries of the power.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for your response.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. I guess it is all relevant, because some of the
customers will yell back and say they are coming too fast and
too quick. And I will give an example.
Several years ago we were concerned about the security of
Hoover Dam.
Mr. Connor. Yes.
Mr. Pastor. And, obviously, we came--I guess you came forth
with a plan how to secure Hoover Dam. And there were additional
costs. And we were trying to recoup some of those costs by
sharing some of the costs with the customers. And they were not
happy campers I know for many years. I do not know if that
finally settled down. But the whole security issue--and this
happened during the Bush administration, as I remember. It was
their Commissioner of Reclamation. And I know that many of the
customers really had him on the hot seat.
Where are we on this--because you did mention security----
Mr. Connor. Right.
Mr. Pastor [continuing]. Has a cost.
Mr. Connor. Yes.
Mr. Pastor. How are you doing with that one?
Mr. Connor. Well, let me speak to that, and then I will
talk to the security in general.
You are absolutely correct that the situation with respect
to security costs at Hoover Dam has calmed down because,
essentially, Congress in 2008 capped what we could seek as far
as reimbursement from the power users for security costs. And
it was viewed, at a certain level, that the enactment of that
legislation in 2008, it would increase over time with respect
to inflation.
So the reality is that we are continuing to evaluate our
security needs. And some of that is guards and those types of
costs. Some of it is infrastructure and hardening, as we call
it, of our facilities, and investments in surveillance, and
investments in strengthening fortification of some of our
facilities. Some of it is increased patrols and security. That
is an ongoing area. But what that legislation has caused us to
do is to try and look and be as efficient as possible with
respect to those annual security costs that we have in place.
We are also looking, over time, at an ongoing active set of
inspections, and monitoring with respect to security needs. So
we continually have an updated tick-list about infrastructure
needs, as well as reassessing the security aspects. We are
continually doing a lot of exercises, both tabletop exercises--
just to work through who we would need to inform, how would we
react to certain situations--to actual on-the-ground exercises
like we had at Folsom at the end of last year, where we
coordinated with a lot of local response, the emergency
response personnel from both the sheriff's office, the county,
the municipality in the area, EMTs, et cetera. Carried out the
whole mission in an exercise that demonstrated a takeover of
Shasta Dam in California, in a hostage situation, where there
was an initial explosion.
So we have exercised actual scenarios, which helps us learn
through and improve our coordination with local law
enforcement, with Federal law enforcement. And it is an ongoing
process.
Mr. Pastor. Let me go back to my second issue that I had,
with rural water.
Mr. Connor. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pastor. I think you reduced the 2011 request, I think,
by 42 percent. And it is a 71 percent reduction from Fiscal
Year 2010.
And does this mean that we have met our commitments to the
ongoing projects? And can we expect a lower level of funding to
continue?
Mr. Connor. Well, there is $1.3 billion in backlog in our
Rural Water Program right now----
Mr. Pastor. Right.
Mr. Connor [continuing]. With respect to construction. So,
viewed on the authorizations that we have before us, and the
expectations, I do not think folks would say that we have met
our obligations, because of their ongoing need out there and
that $1.3 billion backlog.
It is--with the reduced funding levels that we had, 5
percent below our 2011 budget, it has been a tough set of
decisions that we have had to make with respect to funding
levels. And I think in the Rural Water Program area, after
going through the priorities and the needs that we have, that
was the investment that we thought was responsible, given this
year's budget--the $36 million--taking into account the
obligation we have to fund O&M for some of the projects, and
leaving some level of construction dollars available to try and
complete Mni Wiconi, which is the priority, given how close it
is to completing construction of that facility.
But we also looked at this in the context of the Recovery
Act. We initially committed $200 million of Reclamation's
towards the Rural Water Program, and that was a terrific set of
investments that allowed us to get over some of the real
expensive items in some of those projects, such as water
treatment plants. And if we can get over the water treatment
plant investment needs, then we can work on laying pipeline and
taking the water supply out to communities.
So what we did, also, which was part of our calculation
here, is not that rural water is not a priority. We looked at
rural water in the Recovery Act and ended up investing $232
million. So we added an additional $32 million over the last--
at the end of 2010 to increase the investment, to phase in
certain more aspects of that project, and so that was welcome,
certainly welcome, by those project sponsors for those many
projects.
But where that leaves us this year is that there was one
area that is not funded as high as it has been in the last
couple years. I think the $36 million figure was higher than it
was 4 or 5 years ago, but it had gotten up, I think, in the
2010/2011 budgets somewhere close to the $62- to $64-million
range. So we have got to go back and assess what is realistic
with respect to Rural Water Programs in the future as we deal
with these reduced budgets.
Mr. Pastor. So again, I think I heard that one of the
deciding factors for the reduction was, again, the $232 million
of recovery money that went to the construction of water
plants, and so that was one of the factors in deciding for this
reduction. Am I correct?
Mr. Connor. That was one aspect of it. We thought we had
made a good--a significant investment and had got ahead of
where we thought we were going to be with several other
projects because of the availability of the Recovery Act. But
still, there are significant needs out there.
Mr. Pastor. It was $1.3 billion I think I heard you start
your----
Mr. Connor. Absolutely, $1.3 billion is what we have as far
as the authorized level for projects that we still have, given
what we have already invested. That is the remaining investment
that is out there, so that is going to be difficult to secure
those kind of resources in this budget environment given the
other demands on our budget. We have also got something to the
tune of a $1.5 billion backlog for Indian Water Rights
Settlements.
We have got another $1.5 to $2 billion backlog for
environmental restoration and ESA compliance activities. We
have got a billion-dollar backlog that we have estimated with
respect to aging infrastructure needs. We have got Title XVI
projects, approximately a $600 million backlog of those
projects. We have got an agency where we are viewed as critical
to help the West address its water needs in a lot of different
areas, including rural water. And we are trying to make the
best investments we have within the overall funding levels that
we can expect.
Mr. Pastor. I am going to go back a little bit to your
testimony and then I am going to try and connect some of your
budget decisions. You talk about the Bureau as very active in
climate change strategies. And I think from your testimony you
have adaptation as one strategy and I think you have mitigation
as another, and I will start with adaptation.
Have you connected that, your models of adaptation
strategy, in dealing with the increase of WaterSMART? And if
you have, how have you used that strategy to pick the projects
that you have decided?
Mr. Connor. Well, I would say fundamentally up until this
point we view, whether you look at climate change and the
projections--some of the projections are pretty scary. You look
at the Colorado River Basin and people are--the various reports
out there publicly so far project a 7 percent to 45 percent
reduction in inflow into the Colorado River System for a river
that is already over-subscribed. If you look at projected snow
pack reductions in the Sierra Nevada of 7 to 20 percent;
reduction for California's primary water--natural water
storage, the snow pack in the Sierra Nevada. Those are alarming
pieces of data.
But just look at drought, what we know from drought
historically and given increasing needs. So we have looked at
WaterSMART and other areas, Title XVI, the Conservation
projects that we do, as just good investments for good, smart
water management. We have not necessarily tied those to any
specific adaptation strategies for climate change. Our view up
until this point has been there are good water management needs
out there. More efficiency is good to address whatever the
challenge is, whether it is overpopulation, environmental
needs, climate change, or drought. So those are just viewed in
general as things that we need to support to reduce the
oversubscription of water in the West.
We now have very modestly in this budget, I would say, a
more aggressive set of programs to take into account climate
change, what is going to happen, and how to adapt to it. We are
doing a basin studies set of programs. We are working with
stakeholders in the basins. They are cost sharing on a 50
percent basis to look at supply and demand imbalance basin by
basin. We did Colorado River Basin, Yakima River Basin, Milk
River in Montana as the initial three, and we have got six more
basin studies going on. We are working in partnership to look
at the imbalances projected, the limits in supply over time,
and trying to develop specific adaptation strategies with those
stakeholders in those basins. We are going to see the first
reports related to specific adaptation strategies start to come
out towards the middle and end of this year.
We are also, under the Secure Water Act which Congress
passed in 2009, doing an assessment, a West-wide risk
assessment and a report on the projected impacts of climate
changes on the major river basins that Reclamation has projects
in across the West. And so that is going to be the first--for
some of those basins, like the Colorado River Basin, it will
add to the level of analysis and modeling that is already out
there. For other basins, such as the Rio Grande or the Klamath
or other basins, it may be the first real assessment of what is
out there with respect to identifying risks because of climate
change.
So we are moving from general good water management
activities to specifically looking at the impacts of climate
change, trying to better understand it, and working with the
people who will be affected by it to develop adaptation
strategies. And we are going to start seeing that towards the
end of this year coming out in more specificity.
Mr. Pastor. I only have two questions. In your testimony,
you talk about you are working with, I guess, DoE to use
renewable energy on some of your--I am trying to find it here--
in some of your operations. You are identifying opportunities
to address the President's clean energy goals through the
development of new, sustainable hydropower capacity as well as
integrating renewable energy in your operation. So I guess my
interest is in the ``integrating renewable energy'' in our
operation.
Mr. Connor. Yes. We have got a very active program in
partnership with the Corps of Engineers and Department of
Energy. And it is involving sustainable hydro, but I am
thinking you want to focus on----
Mr. Pastor. Right.
Mr. Connor [continuing]. Other renewables.
Mr. Pastor. Right, the other renewables.
Mr. Connor. We are looking at--you know, it is part of this
whole energy-water nexus. How can we be more efficient? Moving
water can create energy production opportunities. And we exist
out in the West, where there are a lot of renewable resources,
such as solar. So we have done things such as--as simple as, in
our Closed-Basin Project in Southern Colorado, integrating the
use of solar panels to create energy generation to power and
provide some of the power for our pumps associated with
groundwater pumping that we do in the Closed-Basin Project.
Our WaterSMART grant programs and the Title XVI funding
criteria--they are grant programs. There are a range of
priorities that we look at and we score grant proposals. One of
them is the integration of renewable energy into specific
projects. So in one of the situations or maybe a couple in
Oregon that we have funded is taking out of service an open
canal, using a pressurized pipe system to deliver water to an
irrigation district, and they have incorporated a turbine in
that pressurized system, a 1 megawatt turbine into that system.
So we are creating renewable energy, integrating that within
water operations, recapturing some of the energy that is used
to pressurize that system. That is just good, smart water
management. And, oh, by the way, that also conserved something
like 20 to 23 CFS of water that got dedicated to in-stream
flows.
We are now going back with respect to some of these
opportunities in the Navajo-Gallup Pipeline Project--and we are
just at the design phase there--to initiate a lot of solar
resources, a lot of pumping stations associated with pumping
water long distances.
We are going to go back and thoroughly assess what we might
do as far as distributed generation and use to offset some of
the project needs that we have, and we will do that in areas
associated with our projects. Our view is if we can make use
from a financially--in a way that makes sense from a financial
perspective and get the investments we need to integrate
renewables into our operations, we use a good amount of our own
project--or the hydropower that we generate, a lot of it goes
for our own projects. If we can take some of that off, get some
of our project power from renewable sources and take that
offline, then we can put more power on the grid from our
hydropower resources. So those are the type of opportunities
that we are good at with respect to our operations and funding
water operators to incentivize them to incorporate renewables
into their operations.
Mr. Pastor. All right. You mentioned--and this will be my
last question, Mr. Chairman--Title XVI in response to my
question. And as I recall, most of the Title XVI, the funding
was kind of project-specific. And for many years, that was
probably how things were funded, but now I see you converted to
a grant program and you referred to it as converted to a grant
program. What made you do this and what are the some of the
criteria?
I heard one on how you use renewable energy to be
integrated in the project, but what--because you have had some
longstanding projects out there for many years, Title XVI, what
happens to them under this grant program? And other than
integrating renewable energy, what other criteria do you use to
provide the grants?
Mr. Connor. Sure. I will just first mention what the
motivation was when we had Recovery Act funding, we allocated
$135 million for Title XVI projects. And we went through
basically a selection process where we developed criteria that
were specific to some of the Recovery Act items, but also more
general water management goals that we were trying to achieve.
That process went pretty well to allocate money to authorized
Title XVI projects. So that was an incentive to develop a set
of criteria that we thought were a proper way to prioritize the
investments in Title XVI projects given the limited resources
that we have and the backlog that we have.
So that is why we have proposed and we have come out with
our criteria. Now we had a Federal Register process note and
took comments, integrated those comments, and have come out
with our final criteria. Some of the criteria for the Title XVI
are water supply-generated, the acre feet that you can generate
through reuse. How sustainable is that supply? Is it going to
be available in times of drought?
I think that is one area where Title XVI has an advantage
over some of our WaterSMART grants. If there is a drought, you
do not get as much water through a canal. You do not save as
much as you do in Title XVI where it is a more reliable supply.
The completion schedule, so projects that are in progress
and are near completion, we want to take that into account.
Readiness to proceed, are the local communities available? Are
they ready to go with the next phase? Do they have their cost
share ready to go?
Environment and water quality benefits associated with
that, renewable energy integration is one. The overall cost per
acre-foot that a project has and whether it addresses a number
of needs from a watershed perspective is part of the regional
partnership that addresses a lot of different problems.
Those are--I do not know if that is exhaustive, but I think
those are the primary factors. There may be a couple more that
are in our criteria, but those are the kind of things that we
are looking at in scoring the proposals that we get and making
an intent. We have not got this program up and going yet
because 2011 was the first time we proposed it and we have not
yet received our 2011 appropriations, but that is our intent to
score them against those type of criteria.
Once again, we are talking about authorized Title XVI
projects.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I think there is one last question, then
we are going to wrap up. The BoR receives $80 million annually
from Bonneville for operations and maintenance funding. Is that
right?
Mr. Connor. That sounds right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And over a million for small capital
improvements and replacements?
Mr. Connor. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is that--obviously you are pleased to
have that money. Are there any other similar type arrangements
with any other?
Mr. Connor. There are. I believe now some of our O&M that
we have obligations associated with our power facilities, and I
think that Western Area Power Administration is now up-fronting
some of that O&M.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is it a good model for others?
Mr. Connor. Absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Certainly from your perspective it would
be, but----
Mr. Connor. It is.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah.
Mr. Connor. And I think it is more efficient rather than
have federal appropriations go and this getting paid back. I
think the model is--particularly when these are year-to-year
costs, it just makes more sense for them to be provided up
front, whether it is the Bonneville Power or whether it is
irrigation districts. And a number of them are providing us
funding up front. We are trying to increase that and make
that--Reclamation has done a good job----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That is a goal.
Mr. Connor. That is a goal, exactly.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so, for the record, would you be
willing--would you provide the Committee at some point in time
sort of what that landscape looked like now.
Mr. Connor. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You can do that.
Mr. Connor. I can do that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And as we conclude, Mr. Murray, you have
not had a chance, if you will pardon the expression, to get
your oar in the water. Is there anything you would like to say
for the record besides your statement?
Mr. Murray. No. I would just like to thank you for your
past support of the program and I appreciate the opportunity to
have been here to----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We know Utah is front and center by the
virtue of you being a witness today, so we will not forget
that.
Mr. Murray. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, Mr. Pastor and I and the entire
Committee would like to thank you all for the work you do each
and every day. Thank you, Commissioner----
Mr. Connor. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. Mr. Murray.
Mr. Murray. Thank you, appreciate it.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1034A.153

W I T N E S S E S

----------
Page
Connor, Michael..................................................   147
Darcy, Jo-Ellen..................................................     1
Murray, Reed.....................................................   147
Van Antwerp, Lieutenant General Robert...........................     1


