- AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

?

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________
PART 7

NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE

S

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
PART 7--AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,

AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
?

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia, Chairman
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   SAM FARR, California
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming         MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Martin Delgado, Tom O'Brien, Betsy Bina, and Andrew Cooper,
Staff Assistants
________
PART 7

NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE

S

________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-636                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Tuesday, April 5, 2011.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE--NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

WITNESSES

HARRIS SHERMAN, UNDER SECRETARY, NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT
DAVE WHITE, CHIEF, NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE
MICHAEL YOUNG, BUDGET OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Opening Remarks

Mr. Kingston. The committee will come to order.
We are pleased today to have Mr. Harris Sherman, Under
Secretary for the Natural Resources Conservation Service; and
also Dave White, who is the chief; and Mr. Mike Young, who is
just a regular. Could not go through a week without having a
hearing up here.
But we appreciate the good work that the NRCS does. And the
Natural Resources and Environment mission is always a solid
one. It is one that works with farmers and provides technical
assistance, which--it appears that often farmers these days are
more fearful of the government, and they do not see it the way
they used to, in terms of, okay, this is helpful on things that
I want to accomplish. But NRCS does work closely with private
landowners, and we appreciate that.
The budget also is a decrease of about $100 million from
2010 because of the proposed cancellation of three programs.
And we think that that is helpful under this environment. And
we look forward to your testimony.
It is an interesting week. We were just commenting, Mr.
Under Secretary, this is the last hearing, and we will be going
to markup in the next couple of weeks. Today, the budget comes
out. This Friday, the CR is either settled or the gap becomes
wider. We don't know. And the backdrop of Libya and everything
else, these are interesting times.
So we look forward to your testimony.
Mr. Farr.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.001

Mr. Farr. I have no opening remarks. I will just take it to
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Okay.
Mr. Under Secretary, your testimony has been summarized, so
you are welcome to abbreviate it as much as you feel
comfortable doing.
Mr. Sherman. Okay, thank you.

Statement by Mr. Sherman

Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. It is a pleasure for
Chief White and I to be here today to present our budget to the
committee.
I would like, at the outset, just to emphasize the mission
of the Natural Resources Conservation Service--NRCS. It is
about voluntary conservation of private farms, ranches, and
forests. It is about stewardship of the Nation's water
resources, soils, wetlands, wildlife, vegetation, and other
natural resources. And it is about conservation that we believe
keeps agriculture strong and well-positioned, while providing
jobs to rural America.
It is also important to emphasize the context in which
these programs exist. Seventy percent of the United States is
in private landownership. That is about 1.4 billion acres. I
think it is fair to say, over the past hundred years, much of
the emphasis on conservation and stewardship has been about our
public lands. But, today, I think there is a recognition that
our private lands are often the lands in greatest risk, and
they are lands where these conservation efforts will produce
the greatest gains.
NRCS is uniquely positioned to do good work in these areas.
Today, we have a remarkable suite of conservation programs.
These are programs that affect every geographic area of the
United States. They are highly diverse in their functions and
their applications. And I think it is fair to say there is high
demand from landowners to the technical and the financial
assistance that we provide.
There are tens of millions of acres now benefitting from
flagship conservation and easement programs. You are very
familiar with these. They have many alphabet names to them, but
Environmental Quality Incentives Program--EQIP--Wetlands
Reserve Program--WRP--the Conservation Stewardship Program--
CSP--the Conservation Reserve Program--CRP--and many others are
part of this panoply of programs that we are providing.
And the programs are delivering major benefits. In 2010
alone, farmers installed conservation practices on 14 million
acres of cropland. NRCS enrolled 25 million acres into the
Conservation Stewardship Program in 2010. And we are very proud
of the fact that our Wetlands Reserve Program enrolled 270,000
acres into the program during 2010.
The National Resources Inventory that was released in 2010
and our recent Conservation Effects Assessment Program--CEAP--
studies in the Chesapeake Bay and the Upper Mississippi River,
clearly show that there are significant reductions that occur
to sediment, nitrogen and phosphorus in our waterways as a
result of these conservation practices. And so, too, we are
starting to stem the tide of fragmentation and development of
our farms, ranches and private forests.
I was struck recently by the statistic that one-third of
the land ever developed in the United States occurred between
1982 and 2007, a 25-year period. Forty million acres were
removed from the rural land base during this period of time, 12
million acres of which relates to prime farmland. So I think
NRCS is uniquely positioned to help to deal with these issues
of fragmentation and development of our rural land base.
The 2012 budget is a continuation of the core NRCS
programs. As you have mentioned, we have had to make some
painful, difficult choices, but, in these budgetary times, we
were left with no choice. We are proposing the elimination of
several of our 2012 discretionary programs. This includes
support for the Resource Conservation and Development--RC&D--
councils, support for the watershed and flood control projects,
support for the watershed rehabilitation programs, a Grazing
Land Conservation Initiative, and the earmarks associated with
the Conservation Operations budget.
At the same time, we are proposing modest, strategic
efforts to improve our efficiency and our effectiveness in the
conservation delivery programs. Chief White will talk more
about the Strategic Watershed Action Teams. We would like to
continue to expand their work. The streamlining of our business
models to enhance conservation delivery, the so-called
Conservation Delivery Streamlining Initiative--CDSI--program.
Greater assistance in our assessment programs, the CEAP
programs, which demonstrate what is working, what is not
working, and how can we accordingly improve our programs. And
lastly, a USDA-coordinated IT infrastructure modification which
will allow NRCS to better communicate and work with the Farm
Service Agency--FSA--and Rural Development--RD.
Overall, the 2012 budget will reflect an 11 percent
reduction in our discretionary budget from 2010 levels to $899
million. And on the mandatory side, the President's budget is
at $3.6 billion, with $124 million for technical assistance as
part of the CRP program. This level reflects an increase of
prior years, although it is below authorized levels,
particularly with respect to EQIP and to the Wetlands Reserve
Program.
I should mention that, as part of our efforts, in addition
to the core programs, we are continuing to focus on landscape
scale initiatives, better targeting within regions, better
coordinating programs and coordinating practices. We believe
this will pay greater dividends.
Currently, we have some 10 landscape scale initiatives
under way. A number of them deal with river basin programs,
such as Chesapeake and the Upper Mississippi River and the Bay
Delta; some that deal with wildlife, with respect to the
Migratory Bird Habitat initiative or the Sage-Grouse
initiative; and some that deal with forestry and vegetation,
such as the Longleaf Pine and the New England and New York
Forestry programs. We think these are innovative programs. We
think that they are incorporating new tools, such as certainty
and safe harbor agreements. And we are excited about where they
are going.
So let me just conclude my opening statement by saying we
think this is a balanced, strong budget, and we look forward to
responding to your questions.
I know Chief White also, if he can, would like to have a
few opening comments.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.010

Mr. Kingston. Without objection.

Statement by Mr. White

Mr. White. Wow. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Farr, Mr.
Graves. You know, looking around here, I have to tell you, I
never, ever expected I would be sitting in this chair. This is
really like a dream come true for me. And thanks for having me.
Mr. Kingston. Is this a good thing or a bad thing?
Mr. White. This is a great thing. I mean, I wish you guys
would bring me up more often because there is so much cool
stuff happening in conservation I would like to share with you.
Now, I was trying to think about how I would approach this,
and I know you would probably like to have, like, a middle-aged
bureaucrat read numbers to you for five minutes. But I thought,
no, why don't I do something different? So I would like to
share two things with you that are going to give you an idea of
what we are doing on the land.
You should have some color photographs in front of you.
And, basically, it is a series of before-and-afters of what
conservation is looking like.

SAGE-GROUSE INITIATIVE

And Mr. Sherman mentioned sage-grouse. And Mr. Kingston,
you, in your opening remarks, talked about how people, farmers
and ranchers are more fearful of the government than they used
to be. And I want to talk to you a little bit about sage-grouse
and how we are trying to change the paradigm of how this Nation
approaches threatened and endangered species.
The sage-grouse is an iconic species. It is found
throughout 11 western States. There used to be millions of
them; now we are down to about 200,000. For several years, it
has been on the candidate list as a potential listing as
threatened/endangered. Last year, the Fish and Wildlife Service
made the determination it is warranted to be listed but
precluded because they have higher-priority species.
So we have, essentially, a couple of years to work on this
bird species. And our goal is nothing less than to prevent the
listing of the sage-grouse. And I don't mean that through any
nefarious measures, but, rather, to make the habitat so darn
good as to preserve the species that the listing will become
unnecessary.
And the reason this is important is, many of you were here
when the spotted owl was listed, back in the early 1990s, and
how the listing of the spotted owl really disrupted forestry
throughout the Northwest--people thrown out of work, a lot of
anger. The sage-grouse has the same potential as the spotted
owl, but it covers 10 times the area. Because of the fragmented
ownership, with Federal private lands throughout the West, it
would completely disrupt ranching in the western United States
as we know it.
So we are working with the partners. We have great support
from the Fish and Wildlife Service. They have issued the first-
ever conference reports that says, if a person works with us on
sage-grouse, even if the bird is listed, they won't have any
further regulation. They are trying to take some of the ``black
helicopter'' fear out of these issues.
The Bureau of Land Management--BLM--has given us their
data. The State Fish and Wildlife Service have shown us where
the core areas are. We know now, if we can protect 25 percent
of the core areas, we can preserve 75 percent of the species.
The cool thing about this is, we are not talking about
providing palliative care for every sage-grouse that is alive
today. There will be energy development in the West. We need
wind energy, we need oil and gas. There will be areas that will
be developed. Our cities will grow. But if we do this right, we
can preserve the species.
And we can do it in an atmosphere of trust and cooperation.
We have the wholehearted support of other Federal agencies,
State agencies, governors, and private groups; both
agricultural and conservation groups are 100 percent behind
this. So we are doing it in an atmosphere of trust and
cooperation.
Mr. Harris mentioned the Strategic Watershed Action Teams,
where we are going to try and leverage Federal dollars with
private and local dollars to get more boots on the ground. In
the sage-grouse area, we offered $4 million as potential match.
Partners there came up with 45, 46, more than 50 percent match,
to get range conservationists, some biologists to work with
ranchers.
We are getting support from people we never thought about,
like the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation and the Mule Deer
Foundation, because if you protect this one species, you are
also providing habitat for hundreds of others.
So instead of battle lines being drawn, Mr. Chairman, we
are trying to focus on cooperation and trying to do things that
really matter for the American people.

CONSERVATION DELIVERY STREAMLINING INITIATIVE

The other thing I would like to talk to you about is a
little initiative we have mentioned in there, the Conservation
Delivery Streamlining Initiative. We believe--essentially, we
have a problem. We are stuck with business models and processes
that are from 1950, 1960, 1970. They are not serving us well.
We are redesigning those for the future.
What we would like to do is have clients--farmers,
ranchers--be able to sit at their homes, come into our system,
look at their conservation plans, look at their contracts, find
out where a cost-share check is, find out when they have a
practice due, and make that available to every one of our
clients.
We would like to have a unified desktop, which would free
up our people from duplicative data entries. We are going to go
in the whole area of mobile computing. There is no reason why,
when we go out to a farm and, working with the rancher, why
they can't just sign up for an EQIP contract. We can rank them
and do the contract right there on the spot and just have them
start work tomorrow or the next day.
There are all kinds of stuff like that. And I guess the
reason this is important is, you know as well as anyone, the
world population is projected to rise to 9 billion. We are
going to have to have huge increases in food production. One of
the things I saw was 50 percent increase in production by the
year 2030. That is less than two decades.
And how are we going to do that? How are we going to
increase our food supply, make room for all these wonderful
critters we live with, have clean air, clean water, and healthy
environment, and do it in harmony with a productive, vibrant
agriculture that is going to feed us and part of the world? And
I think, with your support, we can do this. You are the ones
providing the resources. I am very grateful for it.
And, with that, Mr. Kingston, I will conclude my remarks
and be ready to answer any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.038

RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Kingston. I thank both of you.
And I wanted to ask right off the bat, on some of the
programs that you are proposing elimination of RC&D, I want to
clarify for the record the situation in terms of what would
happen if your proposal is accepted. Do the people lose their
jobs? Can they be transferred within the agency? You know, what
is the situation? And what happens for the rest of the year?
Mr. Sherman. Do you want to take it?
Mr. White. Yes, sir.
It is about a $50 million account. We have about 391 people
involved. It would be our intent to reprogram, reposition these
people within the agency. Some of them may be transferred. Some
of them would stay in the same office. Some would move to a
local field office.
We have looked at the jobs, their qualifications. Many of
them would fit right into conservation operations work or farm
bill work. A lot of them are biologists, soil conservationists,
agronomists. So the disciplines they have we would need.
We would also probably go for early-out/buy-out authority,
Mr. Kingston. There are over 100 of these people that are
eligible right now for retirement, so we think we could reduce
the ranks some that way.
But, essentially, it would be our intent that no one would
lose their job and that we would reposition the people within
the agency doing other work.
Mr. Kingston. How does a buy-out work? Just walk me through
an example.
Mr. White. Mr. Vilsack has made the commitment that he
wants all USDA to have the same parameters, so NRCS treats its
people the same as RD or Extension or whatever. In the past,
how it has worked is a buy-out would give you an incentive to
retire. If you would leave now, you would get a buy-out check.
And, in the past, it has been somewhere in the neighborhood of
$25,000.
So if you look, we are about halfway through the year. If
someone is making, say, $100,000 a year, for $25,000 they would
be gone, and we would actually have a financial savings, even
in this year if we move quickly. But it is an incentive for
them to do that.
The same with an early-out, an incentive for someone who is
going to retire early and take a reduction in their retirement.
Mr. Kingston. What about the RC&D councils? And how many
are there?
Mr. White. Three hundred and seventy five.
Some of those councils would survive; some would not.
My best guess would be, if you look at what the RC&D
organization has done, they have a thing called Circle of
Diamonds, a certification program for councils where they have
to meet all kinds of financial and different kinds of criteria
where they are really up to snuff. There are about 140 of them
that have this Circle of Diamonds certification. My guess would
be, those would be the healthiest and most robust councils.
Mr. Kingston. And those have NRCS employees supporting
their efforts, correct?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, our support for these councils is in the
form of providing coordinators for the councils and, often,
office space.
So, again, our hope is that, if this funding is not
available, these councils will find a way to continue that
coordination. And they clearly will qualify for other Federal
programs, but----
Mr. Kingston. Uh-huh.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. At least in terms of providing
the coordination----
Mr. Kingston. So they keep their TSP, they keep their----
Mr. Sherman. That is correct.
Mr. Kingston [continuing]. Retirement, and they move into a
different--unless they take the early-out, which those hundreds
were.
Out of the $50 million, $51 million, how much is personnel
costs?
Mr. White. Eighty percent.
Mr. Kingston. Eighty percent?
Mr. White. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kingston. And the President's budget also proposed--
well, I mean, you are the President's budget. So it is
eliminated in H.R. 1. If H.R. 1 passes with it eliminated, how
does that affect you midstream here?
Mr. Sherman. Well, I think the significance of H.R. 1
versus the President's budget here is that we would prefer to
have time to implement this phase-down. And under H.R. 1, it
would come immediately. It would present some real hardships,
to make this transition as quickly as it does. But the
President's budget does call for, during 2012, this phase-down.
Mr. Kingston. Okay.
Well, my time has expired. Mr. Farr.

WATERSHED AND FLOOD PREVENTION OPERATIONS

Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Heretofore, I have been one of your biggest supporters, and
after reading about the way you are cutting this thing, I am
not sure I support you anymore.
You know, you are cutting this watershed program, and you
cut the earmarks. We put together the model for the whole
country out in my district, with eight counties involved. We
had a watershed management plan. It has been in operation for
about a decade. It is working with NOAA through the National
Marine Sanctuary through eight counties. All the farm bureaus
have signed on. It is a remarkable program.
And I don't see--are you going to fund it? You say there
are other ways in which you can fund these programs. It is not
on your priority for your new watershed enhancement program. It
should be. It should be your model, because it is already in
place and all the political buy-in is there.
Mr. Sherman. Well----
Mr. Farr. Mr. White is the one that----
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Mr. Farr. I mean, you talked, you showed these pictures. It
is great. We have done all that and more so.
Mr. White. I know you have, sir.
Now, the watershed program proposed for elimination in the
President's budget--I think is different from the one in your
area.
Mr. Farr. Well, ours, frankly, was an earmark.
Mr. White. I understand. The 534----
Mr. Farr. It shouldn't have been. It should have been in
your program because it is working better. I mean, it is the
model the Chesapeake Bay--all these places around the country
now are finding out about it and wanting to know what we did.
And you had all this private-sector buy-in. It took a long
time to build all that trust.
Mr. White. I understand, sir.
Mr. Farr. So what are you going to do about it?
Mr. White. The two programs that are slated for
elimination, one passed in 1944, the other was 1954----
Mr. Farr. I don't care about, you know, the bureaucracy of
it. Just, are you going to be able to fund that watershed
program?
Mr. White. We will still continue landscape initiatives,
particularly in areas where water quality or threatened
endangered species, air quality----
Mr. Farr. Well, can you answer my question? You know what
the program is out in the whole Monterey Bay. I mean, I just
can't believe that you would eliminate funding for that.
Mr. White. Well, actually, the funding has already been
eliminated in the CR that we are currently in. It is----
Mr. Farr. Well, you want some money to do this new program
that you brag about. Can you fund it under that program?
Mr. White. We will continue, sir, to the extent of our
capability----
Mr. Farr. Why did you choose the Sacramento Basin? What is
the politic there? Why is that the one that you put in your B-
WET program or your--not B-WET. What the heck is it called? One
was the Mississippi Basin, and the other was the Upper
Mississippi River plan and the California Bay Delta plan for
your new chosen SWAT teams, Watershed Action Teams.
Mr. White. Yes, sir. Those were initiatives we had
nationally. And that is where we had $20 million, and that is
who we worked with.
Mr. Farr. Why.
Mr. White. That is where the initiatives we were working
on----
Mr. Farr. What do you mean by ``the initiatives''?
Mr. White. We are trying to take----
Mr. Farr. Is this a top-down initiative, or is this a
bottom-up initiative?
Mr. White. Actually, Bay Delta was bottom-up. So was New
England Forestry. There were three that I----
Mr. Farr. And so was the Monterey Bay.
Mr. White. Yes, sir. It was an earmark that has been
funded. We think it is a good project. And, to the extent we
can, we will continue to support it.
Mr. Farr. It is a good project? Your folks in California
think it is the best project.
Mr. White. And we give great deference to our State leaders
on how they allocate their funds.
Mr. Farr. But you are not answering my question then. If
you are giving deference to them, if you are giving deference,
your State conservationist, Ed Burton, says that this program
needs to continue.
Mr. White. Then we will talk to Mr. Burton on the future of
that. Just because it is not listed as one of our national
initiatives doesn't mean it has no value. We are doing things
all around the Nation.

VEHICLES

Mr. Farr. How many people in your program work in
Washington?
Mr. White. Four hundred or 500, out of the 11,000.
Mr. Farr. So about a quarter or what?
Mr. White. Oh, no. Four percent maybe.
Mr. Farr. Do they use vehicles from the--do they use
vehicles, trucks and cars, that are purchased by NRCS?
Mr. White. No, sir. We do not have any in national
headquarters.
Mr. Farr. Well, then, why do you have more trucks and cars
than you have personnel?
Mr. White. We do have a lot of vehicles. And we are trying
to reduce that number. That number----
Mr. Farr. You have more than one for every single person.
Mr. White. No, sir.
Mr. Farr. Yes. You have 11,000 staff positions, and you
have 11,300 trucks and cars.
Mr. White. We have----
Mr. Sherman. Well, can I just--on the question of vehicles,
we are looking into this. But I just want to say that--I just
want to say that we share----
[The information follows:]

(As a field-based agency, the majority of NRCS employees work
directly with private landowners on their farms and ranches and with
local entities to achieve conservation of our Nation's natural
resources. By their very nature, these are rural locations where public
transportation is non-existent, uneconomical, or inadequate. NRCS
maintains a fleet of vehicles that is distributed among its field
locations in the 50 States and the Caribbean and Pacific Basin areas.
In order to maximize their use, NRCS currently has agreements for
sharing its vehicles with other USDA agencies and partners in nearly 70
percent of our field locations. NRCS is aggressively assessing its
inventory in each state to justify its fleet, coordinate trips among
staff members, maximize vehicle sharing, and dispose of older, high
maintenance, high-emission, and under-utilized vehicles.
As reported in the FY 2012 President's Budget and in the table
below, NRCS expected to have 10,982 vehicles at the end of FY 2011 and
10,940 vehicles at the end of FY 2012. However, the agency is currently
taking steps in FY 2011 to reduce the vehicle fleet by over 10% and
maintain that level in FY 2012 unless a critical mission need arises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
FY                          Vehicles   Staff years
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2008.........................................        8,791       11,337
2009.........................................       10,130       11,186
2010.........................................       11,308       11,446
2011.........................................       10,982       13,023
2012.........................................       10,940       12,219

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mr. Farr. Looking into this? You are cutting out incredible
programs, and you are looking into the fact that you got more
damn vehicles than you got people. I mean, I think your
priorities are upsidedown.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Under Secretary, we will let you get back
on that.
Mr. Graves.

REQUEST FOR REDUCED BUDGET PROPOSALS

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Under Secretary, we thank you for being here, and
appreciate the willingness to show that you can operate with
less in some areas. And I know that is something we don't see a
whole lot of that comes before this committee, are agencies
presenting us with some cuts.
But one thing I would like to add as we move forward--and I
think we will be looking for additional savings, wherever
possible. I have a letter to submit to the chair that would ask
that you work with us in providing us with additional savings,
up to 20 and 25 percent, how you could accomplish your core
mission.
And I think you have already demonstrated a willingness to
move in that direction, so I hope we can count on your support
in that effort.
Mr. Sherman. We will be very happy to work with you on
exploring where additional possible cuts are.
Mr. Graves. Great. Well, thank you.
And I want to go back to--Mr. Farr was bringing up a point,
and you mentioned that it is currently out, or been eliminated
through the CR already. Was that in the CR adopted in December,
or was it the one----
Mr. White. The current one we are in.
Mr. Graves. The current.
Mr. White. Yes.
Mr. Graves. So it is the 3-week we are under right now.
Mr. White. Yes.
Mr. Graves. Okay. Okay. So we currently have already
eliminated that, and you are just recommending that that stays
eliminated, as well, moving into the future.
Mr. White. Actually, that is not part of the President's
recommendation for 2012. The President's recommendation for
2012 would be that the money be transferred to other projects.
Mr. Graves. Okay.
Mr. White. So maybe it is a semantic term.
Mr. Graves. Sure. And if you had to think about other
areas--and I know, oftentimes, we are talking about dollars in
cuts, hard cuts--are there areas that you might be able to
recommend to the subcommittee, whether just policies that the
legislative branch has passed that you are still implementing
or is causing you to carry out activities that are no longer
necessary where you have moved into the 21st century in some
way and the agency is doing something that maybe is just not
necessary during this time?
Mr. White. Mr. Graves, we are looking at a variety of
things where we think we can achieve savings. The streamlining
I talked about briefly in the oral statement, we think, at the
out end of that, we will eliminate 80 percent of the clerical
and admin-type work we have to do, and we will have our field
people spending at least 75 percent of their time one-on-one
with producers, which we want them to do. If that goes through
the way we are projecting, that would be essentially the
equivalent of getting 1,500 more people.
What I would hope that the committee would work with us on
is that, right now, the tax on government innovation is 100
percent. So if you save money, it is generally taken away. So I
would hope that there would be some ability to work with the
committee to ensure that some of those savings can be plowed
back into better customer service.
Mr. Graves. Sure. Sure. Great. Well, thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, as I close, I would just--any
recommendations you can give us to help you accomplish more
savings for the taxpayer, we are open to that. And if it is
policy, as well, if you want to repeal anything or move
something out of the way, know that we are open to joining with
you in that effort.
And, Mr. Chairman, I have this letter I would like to
submit for the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.039

Mr. Kingston. Do you want to yield any time to the Under
Secretary to answer the car question that Mr. Farr asked?
Mr. Graves. That would be fine.

VEHICLES

Mr. Sherman. One aspect of the car question is that, in
these offices, these 2,000-plus offices that we have around the
country, we are sharing these offices with FSA and with Rural
Development and with the districts. And these vehicles are
being used by all of the agencies. So one of the things we are
looking into is the extent to which these other agencies are
using the vehicles.
But, obviously, we are focused on the numbers that you
mentioned, Congressman Farr, and we are going to try to get
that number down.
Mr. Farr. It is in your budget.
Mr. Sherman. It is in our budget, but these other agencies
are using these vehicles.
Mr. Kingston. The chair would yield to Ms. DeLauro a point
of personal privilege.

EXPRESSION OF APPRECIATION FOR BRIAN RONHOLM

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very, very much, Mr. Chairman and my
colleagues and our witnesses this morning.
I just wanted to--it is kind of a bit bittersweet for me
today, as well as at the end of the week, when a very, very
trusted and loyal staff person named Brian Ronholm, who has
been with me for 5 years and has sat through thick and thin and
through all the efforts that we try to make in the Ag
Subcommittee--and he has taken this on.
You know, I often say that the Members get a chance to
speak from these microphones and we get a chance to stand up
and to speak and we get recognized for what we do, but it is
that same sense of passion for issues, the same caring, the
same kind of, and in some respects more, diligence goes into
the efforts that we, as Members, try to make. And our staff,
they have the same kinds of values that Members have in making
the fights and the issues that we take on.
And they are oftentimes the unsung heroes. I want to say,
personally and publicly, that for whatever our opportunities
were to make some progress on the Agriculture Subcommittee, Mr.
Chairman and fellow Members, that Brian Ronholm holds the
lion's share of that accomplishment. And I couldn't ever have
done the job without him.
He is going to work for USDA, which is your gain, for FSIS,
an area that has been near and dear to our hearts over the last
several years.
So, Brian, many, many thanks, and Godspeed. And we know you
will do an outstanding job, and you will be briefing someone
who is sitting at that table in the not-too-distant future.
Thank you very, very much.
Mr. Kingston. I think we should have him come up to testify
quickly. And Mr. White has already outlined what a joy it is,
so we need to get him up here. And I plan to ask you a lot of
hard questions, too.
But, Brian, we appreciate, on the majority side and as we
were on the minority side, we appreciated working with you over
the years and all your professionalism and the fact that you
have always been accessible, straightforward, and diligent and
extremely knowledgeable. So it is a great pickup for the USDA,
and I know it is a great loss for Rosa's office. And we wish
you well.
[Applause.]
Mr. Kingston. Ms. DeLauro.

CHANGES IN MANDATORY PROGRAM SPENDING

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am concerned, as others have expressed their views, on
the level of changes in mandatory program spending, the CHIMPS,
if you will, that are in the President's budget request.
According to CBO, the 2012 request would reduce farm bill
conservation spending by $4.7 billion over the course of the
next 10 years and $2.5 billion over the 5 years of the 2012
farm bill that we will be covering next year. That puts a very
big hole in which to put conservation and environmental
protection efforts.
Now, I realize there are times when we have to make modest
CHIMPS, but, as I read this, we are talking about a really very
serious--in the billions of dollars here. So we make those
modest CHIMPS in order to achieve the priorities that we are
called on to address. But the size of the cuts that are
proposed in the request, the long-term impact of the proposed
cuts, in my view, may be too extreme.
And I also think it is a little unfair to single out the
conservation title alone among the titles of the farm bill. If
we need to make changes to mandatory spending programs in the
context of the appropriations bill, then we should be willing
to take a look at all of the farm programs and not just single
out conservation.
And my two questions in this regard are: What is going to
be the impact of these CHIMPS on the conservation programs?
What kind of impact would it have on the natural resource
conservation and environmental protection in general?
We look at Wetlands Reserve, $365 million. I mean, it goes
on. You know the numbers, you know, probably better than I do.
But my questions: impact of the CHIMPS on conservation
programs, impact on natural resource conservation and
environmental protection.
Mr. Sherman. Well, Congresswoman, we really do share your
concern about the degree to which some of these programs will
be affected. But it is a reflection of the difficult budgetary
times we are in.
Ms. DeLauro. I understand that. But my question is not
about the difficult budgetary times, because that gets us to
process versus substance. What I am interested in is the
effect, short-term, long-term effect, which is I think what we
need to focus on in order to be pennywise and pound-foolish, if
I might say that.
And I just would like to--you know, what is the impact of
this scale of cut on conservation programs that, as has been
pointed out, have been successful programs? And maybe some not,
but you could, you know--there is a way to deal with--everybody
wants to take a look at what doesn't work, what does work, and
be effective about that.
Long-term effect; and on conservation and environmental
protection in general.
Mr. Sherman. Well, the effect is, it will involve a delay
in implementing a variety of programs that we are currently
pursuing. So, with respect to the EQIP program, I think the
change in mandatory program--CHIMP--is somewhere in the
neighborhood of $350 million.
Ms. DeLauro. Three hundred and forty-two, yeah, million
dollars, right.
Mr. Sherman. With the WRP program, that is probably another
$350 million, approximately.
Ms. DeLauro. Yeah.
Mr. Sherman. So for these programs--their implementation,
in certain respects, will be delayed. And the benefits that
come from these programs will, in fact, be delayed.
Ms. DeLauro. And you find that you do derive benefits from
these programs; is that correct?
Mr. Sherman. Absolutely.
Ms. DeLauro. Absolutely. So the delay in those benefits
creates what for the longer term?
I am of the view that, when you cut back on what is I
consider infrastructure pieces, which allow you to build a
framework in which you can go forward, you can almost never
rebuild the infrastructure that you need to carry on once it
really is significantly delayed or impaired in any way. And
that is true in rail or in roads and bridges, in the defense
industry, which I represent.
So what about this infrastructure that these programs
provide to all of these areas? What happens?
Mr. Sherman. Well, I refer to this as the Nation's green
infrastructure.
Ms. DeLauro. Right.
Mr. Sherman. And it is as important as roads and bridges--
--
Ms. DeLauro. Amen.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. And schools and hospitals and so
forth. But what this means is that the ecosystem services, the
benefits, the environmental benefits, that come from these
programs will be delayed, in terms of clean water, clean air,
benefits to wildlife, benefits to drinking water.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. So it is a negative impact on those
efforts.
Mr. Sherman. It is a negative benefit.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman. But our hope is, in better times, we will be
able to expand these programs and move forward.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Mr. Farr, do you want a point of personal privilege?

EXPRESSION OF SYMPATHY TO TROY PHILLIPS

Mr. Farr. Thank you.
I don't want to step on a great message here or wonderful
message, but you all know my aide that has been with me in this
committee for years and years, Troy Phillips, and Troy has had
a year of disasters. His father died, and his grandfather died,
and his aunt and uncle died. And last Friday, he found out that
his brother was killed in a motorcycle accident.
Ms. DeLauro. Oh, my word.
Mr. Farr. So that is why he is not here today. But I hope
when he comes back that you will all--yeah, because he has gone
through a lot this year, and it is real tough.
So thank you. I mean, I knew you all know him, so thank
you.
Mr. Kingston. Troy is another great staffer and somebody
that we enjoy working with. And our thoughts and prayers are
with him and his family.
Mr. Farr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. Lummis.

SAGE-GROUSE INITIATIVE

Mrs. Lummis. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As everybody on this committee knows, I am a tightfisted
tough cookie when it comes to spending. But I rarely say I
would like to sit next to Mrs. DeLauro, but on her comments
that she just made, I would like to sit next to Ms. DeLauro and
work on these programs.
Because the NRCS, in my State--and I want to commend NRCS
in Wyoming. What great staff people you have. They do a
wonderful job. The technical assistance that they provide is
significant and instrumental. And especially with some of the
things we are grappling with like sage grouse, trying to keep
them off the Endangered Species list. ESA in the West, the
conservation technical assistance is widely acknowledged by
Wyoming farmers and ranchers as significant.
And so, a rare expression of kudos. And thank you, Ms.
DeLauro, for your comments.
I want to ask some questions about a few of these programs.
First of all, the sage grouse initiative. Your voluntary
conservation program provides regulatory certainty for
ranchers. And so they can help prevent the sage grouse from
being listed under the ESA. But if it is listed, they know,
because of these programs, that they will be able to continue
ranching on their land in the future.
Now, can you describe to this committee how that guarantee
of regulatory certainty for volunteer landowners affected the
participation rate?
Mr. White. I would say it really helped.
Earlier, I mentioned in my opening remarks that Fish and
Wildlife Service really was outstanding in this. They, for the
first time ever, did a conference report that offered that
certainty. And they didn't do it on a piecemeal basis; they did
it globally.
So I think when you take the fear of regulation out of
these issues, you dramatically increase the participation and
the willingness of producers to do this.
Mrs. Lummis. Well, I couldn't agree more. It has really
made a huge difference in my State.
With regard to conservation technical assistance, could
some of the program payment dollars be used to match additional
technical assistance dollars coming from fees?
What I heard during--there was stimulus money that was put
out, and the NRCS was trying to shove money out the door. And
ranchers and farmers in Wyoming were saying, we want the
technical assistance more than we want the money. Matching?
Mr. White. Yes, we are trying to do it. And it relates to a
proposal Mr. Farr was talking about earlier, the Strategic
Watershed Action Teams, where we are actually putting Federal
funds out to see if there are local partners willing to match
it.
And in the sage-grouse area, they are doing more than a
one-to-one match in the sage grouse area.
And what it means is there will be more boots on the ground
to do these projects. They won't have a Federal foot in that
boot, but it would still be direct assistance to the producers.
So we are trying that to leverage the Federal dollars.

CONSERVATION PROGRAMS

Mrs. Lummis. Okay.
A question about conservation programs and how they might
be more effectively administered: Around Wyoming, ranchers and
farmers are telling me they would like to see the CRP program
scaled back and the FRPP program either preserved or have some
combination of these programs.
And when it comes to conservation programs, would providing
States more flexibility allow us to get more bang for our buck
with Federal dollars?
Mr. White. Well, when you look specifically at the Farm and
Ranch Lands Protection Program--FRPP--, the final rule gives a
whole bunch of flexibility to the States. We have really tried
to accommodate State needs and interests in there.
Regarding the CRP, I think all these programs, within the
context of the 2012 Farm Bill, are--it is a perfect opportunity
to look at consolidation, streamlining, efficiency gains. And
if we can't do that kind of stuff in the budget climate we are
in, when can we do it?
Mrs. Lummis. Exactly. Yeah. And I just want you to know
that, in my State, I hear from ranchers and farmers all over
the State that we ought to scale back CRP and keep FRPP.
Anyway, that is just a--excuse me.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, Representative Lummis, if I can also
point out, the President's 2012 budget with respect to FRPP
does call for authorized levels of funding.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay.
Mr. Sherman. That is $200 million going forward.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
Mr. White. And, Ms. Lummis, that picture up there? I would
defer to a range conservationist, but I think that is
cheatgrass, that brown grass?
Mrs. Lummis. Indeed. I recognize that.
Mr. White. It is from Asia, I think. It is terrible.
Mrs. Lummis. And after a fire, it just goes crazy.
Mr. White. If there is a fire that goes through there, it
will be 50 years for that sagebrush to come back.
Mr. Sherman. We will be happy to provide you with another
photograph, an after photograph.
Mr. Kingston. Submit some samples.
Mr. Bishop.

FARM BILL PROGRAMS

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me welcome the panelists. Good to see you again,
especially Mr. White. You have been made an honorary Georgian.
Thanks a lot for what you do.
And based on the feedback from a number of our State's
producers, I would like to share with you how they believe that
our State benefits from the leadership of NRCS in several areas
of conservation, including the Agricultural Water Enhancement
Program. $1.38 million has been invested for innovative
conservation practices, particularly in the Flint River
district; and the EQIP program, which provided nearly $17
million to promote agricultural production, forest management,
and environmental quality.
My question centers on the effectiveness of these programs,
which are both mandatory and discretionary farm bill programs,
in meeting their stated objectives. Just tell us--of course, I
know, but just for the record--why should the U.S. taxpayer
continue to support these programs? And what has been the
positive return on investment to taxpayers for every dollar
that is spent in the programs?
Mr. White. If you look at Flint River, that is an area
where there is groundwater depletion. It is tied up with
Atlanta's water supply, which is kind of a crucial issue. And
the producers there, I think, are doing some of the absolutely
most cutting-edge irrigation water efficiency in the country.
You have the groundwater moisture sensors, where when the
pivot goes around it reads the moisture, it shuts it off, it
turns it on, it lowers it down. It is extraordinary, the water
savings that those farmers are doing. And what it means to the
water supply of Atlanta is important. All of us need water. And
it is just some incredible work that your producers are doing.

NATIONAL RESOURCES INVENTORY

Mr. Sherman. Congressman Bishop, if I can just supplement
that, I mean, beyond Georgia, nationally--we just released this
year, this past year, the National Resources Inventory. This is
an inventory based on 800,000 geographic reference points in
the country, and it reflects progress over a period of 30
years. And without question, there is enormous progress being
made with sediment reduction, nitrogen reduction, phosphorus
reduction.

CONSERVATION EFFECTS ASSESSMENT PROGRAMS

Similarly, the Conservation Effects Assessment Projects are
showing dramatic benefits that are coming from the application
of these suites of conservation practices.
So I think we are beginning to see through these
assessments that this work is important and it is paying off.

LONGLEAF PINE INITIATIVE

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Can you tell us about the Longleaf Pines initiative, which
I understand was funded at $5.7 million, to assist producers
with both managing and re-establishing the Longleaf Pines?
As you know, Georgia pines have a long and storied history,
and timber production has always been vital to agriculture in
Georgia.
Mr. White. Well, Mr. Bishop, the Longleaf Pine actually
helped build this Nation in its early years. It produced the
stores to keep the wooden ships afloat. It built Savannah and
Williamsburg. It is a long-grained, rot-resistant, wonderful
pine. And we had over 90 million acres, and now we are down to
about three million acres. And this is certainly an effort to
restore that ecosystem of the Longleaf.
We think it is commercially viable now. If you look at a
Longleaf forest where it grew up under a fire regime, it was
almost like a savannah. I don't know how many hundreds of
species live in a vibrant Longleaf Pine forest. And if it can
make income for producers and produce all these environmental
benefits, it is certainly something I believe we should
continue to support.

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
In the past, the inspector general has criticized the
Department for deficiencies within the Department, in
particular, the need for improvements of overall financial
management. One of the specific areas cited was management of
contracts. In Georgia, NRCS has over $36 million in obligated
funds for 2,100 contracts for fiscal year 2010 funding.
Do you expect any issues or any problems with these
contracts? Do you expect any cancellations or any other issues
due to funding reductions?
Mr. White. No, sir, I do not.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
I think my time has expired. Right on time.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Under Secretary, I wanted to ask you about the
Inspector General's report in December 2010. It was very
critical. It says, for the third year, that the NRCS has
received a report in which the inspector general issued a
disclaimer on the financial statement and identified a number
of significant deficiencies, including accounting and controls
over undelivered orders; accounting and controls over the
revenue and unfilled customer order process; accounting and
controls over accrued expenses; controls over financial
reporting; accounting and controls for property, plant, and
equipment; general and application controls on the environment;
and controls over purchase and fleet car transaction.
And I think what is disturbing about this is that it is the
third year. And so, two questions: How did we get in this
situation? And what is being done about it?
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me make a few
general comments about this, and then I would ask for Chief
White to go into some of the specifics here.
This agency has seen a three- to fourfold increase in its
budget since 2002. And this is an agency that is also
experiencing the implementation of many new programs that did
not exist prior to 2002.
The agency clearly realizes the importance of
accountability and transparency, and this audit report
continues to show that we have work to do. We have important
work to do to get to where we can be fully accountable for how
we are spending the taxpayers' money.
But I want to point out that we are at least gratified that
there has yet to be any showing of mismanagement, fraud or
Federal monies being misspent. We need to do a better job,
though, with respect to transparency and accountability, and we
are working very hard to that end.
I would appreciate if Chief White could just take you
through these different areas of the audit, because I think the
agency is doing its best to address each and every one of them.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.

AUDIT FINDINGS

Mr. White. First, Mr. Chairman, no excuses. The Under
Secretary is right; we have to do a better job. We are on that
pathway.
In 1980 the Chief Financial Officer Act was passed. USDA
had to undergo an audit at that time, and there were three
agencies--RD, the Food and Nutrition Service, and the Forest
Service--all had to have independent audits.
If you fast-forward to 2007-2008, we were the first agency
to have our own standalone audit since 1980. And it generally
takes from 5 to 10 years for an agency to move from the first
audit to a clean audit. We are in year 3 of that process.
That said, there are seven material weaknesses that you
talked about. I brought this here. I will call this the mother
of all audit remediation plans. This is how we are going to
address the issue this year.
Each one of those seven deficiencies has one of the top
NRCS senior executives owning it. Every State conservationist
in the country is on one of those teams. There is one team for
each of the seven deficiencies. And then there is an eighth
team, headed up by our Management Deputy Chief, which is the
crosscutting team providing the training, the policy
coordination, where the CFO will make the decisions.
We think that we can take care of three of them this year,
and then we would be down to four. We think we can take care of
the reimbursable contracts. We have centralized those in three
locations. We pulled them out of all 50 States and put them in
three, and April 1st we are standing up the consolidation unit.
We think that with the purchase cards, we are probably there,
but we want to make darn sure before we give our auditor that
information. And then the other one I think we can fix is the
security access.
Mr. Kingston. Where does the buck stop? Who is in charge?
Mr. White. Me.
Mr. Kingston. So if next year this is still--you get a
fourth year that is this bad, what will happen to you?
Mr. White. I will offer my resignation to Secretary
Vilsack.
Mr. Kingston. I would think that would be fair, to the
degree that it has to be changed. And knowing that you do have
that earnestness and drive to change something, do you feel
that there are stumbling blocks underneath you that are going
to prevent you from making that happen? Not your resignation,
but correction.
Mr. White. I have thought about resignation. Stress level
goes down, life expectancy goes up. It is not all that bad.
But, yes, Mr. Graves touched on it. We have to change some
of our business processes. We cannot survive with 1960s and
1970s business processes. We have 51 financial units. How do
you corral that many? We are going to have to do some sort of
consolidation. I don't know if it is in 1 or in 20 or 5 units.
But we are going to have some business process change if we are
going to fix this thing for the long term.
Mr. Kingston. Well, my time has expired.
Mr. Farr.

STRATEGIC WATERSHED ACTION TEAMS

Mr. Farr. Yeah, there are two questions I want to get into.
I want to follow up on the SWAT team proposal and also on the
cutting out of the funding for RC&D.
First of all, on the SWAT team, what I understand from your
budget authority is that you are going to--perhaps, it says,
that the two possible programs in regions would be the Bay
Delta and the Upper Mississippi. And then you go on to describe
the SWAT team: 5- to 7-member teams, working for 3 to 5 years,
putting all these experts on the ground, goal is to reach every
landowner in the region, high-priority watersheds where you
have nitrogen loading. And although you don't put it in there,
I think you ought to also put one that would relate it to food
safety, because it is certainly a high priority with everyone
else.
And what I am upset about is that all of the reasons you
are putting together this SWAT team is why we did it before you
ever had a program like this. We put that together in the
greater Monterey Bay area and now have six, seven counties, the
largest in the United States, that have been involved in this
program, and it has been going on for about 10 years.
And it is everything that you want to do. And we did it--
yes, we did it through earmarks because there was no program
like this.
So I am excited that you are doing--I think you are moving
in the right direction. But I don't want to see you pull the
rug out from under the people that are doing the very thing
that you have and have gotten that buy-in from all those
landowners and have gotten that regional politic. In fact, it
is the only press conference I go to annually where the
watershed quality report is put out, where the marine
scientists and the ag scientists, essentially the soil
scientists, and the farmers are leading it, and they are
praising these environmental scientists. You don't find that
anyplace else. I mean, it never happens. They are the enemy. So
it is a wonderful buy-in where people realize, yes, I can do
better farming and have less adverse effects from it.
So, I mean, go back and look at the criteria when you are
selecting your areas. And I would hate to see you pull the rug
out from what is everything that you outline in this program.
And I would like you to add one other thing, is that in
those regions we have--the specialty crops we grow are called
coastal crops. It is the cold-climate crops. It is all the
things that go into a salad. That is why my district is called
the ``salad bowl capital in the world.'' Every salad you eat
today anywhere in the United States comes from the Salinas
Valley. And that lettuce and broccoli and all those things were
picked 3 days ago, and they are here today.
What has come up is that a lot of those, particularly
lettuce, is not a kill-step process. You don't cook it. So we
have a whole new program. And we have had Dr. Hamburg out
there, from FDA, just amazed at, sort of, the laboratory. You
have to get suited up to go into a field now to pick anything.
You have to wear, just like you do in surgery, gloves and masks
and the hair nets and everything.
And this is a high priority for the State of California and
for the United States in food safety. So this watershed,
because it has to deal with water quality and nitrate buildup
and all kinds of other things, of wildlife getting into the
fields, I mean, it is just the perfect laboratory.
And I am just making a plea, when you go back--and I will
tell you, what sells you--what Mrs. Lummis was talking about--
what sells you on the ground is the professionalism of your
people. You have one of the guys that I have just been so
impressed with, Daniel Mountjoy. I think he is one of the most
outstanding public servants I have ever met--a big, burly guy
who looks like a big old bear. He has had some horrible
tragedies; his wife just passed away and all kinds of things.
But I will tell you, there isn't a farmer in the area that
doesn't respect and call upon Daniel Mountjoy, because he is a
very practical guy. And he is the kind of guy that has built
this whole infrastructure base out there.
So, again, I am pleading with you to go back and look at
that. And if you pull the rug out from under that, you will
have me as your enemy forever and ever.

RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Now, to the second question. Secretary Vilsack was here
and, I think, made a very interesting statement about how he is
trying to create a new rural strategy for America because rural
America has been in a depression for the last 10 years.
Why, in building that rural strategy, would you cut out the
RC&D? I mean, you look at the statistics of the number of
people employed, the number of programs--it is the recovery
plan for rural America. Now, did you cut this out because you
were ordered to, or do you really believe we ought to get rid
of it?
Mr. White. First, I will commit to you to find out more
about what is going on in your watershed area and work with Ed
Burton. Because you are ground zero on food safety, and I know
the co-management that we have to do.
Regarding the RC&D, this is a proposal that has been around
for 4 or 5 years. It was certainly developed and put in before
my term. And I certainly support the President's budget.
[The information follows:]

NRCS is committed to the best of our ability with available
resources to help the landowners deal with increasing regulatory
pressures and environmental challenges in critical watersheds such as
the Monterey Bay area.
We expect the majority of the existing RC&D Councils will decide to
adjust positively to this change in support from NRCS and continue to
operate successfully as nonprofit corporations. However, in the absence
of USDA support, more of their efforts will be directed toward
obtaining funding for office overhead and staffing. This may
temporarily have the effect of limiting other accomplishments,
including rural job creation, but we expect most of the councils will
overcome this short term effect and continue to implement projects that
foster the creation and retention of jobs in rural areas.

Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Latham.

CONSERVATION PRACTICES: 590 STANDARD

Mr. Latham. I think the answer is, how do you spell
``OMB''? But, anyway.
First of all, welcome, everyone.
According to the 590 standard, which was issued in January,
it says, ``Nutrients shall not be surface-applied except under
emergency provisions in accordance with State law to frozen
and/or snow-covered soils during seasons of high run-off
potential or during periods of winter dormancy,'' end quote.
This obviously is a major concern for a lot of cattle
producers in the upper Midwest and, I would guess, throughout
the West also, because it prevents land application of manure
for all but just a very few days of the year.
Under this definition, isn't the entire winter and spring
periods when you couldn't apply manure?
Mr. White. Well, first, I am all over this issue, Mr.
Latham.
Mr. Latham. Good.
Mr. White. We have 149 standards in NRCS. And every single
one of them gets updated with current science about every 5
years. The 590 standard, without question, is the most
controversial one because it deals with nutrient management.
For almost a year, we have been through several iterations
of drafts that have been given to the agriculture groups, the
conservation groups, and agencies. We have published it in the
Federal Register and received hundreds of comments. And in a
couple weeks, they are supposed to be bringing me the final
recommendations.
I am very aware of the issue of where the 590 says you are
not supposed to put manure on frozen ground. I understand this
could have a huge impact on the producers in the northern
climes: New England, Minnesota, Montana, Wyoming, anywhere like
that.
There are other issues in there, too, that I have heard
complaints about. For example the draft says once you reach 10
times the phosphorous in a soil, stop application. There are
producers in the southern no-rainfall zone that say, ``What do
you care? We don't get any rain. We are 60 miles from a
creek.''
So what I am thinking about doing, Mr. Latham--most of our
standards are national in scope, but this one is so
controversial. It is controversial not because we just use it
for our voluntary programs, but regulatory agencies sometimes
take our standards and use them in regulatory programs because
the science is so darn good. So I am actually thinking we may
need to regionalize this so we can address those cold-weather
issues. Otherwise, these producers are going to have to build
huge storage areas for the manure over winter. We are going to
have to look at the southern issues, where it never freezes.
There are a lot of things that I am very aware of, Mr.
Latham. And, God willing, we will have something out there that
can work for agriculture and protect the environment no matter
what region of the country you are in.
Mr. Latham. And is there any estimate--did you do a cost-
benefit analysis or any kind of estimate as far as cost to the
producers----
Mr. White. No.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. If they cannot apply manure, to
store, stockpile manure?
Mr. White. No.
Mr. Latham. So what are they supposed to do with it during
these months when they can't apply it?
Mr. White. Well, if you are in the South, it doesn't
matter; you just put it on pretty much anytime.
But the agriculture groups that have come forward in
opposition to this say it would be hugely expensive to have to
build structures to store it. So, a concrete tank, an earthen
container, someplace where you would have to store it.
But I am cognizant of that, and I think we should work with
the State authorities on this issue, the conservation
districts, and try to come up with a way that would tailor this
standard for different regions of the country to take into
account, what do you do if the ground is frozen for--I mean,
Montana, it is frozen, like, 8, 9 months of the year.
Mr. Latham. Well, and in a place like Iowa, where, if you
can't apply it in the winter--I mean, I understand if you drive
around some areas, you will smell, obviously----
Mr. White. Oh, yeah.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. The manure out there. But if you
can't apply it in the winter or the spring, and in Iowa the
rest of the year or, at least, you know, through the summer
months, you are in production on that land, so you can't apply
it then, so you have to spend a tremendous amount of money to
have facilities to stockpile this until fall or something?
Mr. White. Understood. Now, the other side of the coin, I
have also gotten letters from environmental groups who say we
are complete sellouts and this would destroy the environment.
So there has to be some answer in there, and I think a regional
approach may be the way to go.
Mr. Latham. May be--excuse me?
Mr. White. Maybe the way to address this is to have the
States work it out with their partners in that locale.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. DeLauro.

FOOD SAFETY AND CONSERVATION

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. White, in your testimony, you mentioned that one area
that NRCS is pursuing is the intersection between food safety
requirements and the important conservation work accomplished
by farmers and ranchers. You also mentioned that you are
collaborating with AMS and FDA on co-management of
environmental stewardship on farm product safety guidelines and
regulations.
You outlined the current areas of collaboration, such as
the produce safety alliance, produce safety rule development
and implementation, and education outreach. Can you explain in
detail what some of this collaboration involves? What are the
conservation goals that NRCS is trying to achieve with these
collaborations? And can you also outline situations where food
safety goals and conservation goals conflict and how they get
resolved?
Mr. White. Yes. This goes back to Mr. Farr's area. Remember
the 2006 spinach E. coli outbreak?
Ms. DeLauro. Remember it well.
Mr. White. That led to the leafy-green marketing order. And
what we were seeing then was, where farmers had put in buffers
or riparian area protection, ponds for wildlife or air-quality
benefits or water quality, something like that, and they were
faced with: You choose between food safety and conservation.
And a lot of them were just ripping out conservation practices.
The Food and Drug Administration has authority for this. In
USDA, the lead is the Agricultural Marketing Service--AMS. They
have asked us in. They have opened the door for our
participation.
Cornell University has a term of art, like ``best
management practices'' in this area. So we are on the steering
committee. In fact, Thursday of this week, the Secretary's
office is convening a meeting with the Food and Drug
Administration--FDA--and NRCS and AMS and the Agricultural
Research Service--ARS, the researchers, to talk about this
issue.
So what we are hoping is that we can achieve both, where
you have the good things we want for the environment and also
the food safety that we must have.
Ms. DeLauro. Uh-huh. Are you looking to set out some
national criteria? Because, otherwise, as Mr. Farr knows from
that prior time, the folks are on their own to put something
together in order to safeguard their efforts and come up with,
you know, marketing orders, et cetera.
But at the Federal level, is there an intent to try to lay
out some criteria guidelines or standards?
Mr. White. Yes. FDA is supposed to come out with a rule
sometime in 2011.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
Mr. White. I don't know what that is going to contain, at
this point, but I know that they have opened the door for us,
and we are very grateful. And we will be advocating for
conservation throughout that process, ma'am.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Well, we will follow it.
Mr. White. And we will be calling Daniel Mountjoy for
advice on how to do it.
Ms. DeLauro. I would just submit to you, because I can't
let the opportunity go, that, with all of the agencies that are
involved, wouldn't it be simpler, the whole process would be
simpler if we had a single food safety agency?
Mr. Kingston. Now, that is an idea we haven't heard.
Ms. DeLauro. An idea whose time has come. Anyway--in so
many regards, including deficit reduction, I might add.
Mr. White. Well, don't you think we should have a little
bit of conservation input, though?

RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Ms. DeLauro. I am happy for the input, but at one agency.
So we can build in a capacity in an agency to do that.
Let me just talk about the RC&D program. It was eliminated.
And you are right, it has come up before, and every year we
bring it back.
You say the same goals can be achieved through other USDA
programs, partner investments, local project sponsors. Can you
outline how this will be done with resource conservation and
development?
RC&D focuses on energy resource management projects, waste
management utilization projects, community improvement
projects, economic development water projects. Can all of these
areas really be covered by other programs or partner
investments?
Mr. Sherman. Well, let me start and then see if Dave wants
to add anything to that. I do believe that most of the goals
and mission areas of RC&D are addressed in a variety of the
programs that we have.
Ms. DeLauro. I won't have enough time for you to list them,
but I would like to know where those--if you can get for us,
where you pick up the slack if RC&D is gone.
Mr. Sherman. We would be happy to provide that to you.
Do you want this now?
Ms. DeLauro. No, no. I was just--is there anything else you
want to, you know, add about--the light went off. I am going to
assume it is a red light here.
Mr. Kingston. Your time has expired.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. So if you just would get us that
information, it would be very helpful.
Mr. Sherman. We will get you that information.
[The information follows:]

Resource Conservation and Development (RC&D) Councils
implement natural resource and community improvement projects
with funding from various sources including private and
corporate foundations, state and local agencies; and various
federal agencies including USDA's Agricultural Marketing
Service, Food and Nutrition Service, the National Institute of
Food and Agriculture, Forest Service, and Rural Development.
These programs complement the technical assistance provided by
NRCS.
Federal funding sources outside of USDA that contribute to
RC&D Council projects include: the Environmental Protection
Agency, Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management,
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of Energy, Department of
Transportation, Department of the Army, Department of the Navy,
Department of Health and Human Services, the National Historic
Preservation Program, National Endowment for the Humanities,
and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Since RC&D
Councils compete for these Federal funds along with other non-
profit organizations, we do not have information on the funding
levels of the numerous grant programs of these departments and
agencies that may be awarded to RC&D Councils in FY 2012.

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Kingston. And, also, if I could add on the councils
that disappear and the councils that don't disappear, that
assumes some councils are more equal than others or some are
doing a more effective job. And if you could address why
certain councils will remain and certain ones won't, that will
be helpful.
Ms. DeLauro. Is that right? Certain councils will remain? I
thought it was all eliminated.
Mr. Sherman. We don't know which councils will continue. If
this funding is eliminated, I assume there will be certain
councils which will, through voluntary efforts or through other
fundraising efforts, what have you, partnership efforts, will
find coordinators to continue to run their activities.
But in the event that you eliminate this from the budget,
we will report back to you as to which councils continue and
which councils----
[The information follows:]

NRCS does not have information on the financial strength of
each of the nonprofit RC&D councils. We expect the majority of
the existing Councils will decide to adjust positively to this
change in support from NRCS and continue to operate
successfully as nonprofit corporations. For several years USDA
has partnered with the National Association of Councils across
the country. Many councils have increased their partnerships
and financial portfolios so that they are less reliant on NRCS
direct technical and financial assistance.

Ms. DeLauro. But they won't be continued with Federal
dollars.
Mr. Sherman. Well, the payment for coordination, the hiring
of the coordinators, would not continue.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Graves.

CONSERVATION RESERVE PROGRAM

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And forgive me for my lack of institutional knowledge. I
still have a little bit to gain. But I was curious, if you
could explain, there is a line item called ``other planning and
application'' that nearly doubles from 2010 to 2012. What
drives that? And I guess that is the mandatory side?
Mr. White. What chart are you on, do you know?
Mr. Graves. Page 25-16 of the explanatory notes.
Mr. White. Okay. Getting there.
We think that is the technical assistance for the
Conservation Reserve Program. The program is administered by
the Farm Service Agency, but we do most of the technical work.
So, as they have this new signup, that would be an increase
that is not going to happen every year. That is only when they
would have large, multi-million-acre signups.
Mr. Graves. So what is driving that large increase?
Mr. White. They announced they are going to sign up 4
million acres into the program. And this would be a person
going out, working with the farmer, developing the seeding
recommendations, the plans that need to be developed, that kind
of stuff.
Mr. Graves. And I guess, where is that coming from? Who is
requesting the additional acreage?
Mr. White. We work with the Farm Service Agency to develop
those costs, so it would be coming from us both. The funding
source would be the Commodity Credit Corporation.
Mr. Graves. And so, is it formula-driven? I mean, what
makes it mandatory?
Mr. White. It is basically acre-driven and number of plans
projected. And I cannot remember the amount per plan off the
top of my head.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.041

Mr. Graves. So is it mandatory or not mandatory?
Mr. White. This is mandatory spending. The source of the
money is from the Commodity Credit Corporation--CCC.
Mr. Graves. So I guess there is another authorizing
committee that has put something in place that drives it to
this new level----
Mr. White. No.
Mr. Graves [continued]. To get the formula? Or is it----
Mr. White. It is Farm Bill funding. So it would be the same
funding source as EQIP or Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program,
things of that nature.
Mr. Graves. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Bishop.

RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
It is my understanding, still on the RC&D, that as a result
of the proposed elimination of RC&D that Georgia will lose
approximately 10 NRCS staff persons. And while these employees
may be transferred to other positions in the agency, what will
the practical impact of these staff losses be in terms of
program support?
Mr. Sherman. Okay, these 10 individuals, we will make an
effort to reassign them to other work for which they are
qualified. Some of----
Mr. Bishop. Same State?
Mr. White. That would be my goal.
Mr. Sherman. That would be our goal.
And some of these people may be eligible for retirement.
Some of them may be eligible for early retirement. Prior to
your getting here, we talked about a buy-out program, an early
buy-out program that the government has.
So we will make every effort to try to find a place for the
employees who wish to remain within the NRCS system.
Mr. Bishop. I was really--my question was going to the
impact that it would have on the programs, on the services that
they provided to their respective areas, their expertise.
Mr. Sherman. These individuals currently serve as
coordinators of RC&D councils. So if the funding is not there
for these councils, then I think the question is whether these
councils will reach out to others on a voluntary basis or find
others that they are willing to pay for who can step in and
coordinate the efforts of the council. If they can't----
Mr. Bishop. They won't have any federally funded
coordinators?
Mr. Sherman. They will not have federally funded
coordinators. Eighty percent----
Mr. Bishop. Pull themselves up by their own bootstraps, so
to speak?
Mr. Sherman. That is correct.
Mr. Bishop. Get their own funding.
Mr. Sherman. That is correct.
Mr. White. But we might have more help for Flint River.

NRCS STRATEGIC PLAN

Mr. Bishop. Okay.
Let me shift gears for a moment and ask if you would just
talk about your strategic plan. Over the past few years, you
have had discussions about strategic planning at NRCS. Can you
tell us if your strategic planning process has taken into
account the tight budgetary environment that we are currently
facing and the likelihood that this will spill over into the
current farm bill negotiations?
How do you see the proposed changes would impact that plan,
particularly in terms of the Department's internal and external
assessments of natural resources, human capital, civil rights,
and the other issues?
Mr. White. Well, we have revised the strategic plan, and it
is going to come out shortly. And it is pretty simple. What I
wanted was something you can put on one page, maybe front and
back at most. We want to get our house in order, and that is
directly related to fixing the financial arena and those
processes that are bogging us down.
So, first get our house in order; two, get more
conservation on the ground, streamline how we work with
producers, make it more producer-friendly and better there;
and, three, work with our partners where we can to create a
climate where voluntary, incentive-based conservation can
succeed, or continue to succeed.
And regardless of the budget--up, down, in between--I think
that those strategic goals are relevant regardless of what
happens to the budget, sir.

PROGRAM ELIMINATIONS

Mr. Bishop. Okay. I appreciate that very much.
Let me shift again. Overall, with your recommendations,
with the administration's position, I guess driven by OMB or
whomever, that some of these programs and functions will have
to be eliminated, and you are recommending not funding them.
Does this really reflect the ability or an approach to do
more with less, to eliminate redundancies and overlapping
programs so, at the end of the day, you will still be able to
accomplish the mission that you have to accomplish but just
doing it more efficiently? Or is this simply an exercise in
just cutting the budget to comply with the necessity of the
difficult financial crisis that we are in?
Mr. Sherman. Congressman, I think it is both. I think there
are areas where we probably won't be able to accomplish
everything that we sought to do. I think there will be other
areas where we try to identify efficiencies, better ways of
doing things, where we can stretch our dollars more effectively
and further.
But it is really both. In the areas where we have proposed
cuts, hopefully our local partners will find ways to continue
doing a number of the things that previously were done. But we
will have to wait and see whether that happens.
Mr. Kingston. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Lummis.

CONSERVATION PRACTICE STANDARDS

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to add on to and support Mr. Latham's line of
questioning with regard to the land manure standards and----
Mr. White. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Lummis [continued]. Specifically would be interested
in knowing at some point what the scientific basis is for
limiting phosphorous and potassium to 10 times the crop removal
rate.
But since you recognize that this 590 rule is a problem and
you are all over it, as you say, just know that I share Mr.
Latham's concern.
Mr. White. Yes, ma'am.

WETLANDS RESERVE PROGRAM

Mrs. Lummis. Okay. Great.
A question about the Wetland Reserve Program. Has the NRCS
looked into provision exemptions that would allow haying and
grazing in the same year, where that is appropriate for wetland
reserves?
Mr. White. Yes.
Mrs. Lummis. Oh, good.
Mr. White. In 2002, I was loaned to Senator Harkin and
worked on that Farm Bill. No, 2002 was Senator Lugar; 2008 was
Senator Harkin. But in the 2008 Farm Bill, we put a special
provision in the Wetlands Reserve Program that made it through
the adoption phase to allow haying and grazing as part of the
WRP. Because, instead of making it a land retirement program, I
think it would be better served as a working lands program.
The reason is, particularly as you go west, you know, west
of the 100th meridian, those wetlands grew up under the
ungulates. Every 18 months or 2 years, buffalo come down there
and they would make it look like a nuclear bomb hit it, and
then they would move on, and the wetlands came back. They grew
up under that ecosystem.
So we do have the authorities for reserved rights for
grazing. For regular WRP, we can also work with the landowner
to do a plan to allow the grazing.
Mrs. Lummis. So is that on a case-by-case basis? Or do you
have standards that you are going to publish?
Mr. White. It is on a case-by-case basis for the existing
WRPs. If you come under the reserved rights, it is actually in
the agreement--the rancher says, okay, that is mine, if I do it
according to a plan. So there are two different scenarios right
now.
Mrs. Lummis. Okay.
Well, that was the only additional question I have, Mr.
Chairman, and so I will yield back the balance of my time.
Thank you.

CONSERVATION STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM

Mr. Kingston. I thank the gentlewoman.
And we will begin our third round.
I want to ask you, Mr. Under Secretary, about the
Conservation Security Program, which, as you know, was
basically discontinued or at least had a major name change and
overhaul in 2008. However, under the Conservation Security
Program contracts, we are still paying farmers to participate
in the failed program. It doesn't take new enrollees, but if
you are already on the paper, you get paid.
That is really repugnant to taxpayers. What can we do to
get out of that?
Mr. Sherman. I am not the expert on this program, but my
understanding is, it is being phased out. Obviously, the
Conservation Stewardship Program is now in place, and we are
enrolling. We enrolled 25 million acres during 2010, and we are
adding about 12 million acres a year to this program going
forward.
So we are phasing out of this other program. There were
certain problems that were in that program that we are
attempting to correct under the Conservation Stewardship
Program.
But I would turn to Chief White to be more specific in
response to your question.
Mr. Bishop. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Kingston. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. Is it a legal problem, that you can't just
terminate those contracts because they have already been signed
and it would result in some kind of legal liability, and that
is why we are continuing to pay them even though we are
discontinuing the program and going on with a different
approach? But you have those existing programs, and they are
still obligated because of the contracts, and there will be
legal liability if those contracts are breached.
Mr. Sherman. That is my understanding.
Mr. White. Okay. Can I address that as part of the
response--
Mr. Kingston. And throw in there how much money is paid
out. For 2012, what will it be? And what will it be aggregate
during the life of those contracts? And how much would you
estimate it would cost you to take the legal hit and close them
out?
Mr. White. Okay. All right. You are referring to the OIG
audit of the Conservation Security Program. They went in five
States. This happened a couple years ago. They found a huge
error rate, a 50 percent error rate. It was stunning.
When I became chief in 2009 and became aware of this, there
were 23 recommendations in that OIG report. And I have to tell
you, OIG was very fair. I think they did an honest job on this.
And I can also tell you where I think the major error in
the Conservation Security Program occurred, and that was, to
save money, they made a decision to allow farmers to self-
certify. So if you told us you had 100 acres and terraces, we
said, well, you have 100 acres and terraces, and that is what
it was based on. But when the OIG actually went into the field,
maybe you had 98 acres, maybe you had 105, maybe you didn't
have terraces. These were a lot of the errors that they
particularly cited.
So when I became chief, I did not have us go back and look
at the contracts in those five States; I ordered a top-to-
bottom review from Maine to Hawaii, every single contract,
21,000 of them. Go to the field, verify it. If there is a
problem with anything--eligibility, paperwork--fix it. And if
you can't fix it, we have to cancel it and get out of it.
We have canceled gobs of them. We have fixed gobs of them.
We are down to a handful that are really kind of ugly right
now. They will probably end up in some lawsuits. I am trying to
remember, there are 28 or 30 contracts still out where we are
asking for major amounts of money back. We recovered a couple
of million, and there are still some more out there. But we are
progressing and working with the inspector general to clean
this up.
Mr. Bishop. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Kingston. Yes.

CANCELLED CONTRACTS

Mr. Bishop. The ones that you were able to cancel, you were
able to do that because you found that they were in breach of
their obligations under the contract. And, therefore, if they
were in breach, you were justified in canceling it. But those
who were proceeding according to what was expected of them or
where there was a legitimate dispute, those are the ones that--
--
Mr. White. That remain. The ones that are remaining are
okay. They are eligible. They are doing what they are supposed
to do. They are carrying out their contracts. And it would take
$197 million in 2012 to pay all the existing contracts. So I
think that we should continue to pay the existing contracts----
Mr. Kingston. $198 million?
Mr. Sherman. $197 million.
Mr. White. $197 million.
Mr. Kingston. Okay.
Mr. White. Well, $197 million is close enough.
Mr. Kingston. And the ones who were in violation, were they
dropped immediately, as Mr. Bishop said? And are they banned
from participating in future--not just that program under the
new name, Conservation Stewardship Program, but under other
programs?
Mr. White. Now, that I don't know. I will have to find out,
Mr. Kingston.
Mr. Kingston. When somebody is in violation of a farm
program, can they go on to other programs? If you violate WRP,
could you still be eligible for EQIP?
Mr. White. Well, there is a list, a debarment list that you
can put people on, and it would preclude them from
participating in just about any Federal program. But I have to
check and see what it would mean for these farmers.
[The information follows:]

Egregious conservation program contract violations may serve as the
basis for suspension and debarment actions by NRCS. Provisions at 2 CFR
Part 417 establish the USDA policies and procedures for debarment and
suspension. Generally, the period of debarment is based on the
seriousness of the cause(s) upon which the debarment is based and
usually does not exceed three years. However, if circumstances warrant,
debarring officials may impose a longer period. Any individual,
organization, corporation, or other entity convicted of a felony for
knowingly defrauding the United States in connection with any program
administered by USDA can be permanently debarred from participation in
USDA programs.
All NRCS Conservation Program Contracts (financial assistance
agreements) contain language in the terms and conditions regarding
participant self-certification that to the best of their knowledge and
belief, they are not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for
debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from covered
transactions by any Federal department or agency.

Mr. Kingston. Okay. My time has expired.
One last question: Will you give us a copy of your
remediation plan, switching back on the OIG report?
Mr. White. Oh, for this?
Mr. Kingston. Yes.
Mr. White. You betcha.
[The information follows:]

Information has been provided to the Committee.

Mr. Kingston. Can't wait to read it.
Mr. Bishop. We may need a budget increase this year to
offset that.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Farr.

FARM BILL PROGRAMS

Mr. Farr. Mr. Chairman, I would like to compliment you on
having this kind of a hearing. I think so much of this right
now, the CRs that we passed and even the President's budget,
what we failed to do on the legislative side, Congress, is to
understand the implications of these cuts as they trickle down
into communities.
And I was just--it was interesting, I wish Mrs. Lummis and
Mr. Graves were still here, because there are 12 programs that
Natural Resources Conservation Service manages. I mean, we
mentioned the WRP, the CRP, the EQIP. There is the WHIP, and
there is the FRP, and there is a bunch of others, including
AMA, which I don't know what they are. I am looking them up.
But if you look at that list of how these States benefit
from these programs, it is very disproportional. I mean, it
isn't, you know, one size fits all. This formula isn't across
the country. And some States very heavily use--I mean, Wyoming
is the number one in the country by tens of millions of dollars
under the EQIP program. There is no other State--excuse me, not
EQIP. I was thinking of the FRPP program.
And it just seems to me that, indeed, if Mr. Graves wants
to cut everything across the board, what I would ask the
Secretary and the chief here is, break down what kind of impact
that is going to have by State and by congressional district.
Mr. White. Okay.
Mr. Farr. You know, in essence, this process has to be a
political one, and it has to involve the community. And I fault
this administration because they are willing to bring in cuts
in their budget, but when you ask them, how is this going to
affect people on the ground, they won't tell you, because we
support the cuts.
And I don't think that is the way to communicate to people,
to say, okay, because the President wants it and because the
Republican leadership has agreed to it, that we don't have to
tell you what it is going to be. We have to tell people what it
is going to be whether we like the news or not. Because the
political side is then to make sure that people get involved,
and how are they going to trust government if we don't engage
them in what we are trying to do? We become so Beltway-
interested. And I would hope that we can have more and more
hearings about--we are going to be in this mood for a couple
years, I think, of cut, squeeze, and trim. And, I mean, that is
the political reality.
But we ought to be smart about, okay, let's really engage
the public in understanding what that cut, squeeze, and trim is
going to do. And, as I said, even in your agency, with all
these 12 different programs, it is going to have all different
kind of disproportionate effects on different congressional
districts.
Mr. Bishop. Will the gentleman yield on that?
Mr. Farr. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. You mentioned earlier that, in looking at the
regulations in the application, you had to look at it on a
regional basis. It would seem to me that, as we evaluate these
programs, that they have to be looked at on a regional basis,
because there are some areas that benefit from certain programs
and not from others. And somehow there has to be an equitable
balance so that programs that will benefit certain regions,
because of geography or because of crops or because of
whatever, that they will be able to continue to utilize the
benefits of those programs, whereas, you know, in other parts
of the country--maybe it is Wyoming--other programs are more
compatible with their needs.
Mr. White. Exactly. That is a good point. And we would be
happy to do runs on the various budget scenarios. That is----
Mr. Bishop. As we go into the farm bill, we need to have
this kind of information, we need to have that kind of
analysis. Because, depending upon who is making the decisions,
who is at the table and what region they are from, they tend to
think of it in terms of what is good for their region, as
opposed to what will benefit----
Mr. White. America.
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. Everybody in those respective
areas.
Mr. White. Exactly.
Mr. Kingston. And if the gentleman will yield--and I
actually think it is Mr. Farr's time--one of the things that
would be of interest to this committee, because we often get
into who is getting the most, which State is, it would be
interesting--now, you know, obviously, there is acreage
consideration and environmental sensitivity and growth factors.
But I think it would be interesting to know which States are
getting the money the most, just for our own--because any way
you look at the statistics, you could use it on a superficial
basis to come to a conclusion that is wrong--you know, money
per head, money per acre, any way you can do it. But it is
something that comes up all the time on this committee, so we
would be interested.
Mr. Sherman. Would you like this for all of the mandatory
programs and the discretionary programs?
Mr. Kingston. I think it would be very interesting.
Mr. Sherman. All right. We will be happy to get that.
Mr. Kingston. And I am not sure in what way to format it so
that people could use it.
Mr. Farr, Mr. Bishop and I enjoyed your time. Do you have--
--
Mr. Farr. I just want to make sure that you report back, as
Mr. Graves has asked for a 25 percent reduction--I don't know
if it is across the board or he wants you to figure out how to
do that 25 percent. All I am just saying, whatever way you
respond to him, I want you to add to that what the impact will
be on congressional districts.
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Mr. White. I think we can do it by congressional district,
but I know we can do it by State.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.042

Mr. Farr. Well, that will be helpful. Some States are
pretty big.
I mean, I was just showing Mr. Latham, I mean, here we are,
the CRP program. Iowa gets $6 million out of the CRP program.
California, the number-one ag State in the country, gets
$47,000. Excuse me, $47 million--no, I guess--it doesn't say
millions. No, it just says $47,000. And then Wyoming gets
$169,000. I mean, it is very, very small. California and
Wyoming are very small, but other States--you know, Wyoming
gets $21,000 out of the FRP program, and Georgia gets $24,000.
So it is just a whole different aspect of how these
programs affect States. And what is good for one is horrible
for the other.
Mr. White. Like the guys in your district would not accept
a $50- or $100-an-acre rental rate for land that is producing--
you know, you are a high-value specialty crop, so the CRP is of
limited interest to----
Mr. Kingston. CRP is, like, $10 an acre or something.
Mr. White. Well, it is $40 maybe. Forty-five dollars is the
national average; you go below that. And then you also have
higher-value crops in Iowa.
Mr. Farr. Our ag land is $40,000 an acre. You can't grow
anything on it that would give you $40,000 return----
Mr. White. That is why California doesn't have much in
the----

CONSERVATION PRACTICES AND FOOD SAFETY

Mr. Farr. Well, we don't sell ag land. You either inherit
it or marry it, if you want it.
Well, let me just ask the last part of--since you used my
time. But I would just like to comment that the point of what
was happening with the E. coli issue is that all the corporate
buyers--you know, McDonalds buys all their lettuce from growers
in the Salinas Valley. So their lawyer comes in and says, ``Oh,
my God. I am the risk management for the corporation. Do you
know that birds fly over your fields? Couldn't that be
dangerous?'' You know, or animals come in. Yes. We farm in the
open space.
But that is where you have this--and what was lost is
that--the credibility has always been with the government. I
mean, FDA has a lot of credibility and trust by the consumer.
But in this area of food safety, the evolving of that is that
nobody trusts anybody in it. So then the corporations come out
and use these sort of models for risk analysis that have
nothing to do with practicing farm practices in a rural area
and start telling farmers that they have to sort of grow
everything in sheds and use sterilized water. I mean, it is
nuts. And we have to recapture the science of that. And the
science is in your agency, along with FDA.
So I think this whole new movement of reprofessionalizing
and gaining the confidence of everyone that the rules and
procedures that we develop between the private-sector and
public-sector managers are the standard bearer, and we don't go
out and start privatizing rulemaking.
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Latham.

CONSERVATION SECURITY PROGRAM

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am glad to hear Mr. Farr saying those things, because
it does become ridiculous sometimes, some of the rules and
regulations. And I think the 590 stuff is going to prove to be
unworkable, most of that.
Going back to CSP, how many of the contracts were--you say
it was self-certified. How many were not in compliance of the--
you said 21,000 contracts?
Mr. White. That is how many total were in the old CSP.
Mr. Latham. But how many of those were----
Mr. White. I don't have that number. I guess----
Mr. Latham. Is it half?
Mr. White. In the five States they looked at, they found a
50 percent error rate. I don't know if that was nationwide. We
will have to get you the numbers on that.
What I was told is that most of the contracts that had
errors were nonsubstantive--they were technical in nature. You
may not have had every single lease agreement of the farms you
had, in there in the file. There were things that were
technical corrections that we had to make.
The category where there was actual out and out, ``You got
to go,'' I don't know exactly how large that was.
[The information follows:]

Nationally, NRCS reviewed 20,653 active Conservation Security
Program contracts. Of those reviewed, 7,666 had some error. Thus, the
rate of error nationally is approximately 37 percent. However, many of
these errors were minor or technical in nature and were readily
corrected.
In particular, the number of contracts that had errors that were
technical in nature was 5,495. A total of 2,099 contracts had errors
relating to incorrect payment levels. All corrective actions were taken
by December 31, 2009. Most of the actions taken were contract
modifications to correct the errors, or collection of missing
documentation. A total of 333 contracts were cancelled or terminated.
In cases where applicable, money was recovered from the participants.
To date, $4.618 million has been collected.
There are several outstanding contracts that have required extra
investigation. These contracts have recently been issued demand/
termination letters to collect an additional $2.295 million.

Mr. Latham. The idea of that, supposedly, was to improve
water quality, air quality, and soil quality. On an individual
piece of property, have you ever been able to quantify
benefits?
Mr. White. We are getting there. Because that is how----
Mr. Latham. But your answer is, no, you haven't, right?
Mr. White. I would say, we can do that now in certain
areas. We have some----
Mr. Latham. Where?
Mr. White. Well, actually, in the Chesapeake Bay. We can
now----
Mr. Latham. On individual properties?
Mr. White. Yes.
Mr. Latham. Not the watershed?
Mr. White. Yes. We have surrogates now that could tell you
the sediment, the nitrogen and the phosphorous reductions.
Mr. Latham. How about air quality?
Mr. White. No, not there. No.
Mr. Latham. Okay. So we are spending--I mean, this program
has been a disaster from the start. We have never been able to
quantify benefits. We are spending $198 million this year on a
program that you are going to discontinue because it is
apparently full of fraud, according to the OIG.
I mean, it is mind-boggling to me on this whole thing. It
never has been workable. We have never been able to quantify
anything, and yet we are spending all this money.
Mr. White. The old CSP was intended to--the rationale
behind it was that farmers produce more than corn, cotton,
wheat, soybeans; they also produce clean air, clean water. It
was a stewardship program. It----
Mr. Latham. Which was unworkable.
Mr. White. It was implemented at the watershed level,
where, if you were in the watershed, you were okay; if you were
out, you had to wait 8 years. There were some issues.
In 2008, Congress specifically set that one aside and
revamped it. What we have now is completely different. We
learned a lot of things not to do.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. White. But now we have gone back and reviewed all the
old ones. Those people are in compliance with their contracts.
The fraud is not there anymore. What we have left is pretty
solid stuff that is doing some benefits for the Nation.
Mr. Latham. But you cannot quantify on an individual piece
of ground any benefit?
Mr. White. That has always been our issue in the past,
regardless of program. I mean, we are excellent at counting
acres, feet, miles----
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. White [continued]. But I can't tell you the impact on
benthic macroinvertebrates.
Mr. Latham. Well, it is bad enough----
Mr. White. But we are getting there.

PROGRAM ELIMINATIONS

Mr. Latham [continued]. That you have done away with it,
and hopefully fixed it, because it was insane, the way it was
started.
In your budget, you are eliminating the watershed programs.
And I will just make kind of an aside here. A lot of us have
been here long enough to know that administrations propose
things kind of with a wink and a nod, saying, ``We know
Congress is going to protect it, and we are not really going to
do this, but we have to say we are going to do it.''
I will tell you, under the budget situation here we are in,
we are probably going to take everything that you say to get
rid of. And, I mean, I think you better be realistic as to what
you are proposing here, because this stuff is probably going to
happen, unlike in years past. I mean, this is a whole different
dynamic we are in today.
But I don't know how you have any--you know, in Iowa, we
have had a lot of floods--with doing away with this program,
how you are going to have any role in the evaluation of flood
protection, small and rural areas. If you can very briefly--
obviously, we are out of time--but comment on that.
Mr. White. I know. There are a lot of projects there, and
they do a lot of good. And I fully understand how the system
used to work. In 1609, the Japanese invented kabuki theater,
and it was perfected to a fine art here several years ago. But
the rules have changed, and now a lot of things we would maybe
have liked to have kept are not going to be available to us.
Mr. Kingston. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. I yield.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
I thank my colleague, Mr. Bishop, again for yielding to me.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your very positive
demeanor during these meetings.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.

WESTERN LAKE ERIE BASIN PARTNERSHIP

Ms. Kaptur. And we want to welcome our visitors from USDA.
My questions are regional, somewhat, in nature here. As you
probably know, Mr. White, for a long time, we have had a
Western Lake Erie Basin Partnership study ongoing involving not
just NRCS but the Army Corps of Engineers, the EPA, the U.S.
Geological Survey, and three States--Ohio, Michigan, and
Indiana--because of this massive watershed that we are a part
of in what I like to call ``Amsterdam America''--very flat land
and a tremendous flat watershed, which drains into the largest
river that flows into the Great Lakes, the Maumee River. Your
people out there, Terry Cosby and Steve Davis, have been
marvelous in trying to embrace this.
But one of my questions is, as we transition to this new
budget, how can we implement, after 10 years of effort, many of
the recommendations that had been made?
Because we have continuous flooding. We just had another
problem, again, in Finley, Ohio, represented by Jim Jordan.
Mike Pence has problems over in Indiana. We have problems. Bob
Latta has problems. It spans congressional districts.
And we have this issue of programs that NRCS has--your
Wetlands Reserve Program. You have Ag Water Enhancement
Programs, Strategic Watershed Teams. There are a lot of parts
of your budget. What is a little unclear to us is, how do we
piece this together to keep making progress in this region and
have a real rollout so we fix what is wrong and help to better
filter our water or hold our water, move with the Corps to dry
dam, swales, whatever we have to do across this region?
I guess it is a good problem, to have too much water. The
problem is, it is doing a lot of damage. And unlike certain
other Representatives, I don't just represent agriculture. I
have major cities in between all this, and they get flooded,
too.
So how do we work with you and maybe the Great Lakes
Restoration Initiative to kind of prioritize what needs to be
done a little more clearly so the local mayors, the local
county commissioners, we all understand what we are doing in
view of the budget you are submitting? That would be my first
question.

WILDLIFE AND COMMUNITY LIFE

And then my second question involves Lake Erie and the fact
that the algal blooms on Lake Erie and the phosphorous loading
has been significant. Some say we have actually gone backward
now in terms of the progress that we have made with cleaning up
Lake Erie.
And we have this added problem of wildlife habitat, which
is an asset because we are on the Mississippi Flyway, but we
have geese now living in the city of Toledo by the thousands,
on our Boy Scout reservation and our city parks. It is not too
healthy. These are not the kind of geese you can eat. So there
are issues that are involved with Canadian honkers that just
cover the area.
So my other question really has to do with, how does one
balance, in an area, human health and community wellbeing where
these geese, though they are up at the national wildlife
refuges, there are so many of them that they are coming into
the urban areas and they are a real nuisance? What does one do?
What is the balance in nature?
So my first question is relative to the Western Lake Erie
Basin Partnership. My second question relates to, how do we
balance the wildlife with human life and community life?

ENERGY PROGRAM

And my third question is, you have an energy program--oh,
gosh, I saw it in your testimony. My question is, can it be
applied to the greenhouse industry? I was reading in your
testimony--oh, here--on page 13, you do farm energy audits, and
also you have organic initiatives mentioned on page 14. For our
greenhouse growers that are located in urban counties, which is
what I represent also, we have massive greenhouse industries,
would those programs apply there? Because 40 percent of their
cost of doing business is energy.
Mr. White. Yes. Whew, I think I have it all down.
Ms. Kaptur. One, two, three.

WESTERN LAKE ERIE BASIN PARTNERSHIP

Mr. White. You bring up an issue of how we work together,
and Mr. Farr brought that up earlier. If the earmarks truly are
going away and they are not going to be here, there are many
worthwhile things. So what do we do in California or Georgia or
Ohio? What options are in the programs?
Because we always want to work with local people, whether
it is water quality, air quality, soil quality, wildlife,
whatever the conservation issue is. You have outlined a pretty
dramatic one, with the Maumee and the water quality going into
Lake Erie.
So what I think I have to do is figure out how we, in the
absence of earmarks, can meet these local needs with the
spectrum of programs that we have available to us, you know, as
long as they are meeting the statutory purposes, of wildlife,
water, air, soil.
The Lake Erie algae blooms? Oh, my goodness.
Ms. Kaptur. Massive. That is scary, actually.
Mr. White. That is, like, something we ought to be on top
of and trying to do everything we can to prevent. We have work
in the Mississippi River, you know, and the Chesapeake Bay. We
are doing a lot of things, so that is kind of sad that that is
occurring again. And you say we may be taking a step backward.
Ms. Kaptur. Absolutely. And everybody doesn't know, why all
this phosphorous loading? What is the reason? It is like----
Mr. White. Yes. And I will have to get with Terry Cosby on
how we work in the future and what path we go down----
[The information follows:]

NRCS is committed to the best of our ability with available
resources to help the landowners deal with increasing regulatory
pressures and environmental challenges in critical watersheds such as
the Great Lakes Basin.

Ms. Kaptur. If you could just get us one, two, three, four,
five, what are we supposed to do as a region? What could we
work toward here?
Mr. Kingston. And let me say, the gentlewoman's time has
expired, but I am yielding 3 minutes from my time.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman. Can I just also add, this obviously is a very
broad set of issues you are raising, and it involves sister
departments that we have--the Environmental Protection Agency--
EPA-- Interior, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration--NOAA-- Department of Defense, so forth. And I
really do think that whatever solutions we are exploring here
we have to do on a much broader, intergovernmental effort. It
is really important.
Ms. Kaptur. I think the Great Lakes Initiative provides us
with----
Mr. Sherman. A model.
Ms. Kaptur [continued]. Some ability, but I think you have
the data set. They don't necessarily have the data set, to help
us address this massive watershed. I mean, what does Mike Pence
do over in his district? What does Jim do? What does Bob Latta
do? What do I do? It would be nice if we knew.
You know, your wetlands programs, you have so many
programs. But what happens first, second, third, fourth, fifth?
And then, of course, with Lake Erie, it isn't just Ohio; we
have the whole Michigan issue. Maybe the phosphorous is coming
from up there. I don't know. All I know is the problem that we
have.
Mr. White. Well, both of you have given me some ideas to
think on in the future. Because we really want to address local
conservation needs, whatever they may be across the country.
These are not NRCS programs. We don't have ownership. We
only have them because of your good graces. They are American
conservation programs. Whether you are big or small, organic,
conventional, we don't care. There ought to be something in
those programs that our farmers and ranchers want to do on
their place.
The geese thing?
Ms. Kaptur. Yes.

WILDLIFE AND COMMUNITY LIFE

Mr. White. I hate to say this, but there is a program in
USDA, the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, called
Wildlife Services. Now, God knows I would never want to be
serviced the way they would service wildlife. But they
actually, like----
Ms. Kaptur. Help.
Mr. White [continued]. Kill them.
Ms. Kaptur. See, but how do you have a kill in the city? I
mean, do they bag them?
Mr. White. Well, they did it in Staunton, Virginia, with
some black vultures. They have cannons to shoo them away or
other methods. They have a variety of things. Wildlife
Services, if it is a city-type thing, is who I would contact.
Ms. Kaptur. All right. Thank you.

ENERGY PROGRAM

Mr. White. And the energy program, I have to check and see
if greenhouse growers--I guess, as long as they are ag
producers, it would be okay with me. You are talking about the
audit issues?
Ms. Kaptur. The audit issues and the organic technical
assistance that you give. This would be a perfect fit for our
growers. We have hundreds of them.
Mr. White. Okay.
[The information follows:]

The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) can and does
provide technical assistance and program financial assistance to
agricultural producers who may utilize greenhouse facilities in their
operations. The agency does not record or keep track of the number of
producers associated with greenhouse operations, but they are an
important client that we assist in many States.
Examples of technical assistance NRCS provides these producers
include development of conservation plans which address resource issues
such as water quality, erosion control, pests, nutrient management,
water conservation and other issues of importance to these operations.
NRCS may recommend conservation practices such as irrigation water
management, integrated pest management, nutrient management, erosion
practices, seasonal high tunnels, and other practices that are commonly
associated with greenhouse growers.
NRCS has also provided financial assistance to greenhouse growers
through the Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) to help
these growers implement the conservation practices identified above.
Many greenhouse growers are specialty crop or organic producers.
NRCS recognizes the importance of these producers and they receive
priority assistance. The agency has also launched efforts to help
agricultural producers evaluate and conserve on-farm energy. NRCS
offers assistance through EQIP for participants to develop farm energy
audits, which can include on-farm facilities such as greenhouses. The
audit helps the grower identify activities or improvements that can be
made to conserve energy and address other resource concerns.

Ms. Kaptur. But USDA generally doesn't see them because
they are not only farming in dirt, they are farming in dirt
inside of houses. So they don't necessarily offer technical
assistance to them.
Mr. Bishop. Will the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Kaptur. Yes, I would be pleased to yield.

PROGRAM ELIGIBILITY

Mr. Bishop. Are there some prohibitions in terms of
population centers where your programs are eligible or there is
no limit? I know there are some other USDA programs that are
limited in terms of population as to whether or not you are
authorized to provide the assistance. But with NRCS, it doesn't
matter whether it is urban or rural.
Mr. White. Location is an issue. We still have to comply
with the adjusted gross income and any highly erodable land
conservation issues compliance. But I would just have to check.
If they were to go down to their local FSA office, I don't--I
will just have to check on that, Ms. Kaptur.
[The information follows:]

There are no special requirements that must be met by a greenhouse
grower in order to receive NRCS technical assistance. NRCS technical
assistance is provided to greenhouse growers upon request and is
dependent upon availability of staff to provide these services.
Under NRCS conservation programs, greenhouse grower applicants must
meet program specific land eligibility requirements and most of our
programs require that applicants be agricultural producers in order to
receive financial assistance. Many NRCS conservation programs are
authorized by Title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985, as amended.
Thus, in addition to meeting NRCS program specific eligibility
criteria, a program applicant must visit the USDA Farm Service Agency
(FSA) county office to establish farm records and determine their
payment eligibility under the Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) provisions
and the Highly Erodible Land and Wetland Conservation Provisions (HEL/
WC).
The AGI provisions require that applicants requesting certain
conservation program payments, either directly or indirectly are
subject to average AGI provisions. Applicants who have adjusted gross
nonfarm income exceeding $1 million are ineligible for conservation
programs, unless at least 66.66% of total AGI was farm income. (Note:
This limitation may be waived on a case-by-case basis for the
protection of environmentally sensitive land of special significance.)
The HEL/WC provisions tie program eligibility to their land
management practices, including dis-incentives to farmers and ranchers
who produce annually tilled agricultural commodity crops on highly
erodible cropland without adequate erosion protection. In addition,
these dis-incentives apply to farmers and ranchers who produce annually
tilled agricultural commodities or make possible the production of
agricultural commodities on land classified as wetlands.

Ms. Kaptur. Okay. Thank you.

CONSERVATION STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM

Mr. Kingston. Mr. White, let me ask you, on the
Conservation Steward Program, I am still confused as to what
farmers do who are participating in that that they would not be
doing anyhow, particularly if they are participating in a
direct payment crop program or something like that.
Mr. White. You know, I have spent most of my thoughts on
the Conservation Stewardship instead of the old Security. We
are talking Stewardship, right, the new one?
Mr. Kingston. Yes.
Mr. White. Okay. Congress revamped the program in the 2008
Farm Bill and made two categories. One, you have to agree to
maintain that which you are already doing, keep it up to snuff,
keep delivering benefits year after year after year. And
Congress also put in there, you have to do more. It is not
money for nothing; you have to do more.
The last report I saw, Mr. Kingston, was that there are
80,000 new conservation practices going to be installed on the
25.2 million acres that are enrolled.
Do I have the right to revise and extend if I want?
[The information follows:]

Section 1238E of the Food Security Act of 1985, as amended by the
Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, identifies the purpose of
the Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP) is to encourage producers to
address resource concerns in a comprehensive manner by: 1) undertaking
additional conservation activities; and 2) by improving, maintaining,
and managing existing conservation activities. Section 1238G(e)
requires NRCS to compensate CSP for maintaining existing conservation
activities as well as for undertaking additional conservation
activities. CSP participants are required to select one or more
additional conservation activities to adopt over the course of the
contract. Most of these activities are high-level conservation
enhancements that go beyond NRCS conservation practice standards to
deliver valuable conservation benefits.

Mr. Kingston. Absolutely. Because I think that this program
probably is a duplication of other things, and I have a lot of
concerns about it. So, my time is about expired, but I would
like to know exactly what they do that is different, and why
should we be paying farmers to do what they were already doing?
Well, I think that is my question. If you want to get back
to us, we would be very--you know, CRP program, which Georgia
is a major participant in, it pays farmers not to farm. And
that is one of the things that people are always very critical
of. So Conservation Steward Program, paying farmers to do what
they were doing already, it is well-intended, but--Mr. Farr?
Mr. Farr. I will yield you my time. I have no other further
questions.
Mr. Kingston. Okay.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. I yield.
Mr. Kingston. Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. I think I have covered the questions that I
wanted to. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kingston. Well, thank you.
Mr. Bishop. If I might make a comment, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Kingston. Sure.
Mr. Bishop. I just wanted to thank the agency for what you
do, and particularly in Georgia, which is where I come from,
and let you know that, of all of the USDA agencies in Georgia,
that NRCS gets really, really high marks from our producers.
And I just want to thank you for the work that our State
conservationist, James Tillman, does, as well as the work that
all of your folks do, because, I mean, our producers really,
really, really speak very highly and think very highly of NRCS.
And I want to thank you for what you do.
Mr. Sherman. We appreciate those comments.
And we appreciate the chance to work with this committee.
We look forward to it in the future. Thanks very much.
Mr. White. Do I get anything for being an honorary
Georgian?
Mr. Kingston. You will get a lot of questions for the
record, and free peanuts. The committee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6636A.280


