- DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

?

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN

SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
DENNY REHBERG, Montana, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        NITA M. LOWEY, New York
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          BARBARA LEE, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Steve Crane, Kevin Jones, Donna Shahbaz,
John Bartrum, Susan Ross, and Lori Bias,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 5
Page
Department of Education..........................................    1
Department of Health and Human Services..........................   83
Pell Grants......................................................  221
Fiscal Year 2012 Budget Request for Department of Labor..........  283

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012
_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
DENNY REHBERG, Montana, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        NITA M. LOWEY, New York
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          BARBARA LEE, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Steve Crane, Kevin Jones, Donna Shahbaz,
John Bartrum, Susan Ross, and Lori Bias,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 5
Page
Department of Education..........................................    1
Department of Health and Human Services..........................   83
Pell Grants......................................................  221
Fiscal Year 2012 Budget Request for Department of Labor..........  283

________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-353                     WASHINGTON : 2012

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\         NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\           MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia               PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia                NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey   JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                      ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama           JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri              JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                    ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho             DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas           MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida               LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana                SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                 JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana           CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California               STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                    SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio            BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                    ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                   MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida            BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------
\1\ Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

----------

Thursday, March 10, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

WITNESS

HON. ARNE DUNCAN, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Opening Remarks of Chairman Rehberg

Mr. Rehberg. We will begin the hearing, and I thank you all
for your patience. This begins the 2012 cycle for the Labor,
Health and Human Services, Education appropriations
subcommittee.
I historically and normally do not feel it necessary to
give opening statements, because we are here to hear from the
Secretary, and so that will be the protocol that I follow. I am
also going to ask that the members, to the best of their
ability, maintain their questions or their conversation with
the Secretary on the fiscal year 2012 budget. There will be
plenty of opportunity to have conversation about other issues
that are before the Secretaries. We are going to have oversight
hearings, and we are working in consultation with the minority
for what those oversight hearings will look like.
And I thank those members, Mr. Flake, you learned your
lesson; you were on time. Thanks for being here.
At this time I will turn it over to the minority ranking
member--and I thank Mr. Duncan for coming; we will introduce
you in a moment--if you would like to make an opening
statement.

Opening Remarks of Ranking Member, Ms. DeLauro

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to just say that I am looking forward to our work
together on this committee. I have served on this committee for
a number of years, and it is at the heart and soul of
everything that I believe in with regard to education and
health services and scientific research. So, again, I am
looking forward to working with you and all the members of the
subcommittee.
Mr. Secretary, let me say, thank you, for joining us today.
Budgets are the embodiment of more than just our national
priorities; they reflect our moral values, what we as a people
and as a Nation hold most dear. And as such, I strongly support
the decision that you and the President have made in making
investments in education the top priority in this budget. Only
through education can people better themselves and their
communities, keep the promise of opportunity and social
mobility for all, and continue to lead the world in innovation
and standard of living.
As President Obama has said, ``Countries that out-educate
us today, will out-compete us tomorrow.'' With that in mind, I
applaud the new investments in education that you have included
in this budget. For example, $300 million, for i3, the
Investing in Innovation Fund; $150 million for Promise
Neighborhoods; and $100 million to increase after-school
programs.

importance of early childhood education

I want to particularly thank you for your continued support
of early childhood education. This is something the chairman
and I have worked together to emphasize as cochairs of the
Congressional Baby Caucus. And study after study has shown, and
I know from watching my own grandchildren, that the earliest
experiences are essential, and supportive environments critical
to long-term outcomes for children.
The business community understands this. Just last week
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said, and I quote, The
payoff to early childhood programs can be especially high. For
instance, preschool programs for disadvantaged children have
been shown to increase high school graduation rates. Because
high school graduates have higher earnings, pay more taxes, and
are less likely to use public health programs, investing in
such programs can payoff even from the narrow perspective of
State budgets. Of course, the returns to the overall economy
and to the individual themselves are much greater.
So I thank you for recognizing the vital importance of
early learning in the budget.

title i, esea and idea programs investment

I do have some concerns about other inclusions in the
budget request, and I hope we can discuss them this morning.
For example, I would like to see a bigger commitment to Title
I, which aids at-risk children, and to IDEA for children with
disabilities. These are the two fundamental building blocks of
our K-through-12 education system and the resources that school
systems rely on desperately to get by.

children living in poverty

According to Census data, the number of America's children
that live in poverty grew by 2 million during the recession. In
2009, child poverty reached a level of 20.7 percent, a rate of
more than 1 in 5 and totaling more than 15.5 million children.
This makes Title I funding even more important, as without
those resources, far too many children would not have the
supports they need to succeed.

pell grant program

In terms of higher education, I strongly welcome the
emphasis you placed on Pell Grants, maintaining the maximum
award at the current amount of $5,550. I have been visiting
community colleges in my district, and I cannot emphasize
enough how important Pell Grant support is in helping people of
all ages go to work, go to school--now more than ever.
Since the recession, the number of students needing Pell
Grant support to pursue their education has increased by 2.4
million to almost 9 million students. Many of these students
told me not only that Pell Grants were making the difference
for them, but if they lost even $100 out of that grant, their
education and their chances of improving their employment
prospects would be put at risk.
That is the knife's edge that these men and women are
walking on in this economy. It is one of the many reasons I
oppose the shortsighted cuts in the majority's budget for the
remainder of 2011 to Pell, to supplemental education
opportunity grants, and to many other education programs,
including Title I and IDEA, and even to Head Start and early
education. If we want to create jobs, grow the economy, and
reduce the deficit in the long term, it does not make sense to
roll back our critical investments in education. We should not
be slashing the programs that help the middle class ensure
educational opportunity for all.
So, on behalf of the students in my district and across
America, I want to thank you and the President for committing
to investments in education. I believe it is just the right
thing to do. Thank you again for coming. I am looking forward
to hearing your testimony, and I thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mrs. DeLauro, and I look forward to
working with you as well.
As you notice, there is a timer in front of you. She may
look nice, but she is not. She has got the red button. We will
ask that you keep your comments to 5 minutes.
Ms. DeLauro. You do look nice.
Mr. Rehberg. She does look nice.
And I ask each of the members of the committee to keep
their remarks to 5 minutes as well. There will be plenty of
opportunity if we stay on schedule for many rounds of questions
of the Secretary.
So, at this time, I would like to welcome you to the
committee and look forward to at least 2 more years of fruitful
discussion with you on how best to provide the services that
you provide to a very worthy cause, and that is the education
of our youth.
So, at this time, Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Jackson. Mr. Chairman, just before the Secretary
begins, can I just acknowledge that, Mr. Secretary, the absence
of members has nothing to do with their interest in the
subject. Secretary Clinton is testifying, and many members of
our committee share both subcommittees, and we have this
hearing at exactly the same time. So a number of us will be
running back and forth between hearings.
Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
And that is a good point.
We have a new standard; I think we are actually keeping
track of our attendance. That is something you have done at
school for many years, I know, because it made me nervous over
the years. And so we are all missing other meetings, and just
please understand this is not for a lack of interest.
So, Mr. Duncan, I am sorry; he used up a minute of your
time. [Laughter].

fy 2012 education department budget request

Secretary Duncan. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member DeLauro and other members of the committee.
Thank you for this opportunity to come before you and talk
about President Obama's fiscal year 2012 education budget.
This proposed budget reflects our Administration's dual
commitment to reduce spending and to be more efficient while
investing to secure our future, and at the very top of that
list of investments we must make is education.
Today, all across America, people are meeting the challenge
of improving education in many different ways, from creating
high quality early learning programs to raising standards,
strengthening the field of teaching, and aggressively attacking
achievement gaps.

role of federal government in education support

While the Federal Government contributes less than 10
percent of K-to-12 funding nationally, our programs play a
critical role in promoting equity, protecting children at risk
and, more recently, supporting reform activities at the State
and local level.

race to the top program

We have used competitive dollars to get State and local
educators to think and to act differently. Our Administration's
Race to the Top program has prompted Governors and educators to
jointly embrace bold reform programs. With our support, 41
States have adopted higher standards. And several States have
passed new laws and policies around teacher evaluations.
Several States altered their charter laws and policies to
foster the creation of new learning models.

rethinking the federal role in education

Race to the Top also prompted us to rethink the Federal
role. Our Department was established to promote equity in
education and protect students most at risk. To that end, we
have steadily boosted our commitment to formula programs, like
Title I and IDEA. This budget also increases our investments in
higher education through both student lending programs and
grants.
But today, our most critical role is in supporting reform
at the State and local level by providing flexibility and
incentives while holding States and districts accountable in a
fair and an honest and a transparent way. And for filling this
role, we must strike the right balance, providing as much
freedom as possible to schools while ensuring that children are
learning what they need to learn.

no child left behind

I have spent 2 years traveling the country, visiting many
of your States and districts, and talking with your teachers
and parents and students. There is a lot of dissatisfaction
with the current Federal law around public education. Many
people feel the Federal Government went too far with sanctions,
mislabeling schools as failures and issuing one-size-fits-all
mandates.
And just yesterday, I announced that the percentage of
schools that are not meeting Federal standards under No Child
Left Behind could rise to 82 percent this year. That is why we
are asking Congress to rewrite No Child Left Behind. We want to
fix the law and we want to fix that law together.
I do not think that all of these schools are failing by any
means. They have challenges, big and small challenges, and they
need to meet them, because every single child counts. But the
current law simply does not distinguish between them. And we
need to do that if we are going to address the real problems.

fy 2012 education budget proposals

But there is also a deep appreciation for the Federal
commitment to children and learning. They are grateful for our
support of STEM subjects, Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics. Americans know that even in challenging fiscal
times like these, we must prepare our young people to compete
and to be successful in tomorrow's economy. They know that,
even as States face greater financial pressure than in any
other time in recent history, we cannot put our children at
risk. So our budget proposal reflects these aspirations and
commitments.
Overall, we are seeking a $2 billion increase in non-Pell
spending. That includes a modest increase in formula programs,
like Title I of ESEA and IDEA, while maintaining programs for
English language learners and other at-risk populations, such
as rural, migrant and homeless children.
We are calling for a new round of Race to the Top Funds,
though we would change the program to target school districts
rather than States and include a carve-out for rural
communities. We also want to do another round of our Investing
in Innovation Fund and again do a rural carve-out there as
well.
We will continue to invest in innovation and research. We
want to support a well-rounded education that includes the arts
and foreign languages, literacy, STEM and physical education.
We want to strengthen the teaching profession in a number of
different ways and work harder to attract top students to
pursue teaching careers. We propose the new competition to
strengthen early-learning programs. And we are challenging
States to boost college completion rates.

program consolidations and eliminations proposed

We are also working to be more efficient. In the 2010
budget enacted by Congress, we eliminated four programs saving
$360 million. In our proposed 2012 budget, we propose
eliminating 13 more programs, saving another $147 million.
Together these savings total more than $500 million annually,
which is helping fund our other priorities.
We are also proposing to consolidate 38 separate elementary
and secondary education programs into 11 funding streams. These
commonsense reforms make it easier for school districts to
focus on educating children rather than bureaucratic compliance
with us here in Washington.
We are also proposing to reduce our investment in career
and technical education, not because we don't believe in CTE,
but because we feel the current program is not getting the
results we need.

efficiencies to close pell shortfall, protect max award

This year we have also identified efficiencies in the
student aid program that, which when coupled with a change in
Pell Grant policy, would help close a $20 billion shortfall in
the Pell Grant program and save $100 billion over the next
decade. Those savings means we can protect the $5,550 maximum
Pell award and help millions of young people meet the rising
tuition costs. Those savings also mean that we can meet the
skyrocketing demand for Pell Grants, which has risen from less
than 4 million grants in 2000 to a projected 9.6 million grants
next year. In the last 2 years alone, an additional 3 million
students received Pell Grants.

winning the future

Finally, let me close by saying that we share with you the
responsibility for being efficient and smart in how we invest.
We share an even greater responsibility, which is to prepare
the next generation to lead.
In his recent speech to Congress, the President talked
about winning the future. To emphasize that point, he announced
his budget at an elementary school in Baltimore. He believes,
as I do, that winning the future starts in the classroom.
He also believes that Government spends too much, and he
has outlined more than a trillion dollars in deficit reduction
over the next decade. This is an important national
conversation. It will take a great deal of time, energy and
thought. It will take courage, real courage on the part of
Congress and the Administration. We have to be truthful with
each other and truthful with the American people about what is
and isn't working. We have to take the heat together for the
cuts that we are making.

congressional support of education

I want to close by thanking Congress for supporting
education over the past 2 years. Because of you, we protected
millions of children in classrooms all across America from the
greatest economic crisis since the Depression. Because of you,
we helped States and districts all across America advance their
reform agendas, raise standards and challenge the status quo.
Because of you, almost a thousand underperforming schools have
launched dramatic restructuring plans. Because of you, there is
a greater determination than ever before to ensuring that our
children can compete in the global economy. And because of you,
we face a brighter future and the greatest prospect that the
world we leave behind will be better than the world we
inherited.
I thank all of you for your collective leadership, and I am
happy to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary of Education, Arne
Duncan, follows:]

ESEA REAUTHORIZATION

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
Holding true to tradition, we will alternate between
majority and minority. I will withhold my questioning until the
end. And as it looks, we will have plenty of opportunity for
several rounds.
So, at this time, I will call on Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, good morning.
Mr. Secretary, your fiscal year 2012 budget proposal
presents your budget request based on your proposed vision of a
reauthorized Elementary and Secondary Education Act. Nearly all
of the program increases and most of the consolidations assume
a brand new structure for K-12 educational programs and
accounts.
Most of the new programs that you are requesting funding
for are not even authorized at this time. They include Race to
the Top, Early Learning Challenge Fund, Title I rewards,
Investing in Innovation and Promise Neighborhoods. In addition,
you proposed to consolidate 38 ESEA programs into 11 new
authorities.
We applaud your efforts to identify duplicative programs
and proposed consolidation and elimination of them. But absent
action from the authorizing committee, it is difficult for us
to fund these programs under the vastly different structure
than you proposed.
And we know that our colleagues who are on the Education
and Workforce Committee are working hard in developing new
ideas to reauthorize the No Child Left Behind act. But I don't
think any of us are under the illusion that the bill can be
developed, passed by the House, conferenced in the Senate, and
signed into law by the President by the time that this
committee needs to develop its budget bill for fiscal year
2012. And again, that budget that you are asking for is $2
billion more than last year.
So the question is, if the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act is not reauthorized by the time that we begin
markup in a few short months, how would you propose to
distribute funding in your budget proposal under the structure
that we are operating under with the existing law?
Secretary Duncan. So what we are trying to do is--as you
know and it is a great question--is we are trying to do
business very differently. And we think by consolidating
programs, we will enable those scarce resources that currently
States and local districts are spending dealing with us in
Washington, enable those scarce resources to be put into the
classroom instead. We want to streamline our bureaucracy. We
want to support reform and innovation and move from this
compliance-driven culture, and we want to move on these two
paths concurrently.
We think we have to support reform. We have to support a
very different set of priorities. And we are going to continue
to push very, very hard. So we want to partner with you,
partner with everyone in Congress. We want, as you mentioned,
to rewrite the law this year and go into the new school year
this fall with a new law that rewards excellence and challenges
the status quo; we need to do that.
And our goal is not to continue to do business as usual. We
don't think, with the 25 percent dropout rate, and the U.S.
falling from first to tenth in the world in college graduates--
we can afford to just do business as usual.
Mr. Alexander. So we feel like it is going to cost the
taxpayers $2 billion more to save some money?

EDUCATION INVESTMENT MUST CONTINUE IN HARD TIMES

Secretary Duncan. It is not just about saving money, sir.
We are trying to, again, make some very tough cuts, reducing,
eliminating the second Pell Grants given in the same year,
making cutbacks in CTE. But I continue to absolutely believe
that, as a country, we have to invest in education. So we want
to invest in early childhood education. We can make a pretty
compelling case that the savings to society of the early
childhood investment are massive. We have to continue to invest
in K-to-12 reform.
And the fact that we have more young people going to
college and accessing Pell Grants, I think it is a challenge,
but a great challenge to have. The jobs of the future, as you
know, you have to have some form of higher education to get
those. So I do fundamentally believe that even in tough budget
times, particularly in tough budget times, we have to invest in
education.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will wait until the next round.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, again, Mr. Secretary.

GROWTH IN PELL GRANT COSTS AND RECIPIENTS

A very important part of the Department's budget is Pell
Grants, which currently help more than 9 million students with
low and moderate incomes afford to go to college. As you have
stated, the cost of Pell Grants has increased over the past
several years. I understand that the biggest single factor in
that increase has been the growth in the number of students who
are eligible for assistance.
In part, it seems to be that because people have lost their
jobs, they are going back to school to get the skills they need
in order to be able to get their next job. So I am glad that
the President's budget places a high priority on maintaining
the current amount of the Pell Grant.
Given the importance of higher education and helping to
prepare students for the jobs of the future, as you pointed
out, and the importance of education in setting the stage for
economic growth, cutting back on student financial aid is not
something that we ought to be doing when the need is so high.
And again, as you have pointed out, to maintain Pell, the
budget proposes some difficult trade-offs that would produce
savings that could be dedicated then to the Pell program.

HOUSE-PASSED 2011 APPROPRIATIONS BILL AND PELL FUNDS

In contrast, the 2011 appropriations bill that passed the
House, H.R. 1, last month responds to the growth in the number
of students eligible for Pell by cutting grant amounts for the
9 million people in the program, including an $845 cut in the
maximum grant amount. That reduction, as I looked at it, would
take us back almost 40 years on the proportion of college costs
that would be covered by Pell. And I believe that is accurate,
but I will have you answer that in a second.
I'd like to explore with you for a minute what is happening
to State budgets. Let me hold up this Wall Street Journal
article which was out yesterday. The Wall Street Journal this
week reports about Pennsylvania, where the State is cutting
spending for universities by 50 percent. What that means is
that tuition is going to be higher for people going to school
at this critical moment.
With State cuts and the Pell Grant cuts, aren't we putting
college out of reach of working families? And in fact, is this
a plan to kill the middle class in America?

IRONY OF UNFILLED JOBS DURING HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT

Secretary Duncan. So my overarching concern is that, at a
time of high unemployment, and today it is actually
staggering--we have a couple million unfilled jobs in our
country. And people say, how is that possible at a time of high
unemployment that you have unfilled jobs? The simple fact is we
are not producing enough workers, knowledgeable workers with
the skills to fill those jobs. And President Obama and I met
with a number of CEOs, and it is interesting how many of them
said, we are trying to hire now, we just can't find the workers
who can fill these jobs.

NEED TO INCREASE RATE OF COLLEGE COMPLETION

In a globally competitive, knowledge-based economy, the
only way we keep those jobs in this country is if we continue
to dramatically increase the number of young people, not just
graduating from high school but going on to some form of higher
education, 4-year universities, 2-year community colleges,
trade, technical, vocational training schools, whatever it
might be. And we have to educate our way to a better economy
and we have to produce the knowledgeable workers that can fill
those jobs and drive down unemployment. We cannot scale back on
Pell Grants.

IMPACT OF H.R. 1 ON AFFORDABILITY OF COLLEGE

Ms. DeLauro. Is this the lowest level in terms of
proportional cost for the last 40 years for Pell?
Mr. Skelly. Thirty-eight years.
Ms. DeLauro. Thirty-eight? Well, that is close, that is
close.
What is your view of the effect that the cuts have on the
ability for kids to go to college?
Secretary Duncan. Well, there is no question that many,
tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of students
would have to drop out. And we look today at why young people
leave college, 52 percent the majority today leave college due
to financial challenges. And so, at a time when college has
never been more expensive and never been more important--as you
know, our families across the country are struggling--and so to
scale back on this desperately needed ability to create that
opportunity through Pell Grants, again, just does grave
disservice not just to our country's young people but
ultimately to our economy.
Ms. DeLauro. I presume from what you have said that
universities and community colleges are not in a position to
make up this difference and are dealing with their own
pressures.
Secretary Duncan. Well, we are actually trying to get them
not to continue to drive up tuition exponentially. And so they
have to contain costs in very tough budget times. And we need
to continue to support young people and families who are
struggling to go to college, absolutely.

INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES EDUCATION ACT FUNDING

Ms. DeLauro. Just quickly, there are a couple of seconds
left here. IDEA is funded at only 17 percent of the promised 40
percent of the Federal statutory commitment. These are
difficult fiscal times and many argue that the Federal
Government needs to do more to meet its mandate for special
education spending. How do you answer that concern?
Secretary Duncan. It is an absolutely valid concern. And
when I managed the Chicago public schools, I lived at the other
end of that. We asked for a significant increase for IDEA
Grants to States. We asked for more also for the Infants and
Families with Disabilities program. It is never enough. It is
never as much as I would like; we have asked for increases in
IDEA and Title I every single year, but is it enough in an
ideal world? Of course not. We would love to be able to do
more; we are just in a very tough budget time.
Ms. DeLauro. So, in fact, we are looking at an unfunded
mandate on the States that is 17 percent when we committed to
40 percent?
Secretary Duncan. It continues to be an unfair amount----
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary Duncan.

HEAD START AND EARLY LEARNING CHALLENGE FUND

With regard to Head Start, you are familiar with a recent
study that came out, a survey of 4,600 preschoolers randomly
assigned, either Head Start or no program, the control group;
114 different measures, academic skills, socioeconomic
development, health status. The survey found no statistically
relevant effects from Head Start programs by the end of first
grade.
The Department seems to recognize that there is a problem
here. It is a $6 billion program, but instead of going in and
trying to correct or do something different, we are laying on
another program; $350 million you are seeking for a new
unauthorized program entitled Early Learning Challenge Fund.
Tell me how this is going to be different. If we are learning
that there are problems with Head Start, why aren't we going to
fix those? My assumption is that we aren't diminishing any
funding for Head Start, but we are laying on this new program.
Why is it different, and how is it different?
Secretary Duncan. As you know, Congressman, Head Start is
administered by HHS. We have worked in close partnership with
them, and they are actually starting to do business very
differently. They are making--where programs are not of high
quality, HHS is making those local sites recompete for those
funds. And if HHS doesn't see improvements, those sites will
lose those funds.
So, to me, the question is not, should we invest or not
invest? I think we absolutely have to invest, but your point I
couldn't agree with more; we have to invest in quality. And if
we are investing in low quality programs, that are not changing
children's lives and that are not helping; it is not the right
thing to do for taxpayers.
So we continue to drive quality with HHS through Head
Start. And our Early Learning Challenge Fund is just geared to
do two things, to create opportunities for early learning
programs in disadvantaged communities and to make sure they are
of high quality. If we can do those things, I would argue to
you that high quality, early childhood programs are arguably
the best investment we can make if we are serious about closing
the achievement gaps and leveling the playing field.

IMPROVING AND INVESTING IN HIGH QUALITY EARLY LEARNING

Mr. Flake. Well, I haven't seen the Department of Education
identify with HHS the problems with Head Start. If you are
unable to identify those problems, how in the world can you do
any better a with $350 million program? And why should we have
any confidence that you will do anything different?
Secretary Duncan. It is a very fair question.
So there are lots of factors that lead to high quality, and
when we are looking at outcomes for students where this is
glorified baby-sitting, where it is not making a difference in
students' lives, we can't and should not, as an Administration,
continue to support that. I absolutely agree with you.
Where it is high quality, we need to create greater access
to those types of programs.
Mr. Flake. Well, I would like to see then the
recommendation for a cut in those funds. They are on the HHS
side, but I don't think we are going to see it. We haven't seen
it.
Secretary Duncan. Where you and I might disagree is, to me,
the goal should not be to cut the funds; the goal should be to
reinvest in the high quality programs to continue to create
opportunities. I worry desperately about young people who come
to school in kindergarten, some of whom have never been read
to, who do not know the front of a book from the back of a
book. And how are we ever supposed to give them a chance to
compete academically and be successful long term if we don't
start to give them enriched, high quality early childhood
programs? So the goal is not to walk away. The goal is to make
a difference in those students' lives.
Mr. Flake. Well, I am not trying to absolve the previous
Administration. We spent a lot of money there, and we shouldn't
have. But this Administration has been in 2 years, and I still
haven't seen any identification of the problems there. It is
just kind of vague, ``we will do better.''

ARPA: EDUCATION

And so let me move to another program quickly. You are
requesting $90 million for this Advanced Research Projects
Agency: Education. It is similar to new technology programs in
other agencies. What is that?
Secretary Duncan. So we have tried to learn a lot from the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, DARPA. And I think
DARPA over the years has led to some extraordinarily important
advances for our country. And I think technology has not
transformed education like it has in other areas. Technology
has transformed how we do business. It has transformed how we
interact socially. At a time of declining revenue, I think
technology can potentially lead to breakthroughs and
productivity in education. And we want to invest in places that
will be sort of cutting-edge, over-the-rainbow type
opportunities that could dramatically improve student
achievement, perhaps at a fraction of the cost. We don't think
there is nearly enough investment in R&D in this space.
Mr. Flake. Do you really think that we should believe that
the Department of Education can outguess the market here and do
better than the private allocation of resources toward these
programs?

FUNDS FOR BREAKTHROUGH EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY, PROGRAMS

Secretary Duncan. We are absolutely not trying to outguess
the market. We are trying to support the market and trying to
take to scale leading-edge work, cutting-edge work that could
help students be much more successful than they are today. The
idea that we deliver education 6 hours a day, 5 days a week, 9
months out of the year is a 19th century model. With cutting-
edge technology, we can start to deliver content 24/7 and
engage students in very different ways and start to close these
achievement gaps.
Mr. Flake. In order to help the market, you have to take
money out of the market to do this, and I just don't think it
is good investment. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for yielding me the time.
And thank you, Secretary Duncan, welcome back to the
subcommittee. Thank you for your testimony.

E-BOOK TECHNOLOGY--REVISITING ``SEPARATE BUT UNEQUAL''

Earlier this year, Chicago State University in my district
provided incoming freshman class students with an iPad. Over
time, as new classes enroll, the Administration at CSU hopes
that all students and teachers will be using electronic reading
devices for their textbooks and to submit all assignments. They
expect to be a textbookless campus within 4 years. These are
the Kindle devices which can download any e-book in the e-book
sphere. And as I see it, more and more bookstores are beginning
to close, like Borders bookstores' recent announcement to close
200 of 508 stores.
I can't help but feel that education is moving in this
direction as well. The idea of a textbook education will soon
go the way of the dinosaur. Soon, local schools, local
libraries will be closing because of the ease with which these
devices bring books to the end user, local libraries in every
jurisdiction in this country, including local libraries in our
public schools.
Based on the way education is funded based on local
property taxes, it is clear to me that, soon, some local school
systems will be choosing these devices over textbooks as well.
We are moving toward a time when paper books will be phased
out, and consumers will be using electronic devices like the
iPad, Kindle and the Nook, exclusively.
Mr. Secretary, with school districts struggling in these
tough economic times and many without the resources to purchase
these devices, we are quickly approaching revisiting Brown v.
The Board of Education and the question of separate and unequal
schools; not by race, but by resources and technological
advantage that is likely to be compounded by the issue of race.
I am wondering what is the Federal Government's plan to
ensure that no school district is left behind in acquiring
these kinds of textbookless devices. I am wondering what the
Federal Government's plan is to ensure that, by virtue of local
property taxes, students will not be trapped in some school
districts with outdated books, while other school districts are
replacing textbooks with these devices? What is the Federal
Government's plan and will the President make a request to
close the gap for those school districts that will be left
behind as other school districts move away from textbooks to
these devices:
In addition to that, I am hoping that you might be able to
share some insight as to whether or not the Obama
Administration is willing to coordinate with the Justice
Department to defend the civil rights of these students against
local property tax schemes that will deny them access to the
fundamental right to learn if in fact they don't have access to
these devices. I will reserve the rest of my questions, Mr.
Secretary, and I hope that you will give us an answer.
Thank you, sir.
Secretary Duncan. Really thoughtful question.

NEED TO ENSURE EQUAL ACCESS TO EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY

A couple thoughts, big picture--this move from print to
digital I think is a fantastic move. It will actually save tens
of billions of dollars going forward and will create, I think,
much greater access, particularly in disadvantaged communities.
So this is not a change or transition that we should fight. We
should embrace it. We should accelerate it. But to your point,
it has got to be equitable access.
And I think the savings, particularly to poor districts,
will be very significant going forward. They can direct scarce
resources to this, at a fraction of the cost of what they have
been spending in other areas and engage students, again, 24/7,
not just a couple of hours a day.
We need to continue to move much faster in education.
Education has lagged behind business, lagged behind social
networking in really embracing technology. So I think this is a
very healthy move, but we have got to provide access.
So a couple of thoughts, we have done a tremendous amount,
not just our Department, but the FCC, the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Agriculture, to really increase
broadband access, and whether it is inner city communities or
rural communities, there have been massive investments there to
try and close the digital divide, and we are going to continue
to invest there.
Our e-Rates program, we are looking to provide much more
flexibility there, so folks can use our resources to do that.

EQUITY AND EXCELLENCE COMMISSION

But your fundamental question about inequities we take very
seriously. As you and I know, I lived on the tough side of that
equation, leading the Chicago public schools, and we actually,
in the past couple of weeks, launched an Equity and Excellence
Commission to evaluate these issues. We have some extraordinary
experts from around the country who are going to give me some
very clear recommendations. And I think----

ENSURING EQUITY IN ACCESS TO EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Jackson. Before my time completely expires, and I know
the chairman is honoring the time, I just want to reiterate or
ask the question again: Is the Obama Administration willing to
coordinate with the Justice Department to defend the civil
rights of these students when, and it inevitably will happen,
when these local school districts resist moving in the
direction of providing these students with the access that they
need through these devices? They are going to resist, just as
sure as I am sitting here, and they are going to question
whether or not you have the right to move in the direction of
these devices.
Secretary Duncan. We will always partner with the
Department of Justice to defend students' civil rights.

ESEA REAUTHORIZATION AND BUDGET PRIORITIES

Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Duncan, one of the advantages I have in
going last is having an opportunity to listen to people prior
to my question, and I listened very carefully to Mr.
Alexander's question, and you did not answer it.
The question becomes if ESEA reauthorization is not
completed before our markup, what are you going to do? So I
will ask it in a little different way, but it is an either/or
question, and that is, with Pell Grants that you have built
into your proposal--and you are touting the fact that your
budget increase is a little over 4 percent, which is not
necessarily true when you consider the Pell Grant increases.
And so the question is, would you rather we cut $15.3 billion
from your budget to cover the shortfall in the Pell Grants if
the changes do not occur in the authorizing committees--because
nobody believes they can be done that quickly--or would you
rather we cut the grant amounts?
Secretary Duncan. My choice is neither on those two
choices.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, you don't get that choice, because
unfortunately, we have to make appropriations decisions based
upon authorized legislation that makes it through Congress. And
so there is going to be no choice for us. If the changes do not
occur before Pell Grant funding occurs at the end of this
markup, a choice is going to have to be made. Are you willing
to cut your budget $15.3 billion, or would you rather we cut
the Pell grant awards?
Secretary Duncan. What I want to do is continue to work
with Congress to invest in these critically important areas.

IMPACT OF H.R. 1 ON PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS

Mr. Rehberg. I don't deny that, and I entirely agree with
you. We want the ability, to pay for the Pell Grants. We
certainly want the ability, so before you answer the either or
the or, because it is one or the other, would you share some
information with me then. I have seen reports that are out
there that have so far gone unchallenged that under H.R. 1, 1.7
million students would lose their Pell Grant altogether; is
that true or not?
Mr. Skelly. Mr. Rehberg, our estimate is that, under H.R.
1, that only 10,000 students would lose their Pell Grant
completely. It would be devastating to the over 9 million
students who get Pell. They would all lose at least $845.
Mr. Rehberg. But it was reported that 1.7 million would
lose their grants entirely. That is not correct?
Mr. Skelly. That is not the way the math works.
Mr. Rehberg. We didn't think so either. But so far, that
has gone unchallenged. Okay.

GROWTH IN PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS

So would it be safe to say as well, following on the
Ranking Member's line of questioning, that there are more
people, certainly more people that are entering the Pell arena
because of the economy--unfortunately the failed economic
stimulus that we are having to deal with, but the question then
becomes, are there more people on Pell as a result of an
increase in eligibility as well?
Secretary Duncan. I think there are more people on Pell
because there is an increasing awareness that you have to have
some form of higher education to compete in this global
economy.

ELIGIBILITY CHANGES INCREASE PELL RECIPIENTS

Mr. Rehberg. But the question is, are there more people on
Pell Grants today as a result of a change in Congress in recent
years in eligibility?
Mr. Skelly. Some of the change is due to changes in
eligibility. You had changes in 2007 and 2008 legislation, and
it increased the number of people who would be eligible for
Pell Grants.
Mr. Rehberg. Do you know how many that would be,
approximately?
Mr. Skelly. I know that, since 2008, we have had a large
increase. We have gone up over 50 percent in the number of
recipients.
Mr. Rehberg. So it was about 4.5 million up until that
point, and an additional 4.5 million recipients after the
change in criteria or eligibility?
Mr. Skelly. It went from roughly 6.2 to 9.6 million
recipients.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.

OTHER FACTORS INFLUENCING RISE IN PELL RECIPIENTS

Mr. Skelly. And of the change, about 40 percent of it was
due just to the growth in the number of students. Some of that
related to the economy, growth in schools. About 14 percent of
it was legislative changes in the need analysis formula. About
22 percent was just from this year and the two Pell process
that was legislated in 2008. And another 25 percent of it was
the change in the maximum grant; it was increased by $619.

TOUGH BUDGET CHOICES IF ESEA NOT REAUTHORIZED

Mr. Rehberg. Returning to my prior question, because again,
realistically, it is nice to give us a budget presentation that
shows that you would like the changes that are going to occur
in other committees. Those are the authorizing committees,
which we have no say over. We are strictly the money committee.
Would you rather we cut your budget to cover the shortfall in a
semi-mandatory Pell Grant program, or would you rather we cut
the grant level?
Secretary Duncan. Again, you may not be happy with my
answer. I think Congress and the Administration have to work
together to protect our Nation's students, and Congress should
not let process and procedure get in the way of what is the
right thing to do here.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, process and procedure is called the law.
It is the law of the land. It is the rules that we follow. We
don't have any choice. If something does not make it through
the House, the Senate, the conference committee and get signed
by the President, it doesn't matter what I want or you want. I
want what you want. I am sure the minority wants what you want.
We want what you want, but if we can't do that, we have no
choice; we are going to have to make a decision. And the choice
is, are we going to cut somewhere else within your budget, or
are we going to have to cut the allowable grant level? There is
no choice.
Secretary Duncan. Again, I would say we shouldn't--we
shouldn't put our Nation's young people or the country itself
in that position. I think we as leaders in this country have to
work together to do better.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Welcome, Mr. Secretary.

CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION

Just in general, the concern I have about the budget is
that it seems to be looking toward future students at the
expense of current students. And you mentioned earlier the fact
that we can't find American workers to fill some of these high-
paying tech jobs. And the President himself has given a very
strong emphasis on the need to educate our children in high-
skill, high-demand career fields, such as STEM and other
disciplines that are vital to keeping our Nation competitive in
our global economy.
So I was surprised to learn that funding for career and
technical education has been slashed by $264 million in the
President's budget. This is a program, as you know, that
provides career pathways for high school and college students
in precisely the high-wage, high-skill, high-demand career
fields that the President and that you have been talking about.
And I can attest to the fact that in my own district, I had
students who participated in the program in Downey, in Warren
High School, and as a result, they outperformed their peers in
English and math, boasting a 94 percent proficiency rate in
both subjects and an impressive 97 percent graduation rate. So,
at a time when we are trying to increase high school and
college graduation rates and train our people for high skill
jobs, what is the rationale for cutting this program, which
successfully helps to make students competitive in our world
economy and has also been shown to lower the dropout rate?
Secretary Duncan. No, it is a great question, these have
been very, very tough choices. I will also tell you that when I
managed the Chicago public schools, we did a pretty thorough
analysis of the students involved in our career and technical
education programs. And to your point, we actually saw higher
GPAs and higher graduation rates. So it wasn't just about those
classes; it was really doing something to better engage
students in school overall.
We still have a billion dollar investment there. We made
some very tough decisions. Honestly, as we looked across the
country, we saw some very high-performing CTE programs, and we
saw others that weren't quite getting the results, and they
weren't leading to real jobs and real skills.
And so, given the extraordinary difficult budget climate we
are in, we invest where we must. And our hope is those programs
will increase in quality, and then to come back and increase
our investments. But if you look across the country, the
results have been pretty uneven, and given the very tough
budget times, we want to raise quality and then come back and
increase our investment.

FUNDS FOR FORMULA AND COMPETITIVE GRANTS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Well, I guess that brings me to my next
question because I think that you would agree that now more
than ever school districts need a reliable and sustainable
Federal funding in order to plan for their school year, to keep
teachers in the classroom and to keep school reform efforts on
track.
And since we are not fully funding our formula programs
aimed at helping the poor, I am concerned that your budget
request shows a preference for new competitive grants.
And while I understand and appreciate what you have said
and the Administration's focus on rewarding innovative and
effective programs, my fear is that these competitive grants
will favor school districts with the resources and the capacity
to write grant applications at the expense of those districts
which have the greatest need but have fewer resources and less
expertise in writing these grants. And that is a realistic
concern.
So with school districts struggling just to provide the
basic educational services, is this really the right time to be
increasing funding for new grants, like the Investing in
Innovation Fund and Race to the Top, at the expense of our core
formula programs, like Title I and IDEA.
Secretary Duncan. No, it is a really thoughtful question,
and to be very clear, 84 percent of our budget goes to those
formula programs, and a small percent, 16 percent, goes to the
competitive side. And as you know, we are actually looking for
increases in ESEA, Title I funding and IDEA funding and want to
continue every single year to increase our investments there.

IMPACT OF RACE TO THE TOP COMPETITIVE PROGRAM

At the same time, we can't just do formula funding. We have
to challenge the status quo and get better. And what I would
argue or try to get you to see is that with Race to the Top, it
wasn't about the States that won. It was a change for the
country. So California didn't win, but California is one of 41
States that raised standards. I would argue that having higher
standards, college-encouraged standards, for every child,
particularly disadvantaged children and children of color, has
been desperately missing in this country. We have dummied down
standards. We have lied to children, and we have done the wrong
thing by them.
So a smaller number of States won that money; but 41 States
raised standards; 44 States are working together on better
assessments. About three dozen States created more innovative
opportunities in their States. Every State eliminated their
laws prohibiting the link to student achievement and teacher
evaluation. So it is not just those States that won; 46 States
now have roadmaps for reform, and they are moving forward.
We do want to invest at the district level, and we do want
to have a rural set-aside. We understand those challenges, but
we have to continue not just to fund formulas but to move the
country. And I would argue for a small percent spent, we are
seeing more reform in the past 2 years as a result of Race to
the Top than we have in two decades.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROGRAM CONSOLIDATIONS AND FLEXIBILITY

Mr. Duncan, in your testimony, you said that the
Administration has envisioned a smaller Federal role focused on
key priorities, one would include consolidating those 38
existing programs.
Since 1985, the inflation-adjusted Federal spending on K-12
education has increased by 138 percent. Since 1960, real per-
pupil Federal education expenditures have tripled. However,
since the 1970s, math and reading achievement scores have
remained relatively flat. So could you elaborate to us how the
Department's budget request would achieve the smaller Federal
role in our education system while making tough choices? And
how would this vision decrease many of the burdensome and
ineffective Federal mandates that our local school districts
have to deal with?

FLEXIBILITY TO HELP MEET LOCAL NEEDS

Secretary Duncan. So a couple of thoughts there. First of
all, in very tough budget times, we are trying to provide
maximum flexibility at the State and local level. And in fact,
last week, in a meeting with the Governors, we handed them a
document, which we would be happy to get you, demonstrating the
flexibility that we want to provide to them now, but also
trying to let them understand, if we reauthorized ESEA, how
much more flexibility they will have moving forward.
[The information follows:]

BENEFITS FROM PROPOSED CONSOLIDATION

By consolidating programs, it will make it much easier to
deal with us. And it frees people from that sort of compliance,
so they can focus those scarce resources on the classroom. But
I think what you are hopefully seeing from what our
Administration is trying to do, with a relatively small amount
of money, is get dramatic changes and improvement. And again, I
submit, Race to the Top, with less than 1 percent of overall K-
to-12 spent for the country, to see so many States raising
standards, to see so many States working together on
assessments, to see so many States doing more innovative things
and creating more opportunities for students. From a very small
investment for the country, a massive change. And we want to
continue to encourage and unleash that kind of courageous
behavior around the country.

COMPETITIVENESS OF OLD PROGRAMS WITH NEW PROGRAMS

Mr. Alexander. In your consolidation sheet, some of these
programs that we know about--you know, Even Start for example
has worked great down in the State of Louisiana; Teach for
America, working great in some of the rural areas where
teachers are hard to find to begin with. Can we be assured that
some of these programs, as they are consolidated, the ones that
are effective today can compete for funds against some of the
programs that we don't know are effective?
Secretary Duncan. Absolutely. And I think this is a real
chance for the cream to rise to the top. And where programs are
getting great results and making a difference in students'
lives, we actually want to put more resources behind them, not
less. For example, Teach for America competed in the Investing
in Innovation Fund and won $50 million from us.
Ms. DeLauro. Would the gentleman from Louisiana yield for
one second?
Mr. Alexander. Sure.

PROGRAMS ELIMINATED IN H.R.1

Ms. DeLauro. My understanding is Teach for America, Special
Olympics and Close Up, among others, were eliminated in H.R.1.
They were not consolidated but eliminated in H.R.1. I just
wanted to clarify that.
Secretary Duncan. So, to be clear, they are consolidated in
our budget, not eliminated. But in H.R. 1, they are eliminated.
Ms. DeLauro. In H.R. 1, they are eliminated.
Secretary Duncan. Yes, that is absolutely correct.
Mr. Alexander. Okay, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you, Secretary Duncan.

IMPACT OF A VETO OF CONGRESSIONAL EARMARKS

First of all, let me just say this, there is no doubt that
President Obama's support for and his commitment to education,
your commitment, this Administration's commitment to education
is very evident in the budget, which includes funding for TRIO,
Pell Grants, STEM education and other programs that are really
near and dear to all of us, especially, of course, our
constituents.
However, the President made it very clear in his State of
the Union address that he would veto any spending bills that
included congressionally directed spending, i.e. earmarks.
Now, let me just say this to you, I think I can quantify,
as well as I know members of the Congressional Black Caucus,
can quantify how earmarks have benefitted our districts, which
provide literacy programs and mentoring, after-school tutoring,
technology utilization, safety programs. I could go on and on
and on.
My concern is that these vital educational programs
supported by earmarks are now, if we put them in, of course,
would be vetoed. Now the reality is, though, that the
elimination of earmarks, you know, is not anything new in terms
of the support.
I was just quite surprised that the President recognized
that he supports these communities that don't have the
technical capacity maybe to write these competitive grants, but
who provide these services for our children and who educate our
children. I know he is committed to that. I was surprised that
he would say no more of this.
Secondly, let me just say, and I know this is
controversial, but I know for a fact that in our districts, I
know members of the Congressional Black Caucus' districts,
these earmarks leverage private funding and foundation funding.
So you are talking about a $250,000 or $300,000 earmark that
leverages $1 million, $1.5 million. Now this administration has
really cut that and these organizations that provide these
school services, cut the rug from under them.
And so I am wondering, and we have written to the President
and to the White House, to ask, what do you intend to do to
help backfill these badly needed school programs that now are
lost without this funding?

CHILD POVERTY RATE

Secondly, at the same time, let me just say this, the
President's budget includes an increase for ESEA Title I, but
it is not targeted to those students and schools with the
greatest need, again. Unfortunately, the earmarks had to make
up for these losses, and now we don't even have that. According
to First Focus, from 2008 to 2009, America's children that live
in poverty, mind you, grew by 2 million, or close to 2 million.
In 2009, child poverty rates reached a level of 20.7
percent, which is a rate of more than 1 in 5, totaling 15.5
million children. So this makes it even more important to
target Title I finding via formula grants to the schools with
the greatest needs. So, again, it is a double-whammy. You know,
you are not targeting resources to those schools. You have cut
earmarks where all these badly needed school programs,
supplemented by private and corporate donations, now are gone.
So what do we do in the absence of this? And what do you all
intend to do to backfill these small little earmarks that have
helped our children become educated young people?

PROMISE NEIGHBORHOODS INITIATIVE

Secretary Duncan. So there are a number of different ways
to think about this, I will just give you one example, the
Promise Neighborhoods initiative. So you and I have talked, and
I have visited your schools and know the tremendous need, and
the hard work and leadership that is happening there. I am
going to do everything I can to be supportive. So when you lose
that $300,000 or $400,000 investment and that leverage to a $1
million or $2 million from the outside, that is tough. I
understand that.
Promise Neighborhoods initiative, we have a $150 million
request there. And we want to work in the most distressed
communities, this is not about fancy grant proposals. This is
about going where there is tremendous need. And there is a
chance to bring significantly new resources, additional
resources to our most distressed communities and to increase
that leveraging ability that much more at the local level.

JOINT FEDERAL EFFORT TO HELP CHILDREN IN POVERTY

I also say that I take very, very seriously the concern
about many more children living below the poverty line. And we
can't just do this by ourselves. This is why Head Start, which
goes back to Congressman Flake's question, I think that is why
that is so important to be of high quality, but we have to
provide greater access to children who live below the poverty
line. We have to work with the Department of Agriculture to
increase the nutritional value of meals, because so many of our
children are not eating three or even two meals a day. And I
just want to assure you that, working with HHS, and working
with HUD, working with the Department of Agriculture, we have
to holistically think about how we support those children in
poverty.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Secretary, I appreciate your response and I
appreciate what you are doing, but let me just say these
educational programs and school programs do not really have
lobbyists here. They do not have the technical capacity to
write these grants. They educate children. They fill the holes
that the public school system has left in terms of the void
because of disinvestment of our minority children. And so I
still don't understand how you are going to backfill these
millions of dollars that have been lost because of the
elimination of earmarks.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.

CONSOLIDATION AND PROGRAM ELIMINATION PROPOSALS

Mr. Flake. Thank you, let me get back to the request for
funding for new programs and authorized programs here. You
recommend consolidation of certain programs. That is laudable.
That is often recommended and rarely done. I would be willing
to guess and bet that this time next year, we will be talking
about more programs, the addition of new programs, but the
consolidation or getting rid of some of these programs, we just
do not see it very often. Why should we have the confidence
that that is really going to happen, if we are talking about
new programs being created that seem to duplicate some of the
programs that we are consolidating or getting rid of?
Secretary Duncan. So we are absolutely committed to doing
this. We did it in the 2011 budget. And again, all I can ask is
that you look at our track record and look at our integrity,
and we are asking Congress for the right to do this. And so we
are absolutely committed to consolidating 38 to 11. We are
absolutely committed to eliminating 13 that don't work. And we
want to invest in those things that have the highest leverage
to make the greatest difference in students lives.
And again, hopefully, you see the way we have worked, that
every single day we are trying to challenge the status quo, in
which our country has an unacceptable dropout rate, in which
our country has gone from first to tenth in the world in
college graduates. We look at international results, the
Program for International Student Assessment, PISA results,
where our children are lagging significantly behind children in
other countries. We have to do much better, and that is our
only focus.

ARPA-EDUCATION

Mr. Flake. Let me get back to this Advanced Research
Projects Agency. You are seeking $50 million, and let me just
read from your request: In addition to the $50 million in
discretionary funding for ARPA-ED, the Administration is
seeking $40 million in mandatory funding from the Wireless
Innovation Fund to support the improvement of early childhood
through postsecondary education through the mandatory
appropriation for the Fund of Improvement of Education. The
Wireless Innovation Fund will be financed by the sale of
spectrum bands by the FCC, and its main purpose is to spur
innovation and the use of wireless technology.
Do you have any estimate of how much money is currently
being invested by the private sector in wireless technology?
Secretary Duncan. I don't have it for the country. I don't
think there has been enough investment or enough R&D in the
education space. And again, we are trying to spur that
innovation.

EDUCATION WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY--TECHBOSTON

Mr. Flake. What is the difference between wireless
technology for the education space and every other space?
Secretary Duncan. I want us delivering content to students
24/7. The President and I visited a fantastic high school
earlier this week in Boston, TechBoston, where students are
getting their assignments on cell phones.
Mr. Flake. But how is that a limitation of the current
wireless technology? I can tell you, there are literally tens
of billions of dollars being invested every year by the private
sector in wireless technology, or something like that. And I
fail to see how this education space is any different than any
other business application. And to spend $40 million in
taxpayer dollars in a tight budget environment so we can direct
funding in chosen industries or chosen businesses or whatever
else, just seems to me a colossal waste of resources.

DEFENSE-ARPA--THE INTERNET

Secretary Duncan. Let me just challenge you a little bit,
the investment in DARPA led to the creation of the Internet.
Mr. Flake. Well, let me just say that I don't think anybody
has any confidence that the Department of Education through the
use of taking--remember, you have to take it out of productive
market-based capital allocation. Government takes it and then
gives out grants in this fashion, through the Department of
Education, where we have conceded that there are literally
dozens of programs that we are consolidating and getting rid of
because they haven't worked well, how anybody should have any
confidence that this is going to be money well spent, I just
don't see it.
Secretary Duncan. What is your analysis of what DARPA has
spent over the years and whether that investment has been
worthwhile?
Mr. Flake. That is miles away from what we are talking
about here with the Department of Education. I think when you
want to talk track records, then let's talk track records. And
then somebody would point out specifically, how in the world
can we see, when you are talking about going from first to
tenth in college graduates and everything else, all this has
happened since we have invested so much at the Federal level in
education. So track records, if you want to look at track
records, we will, but it is not pretty, and so that is my
concern here. That is my concern.

USING TECHNOLOGY FOR CHANGE IN EDUCATION

Secretary Duncan. I hear your concern. I would just
challenge you that we are seeing this massive transformation in
almost every other sector of our society using technology that
hasn't translated into change in how we educate our children.
And I think if we can do that, we will save huge sums of money
going forward and we will do a much better job of teaching our
children. The children I saw at TechBoston were engaged in
phenomenal ways. That has to become the norm, not the
exception. And we have to spread those best practices.
Mr. Flake. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. I want to apologize, Mr. Secretary, but
Secretary Clinton is across the hall and--busy day.

EDUCATION CUTS IN 7-MONTH 2011 CONTINUING RESOLUTION

Thank you very much for your service. And let me first say
that I wholeheartedly agree with you and President Obama that
while we must exercise restraint--no one wants waste, and I can
give you a long list of places where there is waste, not here--
it is penny wise and pound foolish to slash education spending.
If we want to be a global leader, we must educate our
workforce.
And that is why I am so dismayed with the draconian cuts
that the Republicans have sought in the 7-months fiscal year
2011 CR.
Let me provide a quick example of how it would hurt New
York. One of the largest school districts in my district, New
Rochelle, had around 2,000 employees a year ago. After a round
of budget cuts last year and the forecast of additional cuts
this year, it may end up losing nearly 10 percent of its
workforce. The Governor has proposed a $1.5 billion reduction
in education spending. And if the shortsighted CR were to
become law, New Rochelle would lose an additional 5 percent of
its ESEA Title I funding and IDEA.
It doesn't make sense. Because of these cuts, the school is
forced to lay off teachers, eliminate curricula. The House
Republican CR hurts education from cradle to grave. Graduation,
here is what to expect if the Republicans have their way--and I
am hoping we can work in a bipartisan way and work it out--
200,000 fewer children enrolled in Head Start; an end to
quality education and news programming through public
broadcasting. School districts and community organizations
would lose billions in after school, TRIO, Title I, IDEA
funding. College students would have their Pell Grants
decreased. To me, this is unacceptable. We cannot win the next
century by decimating the initiatives we need to ensure today's
students will become tomorrow's entrepreneurs and innovators.

21ST CENTURY COMMUNITY LEARNING CENTERS PROGRAM

Now, I don't know if anybody, and I apologize, spoke about
after-school? Good. Because that has been a real priority of
mine. I remember when we worked in a bipartisan way to make
sure our kids had after-school programs. I strongly support
after-school education. And I am appreciative of the $100
million increase you proposed for the 21st Century Community
Learning Centers Program. This is in stark contrast to the $100
million cuts the Republicans propose in the fiscal year 2011
CR.
Can you tell us how many fewer students and families would
lose after-school programs if the 21st Century Community
Learning Centers program were cut by $100 million?
Secretary Duncan. Well, that $100 million would represent
close to a 10 percent cut. So that is the impact it would have.
And I'll just say quickly that I got my start in education as
part of my mother's after-school program, so this is in my DNA.
And this idea of a school being open 6 hours a day, 5 days a
week, just doesn't work. It doesn't work for two-parent working
families. It does not work for a single mom trying to work two
or three jobs trying to make ends meet. It does not work where
you have no parents at home. And I just fundamentally believe
our schools should be open 12, 13, 14 hours a day, with a wide
variety of after-school programming. Academic enrichment being
the core, but GED, ESL, family literacy nights, health care
clinics. The more our schools become like full-service schools
in absolutely serving the community and serving as the
community anchors, where families are learning together, our
children are going to do very, very well. I just don't think we
can get where we need to go as a country engaging our students
in these schools 6 hours a days.
Mrs. Lowey. I want to support exactly what you have said,
because I have been to another part--I have been all over my
district, but the Port Chester schools, that has a very diverse
population. Frankly the parents come in; the kids come in. They
work together. They work on their studies. They really need
these after-school programs. This is not an arbitrary request.

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHEMATICS

One of my priorities is STEM education. Not only do we need
to provide training for new STEM teachers. Current teachers
need to improve and maintain up-to-date skills. Quickly, how
does the request help our country's standing in STEM fields?
Secretary Duncan. Very, very significant investment in STEM
fields. We do a couple things, to better train the current crop
of teachers, to recruit--the President challenged us to recruit
100,000 new teachers into the STEM fields moving forward. We
want to continue to expand access through increasing access to
alternative certification programs. And we also have
significant college scholarships for folks who want to enter
the STEM field. So trying to work on both the future teachers
and expand that pipeline as well as provide much better support
for existing teachers.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam Ranking Member.
Thank you for your indulgence.

SPECIAL OLYMPICS AND EARMARKS

Mr. Rehberg. Welcome, it is good to have you.
Mr. Duncan, the Obama Administration made the statement
that they were going to veto legislation coming out of this
Congress that has an earmark. The Special Olympics was an
earmark, and we took it out. Would he have vetoed that bill if
we had not taken that earmark out?
Secretary Duncan. Again, I am not the President, but I will
say that----
Mr. Rehberg. Do you stand by his decision, though, not to
support earmarks?
Secretary Duncan. Well, we have to continue to support the
Special Olympics. They do a fantastic job.
Ms. DeLauro. If the gentleman would yield. It is an
authorized program. The Special Olympics is an authorized
program.
Mr. Rehberg. Reclaiming my time. I didn't identify it as an
earmark. This committee did. Your chairman, Mr. Obey, did. And
we were just taking the recommendation of the last Congress
that it was, in fact, an earmark.

EVEN START AND PROPOSED CONSOLIDATIONS

Even Start was suggested for elimination by this
administration, correct, by the Obama Administration?
Secretary Duncan. We are looking to consolidate programs
and put them into larger funding pools, yes.
Mr. Rehberg. So the elimination of Even Start by this
Congress was supported by the Obama Administration?
Secretary Duncan. What we are trying to do, again, is to
consolidate programs----
Mr. Rehberg. That is not my question. The question was,
Even Start was identified by this administration for
elimination. Did you agree with or support that decision to
eliminate Even Start?
Secretary Duncan. We are trying to consolidate small,
fractured programs and put them into larger funding streams.

IMPACT AND PAYMENTS BACKLOG

Mr. Rehberg. I have received information from my district
and other districts around the country on the slow payment of
Impact Aid dollars, including one entity down in Arizona that
we have not verified yet--we will--that are suggesting they are
going to have to shut their doors because they have not
received their Impact Aid. In the case of my situation, I am
hearing there is as much as 3 years in arrears. What is the
problem? The money is there. We have the money. The money has
been appropriated. Is it an accounting problem?
Secretary Duncan. No, it is a really fair question. We are
working with a backlog that went back to actually 2006, of over
4,000 of these claims. And that backlog from 2006 to 2008 of
4,000 that we inherited is cleaned up. All of those payments
have been made. And so we are still working to move forward
from that point and expedite----
Mr. Rehberg. So what would be the oldest?
Secretary Duncan. I don't think there should be anything--
we cleaned up everything through 2008, and we are working very
rapidly--through 2009, I apologize.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Secretary Duncan. We are working rapidly. And if there is a
situation, we would look at it, but we inherited a mess there.
And frankly, I give our staff a lot of credit for having them
move very rapidly to clean up some of these claims that are as
much as 5 years old. That is unacceptable, and we have to do
better.

USE OF RECOVERY ACT ``STIMULUS'' APPROPRIATIONS

Mr. Rehberg. I assume you take your direction from the
Administration of the head office. Would you provide us with
information showing that the stimulus dollars that were
provided through the economic stimulus plan gave the agency's
authority to then come back and build programs based upon the
stimulus dollars?
My understanding of the stimulus was that it was intended
to be a one-time event. And so if I am under a misunderstanding
that stimulus dollars were intended to be for ongoing programs
or that programs would be built upon or in anticipation of
there being follow-on dollars, I would like to have that
provided to the committee as well.
Secretary Duncan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay, thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

Recovery Act Funding

The Department has urged States and school districts to use funds
from the America Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Recovery Act)
consistent with these four guiding principles: (1) spend funds quickly
to save and create jobs; (2) improve student achievement through school
improvement and reform; (3) ensure transparency, reporting, and
accountability; and (4) invest one-time Recovery Act funds thoughtfully
to minimize the ``funding cliff.'' In our program-specific guidance,
the Department has consistently noted that the Act provides a one-time
infusion of new resources that should be invested in ways that do not
result in unsustainable continuing commitments after funding expires.
That said, the Recovery Act authorizes new programs--such as the
Race to the Top and Investing in Innovation programs--for which the
Congress can provide subsequent appropriations. Recognizing the impact
they are having on accelerating the pace of education reform in States
and localities, the Administration's fiscal year 2012 request includes
new funding for these programs, which we propose to codify in
authorizing statute through the reauthorization of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act.

Ms. DeLauro.

PROGRAMS NOT INCLUDED IN THE CONTINUING RESOLUTION

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Once again, Even Start, Teach for
America, Close Up, and Special Olympics are all authorized
programs. We live or die here by programs that are authorized
or not.
Mr. Flake had a question about and others had a question
about unauthorized programs. These are authorized programs.
Even Start, as a result of the 2-week C.R., the Continuing
Resolution, that we are currently living under, has been in
effect killed. And I would just say to Mr. Alexander that I
share your view about the benefits of the Even Start program
and the incorporation of parents in the education of their
children.

STIMULUS FUNDING

Just a clarification before I get on to my question, the
economic recovery program was a response to the recession, to
massive unemployment. We were looking at losing 700,000 jobs a
month about 2 years ago. We have seen that 192,000 mostly
private sector jobs were created last month, and we are
beginning to see some small glimmer of recovery, but in fact,
it is not making its way down to most of the people in this
Nation.

PELL GRANT REDUCTION IN CONTINUING RESOLUTION

An $845 reduction in the Pell Grant, as has been said,
takes us back 38 years in terms of the cost of what education
is today. And what we are doing by this is making it almost a
fait accompli that education becomes a purview of the rich and
not middle class families, who with the help of Pell Grants are
being able to take advantage of getting skills so that they can
succeed.

LITERACY FUNDING--STRIVING READERS PROGRAM

Let me move on to another area which is of real importance
to me, and that is literacy. We have more than two-thirds of
the Nation's 4th, 8th, 12th graders scoring below proficient on
the National Assessment of Educational Progress.
Congress seeks to address this through the Striving Readers
program, which was moving forward by helping 46 States put
statewide literacy teams in place, standing ready to implement
the program. Again, the House majority stripped away all the
funding for the Striving Readers program in 2011. They have
proposed to reach back and rescind the funds remaining from
last year's appropriation. State literacy teams are now
waiting. In addition to which, as we just had this discussion,
the targeted funding for literacy in the budget has all been
eliminated. If you can't read, you can't do anything, you have
little chance for success.
Mr. Secretary, your budget proposes to fold existing
literacy programs, like Striving Readers, into a new
consolidated effort to invest Federal resources in helping
States to improve the reading skills of their students.

FUNDAMENTAL IMPORTANCE OF LITERACY SUPPORT

Can you talk about the importance of contributing Federal
funds to strengthening literacy in our Nation's schools? What
impact we can expect from this approach of the majority to
strip away all of the targeted literacy funding that is
essential? As a Nation how we can go back on the commitment to
literacy is absolutely, I believe, unacceptable and it is
irresponsible if we are going to make our way to long-term
economic growth.
Secretary Duncan. So if you ask why so many students drop
out of high school, it is because many have struggled to read.
And when they drop out of high school, they are basically
condemned to poverty and social failure. There are no good jobs
out there for dropouts. So we have to continue to invest in
literacy. It is fundamental. It is foundational. If we teach
our children to read and to love to read and to be able to
comprehend what they are reading and to be able to express
their ideas verbally on paper, I am very confident about what
they can accomplish in life. And if we don't do those things
well, Congresswoman, basically nothing else we do matters. It
is that critically important to helping our students fulfill
their academic and social potentials.

CONNECTION BETWEEN PARENT LITERACY AND STUDENT SUCCESS

Ms. DeLauro. It is a Nation going backwards in terms of
literacy instead of forward. I just want to mention to this
committee, a recently released NIH research effort identified a
scientifically significant connection between the educational
level of parents and the school success of their children. In
light of this--understanding the role that parents play in the
education of their children--I want to ask you, Mr. Secretary
about how you are going to connect parents in terms of the
education of their children and particularly about low literacy
skills and limited English proficiency.
Secretary Duncan. Parents have to be full and equal
partners in their children's education. We think we have
underinvested in parental engagement and parental
participation. And we are actually looking to try and double
funding there. We think parents have to be in those schools
helping students. It is part of the answer, and teachers cannot
do this by themselves.

BUDGET INCREASE FOR PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT

Ms. DeLauro. Where in the budget would we find those
dollars that talk about parents----
Secretary Duncan. It is an increase in parental engagement
from--the request is from about $140 million to $280 million.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. No.

BUDGET PROPOSES ESEA REAUTHORIZATION, CONSOLIDATIONS

Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Duncan, let me ask you, Striving Readers
program, that was also slated by the Administration for
consolidation or elimination?
Secretary Duncan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. So this Congress did exactly what you
asked it to do.
Secretary Duncan. Again, we are trying to consolidate
multiple funding streams that make it very difficult to deal
with the Federal bureaucracy and get scarce resources----
Mr. Rehberg. Does that consolidation require an action by
an authorizing committee? The Appropriations Committee doesn't
get to consolidate programs; we just get to figure out how to
pay for it.
Mr. Skelly. Consolidation is sought in the proposed budget,
and we would like to have all of ESEA reauthorized this year.
Mr. Rehberg. It is inside the budget, so it is in
anticipation that it will be done in the authorizing
committees. So, once again, my question is, if the authorizing
committees both in the House and Senate are unable to complete
their work in time, and have a new ESEA bill signed by the
President what are we supposed to do?
Mr. Skelly. The Administration is going to work with
Congress on this, but Congress, you guys are the experts in
your process in how you do things. Our budget proposed that we
would have this consolidation and we hope you would get to it
in time.
Mr. Rehberg. So you are okay, then, with us cutting the
budget; if the consolidation doesn't occur, we can go ahead and
reduce this account by that subsequent amount?
Secretary Duncan. If Congress doesn't act, a program like
Striving Readers would be kept in the meantime.

SCHOOL TURNAROUND, RESTART, CLOSURE, TRANSFORMATION MODELS

Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Let me ask you a question about your
programs, your four categories for school improvement. I know
you have been to Montana, and I know you are well familiar with
our Native American school situation. I also heard you say that
you wanted to move away from a one-size-fits-all, but we just
feel that you replaced it with four sizes fit all.
Let me ask you, on the transformational category, which
about 71 percent of the schools that are currently receiving
grants are in that transformational process, that is the firing
of the principal--is that what transformation means? I was
trying to identify which category within the four each was. And
I saw in the materials that 71 percent of the grants are going
to transformational schools. Is that the firing of the
principal?
Secretary Duncan. It depends on the situation. If that
principal has been there for a long time and hasn't moved the
school forward, it would mean that. If that principal has been
there a short amount of time and is part of an existing
transformation movement, he would not be removed.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. If we are talking about a school that is
in noncompliance and it had been identified for a period of
years, and they fired a principal. They received the grant.
What is the end game? Does that principal have 1 year to
succeed, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years?
Secretary Duncan. No, we are in this for the long haul.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, that is what I am trying to understand;
what is the long haul? What is the end game? I understand the
children are the end game, but as far as your four categories,
I am trying to make it work for rural America. How long does
that principal have before, if they don't conform, they are
kicked out, and we start this all over again?
Secretary Duncan. This has nothing to do with conforming
and not conforming. What we did through this program is we
challenged the country to take those bottom 5 percent of
schools, not the 95 percent, the bottom 5 percent, the 1 in 20
where it simply wasn't working for children, and we challenged
the country to stop tinkering around the edges and to stop
perpetuating the status quo in which children were being poorly
served by those schools.

RURAL SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT GRANTS

I am very cognizant of rural concerns, I have spent lots of
time talking about them. It is very interesting, rural schools
constituted about 19 percent of the potential pool of schools
eligible for turnaround grants, and they actually received 23,
24 percent of the funding. So they were disproportionately
represented. They found ways to make this work. And we have
been very encouraged with that participation and those results.
I was, frankly, pleasantly very surprised. I was worried we
would not have enough rural schools competing. And they were
actually disproportionately represented in the number of
schools receiving money through school improvements grants.

EDUCATION BUDGET BASED ON CURRENT LAW

Mr. Rehberg. Okay. You know, this being my first
opportunity to chair a subcommittee. I have chaired
appropriations subcommittees at the State level, but never at
the Federal level, so this is frankly new to me. And I don't
know if I am going to ask you to do something that is not
standard, but would you present a budget based upon current
law? That is all we ask, current law, because the law hasn't
changed. The law probably will not change before we have to do
a markup. I am asking you, will you present a budget to us
based upon current law?
Mr. Skelly. Last year we had a similar situation, and we
did propose sort of an alternative or fallback of what would be
the most important thing, the highest priorities within----
Mr. Rehberg. Well, I am asking you to present to this
subcommittee a budget based upon current law--not a sort of,
not based upon your best priorities. If we are going to have to
make decisions based upon the current law, I need a budget so
that I can see what your priorities are and not try and guess
it, or we are going to make those determinations, and we are
going to get yelled at by the minority. So I am asking you to
present to this committee a budget based upon current law.
Thank you.
I think Mr. Dicks is next.
Welcome, nice to have you. I never served on a committee
with you before.
Mr. Dicks. Well, Mr. Rehberg, it is nice to be with you.
Montana and Washington are close. You went to Washington
State----
Mr. Rehberg. You had to say that.
Mr. Dicks. You beat us twice in basketball. So it has been
a bad year.
Mr. Rehberg. No, it has been a good year.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you. I do want to congratulate you on
becoming chairman.
And to our Ranking Member, Rosa DeLauro, who does so much
and is such an effective member.

NUMBERS OF CHILDREN, STUDENTS IMPACTED BY BUDGET CUTS

In your opinion, given the dire circumstances facing State
and local governments, what does your Department project will
be the impact of the Federal budget cuts on local educational
agencies? How will they deal with $690 million less in Title I,
more than $330 million cut in school improvement grants, $1
billion less in Head Start funding? We are looking at a loss of
8 percent in the education budget. How will this lack of
financial resources hurt our children in public schools?
Secretary Duncan. So in a time when we have to get
dramatically better education and in fact get better faster
than we ever have, it would be a very significant step in the
wrong direction. On the ESEA Title I cuts, that means as many
as a million poor children would lose access to educational
services.
Mr. Dicks. A million?
Secretary Duncan. Yes, nearly a million young children. On
the School Improvement grants, it would be more than 250,000
children who have had historically very poor educational
options, who are now getting better ones, would lose that. A $1
billion cut to Head Start would mean about 216,000, again low-
income children, who desperately need to get off to a good
start in life, would lose access. And on the Pell Grant cut, as
Congresswoman DeLauro mentioned, as many as 8 million; 8
million young people would see their Pell Grants cut. I would
worry desperately about what percent of those would then have
to leave college.
Mr. Dicks. And there is no question that Head Start and
these programs have been very effective and help the children.
And there is a backlog, right? We are not still taking care of
all the children that would like to be in a Head Start program;
isn't that correct?
Secretary Duncan. Quality early childhood education
programs are arguably the best long-term investment that our
country, our society can make.

IMPACT AID BACKLOG

Mr. Dicks. Let me ask you, on another matter, Impact Aid,
which is an issue in Washington State, I think it is probably
in Montana as well. I have been told, and I didn't realize
this, that it takes years and years for the Impact Aid money to
actually get to the school district. Can you explain why that
is?
Secretary Duncan. The chairman asked me about that, and
when we came here, this administration inherited a backlog that
went back to 2006, over 4,000 cases. I am pleased to report to
you, Congressman, that all 4,000 of those have been resolved up
through 2009. It was a mess, and our staff has worked very,
very hard. We are never going to go back to those days, and we
will continue trying to expedite the more recent claims. But
yes, there was a backlog that went back 5 years.

IMPACT OF FEDERAL BUDGET CUTS ON PELL RECIPIENTS

Mr. Dicks. You mentioned Pell Grants. What is the number,
how many students will be affected? Is it 8,000, is that the
number, who would have gotten the maximum grant and that will
be reduced?
Secretary Duncan. No, it is about 8 million that would see
their----
Mr. Dicks. Eight million.
Secretary Duncan. Eight million Pell Grants reduced by $845
each, and about 10,000----
Mr. Skelly. Ten thousand.
Secretary Duncan. Ten thousand would completely lose access
to Pell Grants, but 8 million would be touched. As I mentioned
earlier, more than half of the people who drop out of college
today do so for financial reasons. They are trying to do the
right thing. They are trying to take that next step, but
because they simply can't afford it, that is the largest
reason, the majority reason why people leave school today. So a
further cut in access, I think it would be devastating.

IMPACT OF FEDERAL BUDGET CUTS ON HIGH SCHOOL COMPLETION

Mr. Dicks. What about the fact that one-third of the high
school students are dropping out of school now? Do we have a
program to address that issue? I am familiar with the Youth
Challenge program at the National Guard. I worked on it. Do we
need do more to help these dropouts? How will they be affected?
Secretary Duncan. Well, couple things. We have to stop the
pipeline of dropouts first of all. Again, that is where these
school Improvement grants are so important, where we are
investing in radically different ideas of what those schools
can do and seeing huge results.
The President and I, with former Governor of Florida Jeb
Bush, were in Miami last Friday in a school that a year ago had
huge problems, and we are seeing remarkable progress. And so we
have to stop the dropout factories, and we have to have a
safety net of alternative programs and alternative schools for
those who do drop out and want to come back in.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS EFFECT ON IMPACT AID PAYMENTS

I just would say one thing, we also understand Impact Aid
has a problem under CRs, that somehow I guess they don't do
anything--I don't understand maybe why that is, but could you
explain that?
Mr. Skelly. Impact Aid is one of our current funded
programs. We give out money as the fiscal year goes on. We are
through----
Mr. Dicks. Halfway.
Mr. Skelly. Just over, 45 percent. So we can give them 45
percent of the annual level funds, but we can't give the school
districts all the money, and some of them are counting on that
to finalize their expenditures.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you for explaining that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. You bet.

PROPOSAL TO ELIMINATE SECOND (SUMMER) PELL GRANT

I have listened now to many members talking about the
devastation, including you used the word devastation, of the
cuts in Pell Grants. I am confused. I thought part of your new
consolidation and elimination and your grand plan within the
Pell Grant was to cut Pell Grants from two in a year to one.
Wouldn't that be more devastating to the student to lose the
$5,550 in grant aid for a second semester within 1 year?
Secretary Duncan. No, actually, it does not cut Pell Grants
for a second semester; it is just for the summer. They can
actually use existing Pell Grants over the summer. So it is a
cut, Mr. Chairman, that obviously is not one that we wanted to
do or look forward to doing, but again, given the tough budget
climate, we had to make tough decisions. And we thought by far
the better investment was to support the existence of Pell
Grants for all students rather than provide a second Pell Grant
for some who already have access--we thought maintaining that
access to $5,550 for all was the right thing to do.
Mr. Rehberg. Have you anticipated how many people that
would include, or how many that would affect?
Secretary Duncan. Oh, yeah, we know how many it would
affect. And again, we----
Mr. Rehberg. Do you want to share that with us?
Mr. Skelly. About 10 percent of all the Pell recipients in
2009; 10 percent got a second Pell Grant and we think that
would grow in the future.
Mr. Rehberg. So that would be almost a million students
would be affected, versus the 10,000 that are going to be,
going to be affected by the $845 reduction----
Secretary Duncan. No, no, not 10,000. It is 9 million would
be affected by the $845 reduction. So, again, these are very
tough calls.
Mr. Rehberg. I understand the $845 is across the board; it
goes from top to bottom, so those that are receiving $5,550 are
going to see an $845 reduction. And it is on down the sliding
scale. I clearly understand that. I am suggesting that by not
going to the second Pell, it is going to affect what, a
100,000----
Mr. Skelly. No, no, 900,000.
Mr. Rehberg. Nine hundred thousand students. So your
suggested reduction in Pell affects 900,000 students that won't
get any grant----
Secretary Duncan. No, no, no, sir, you are
misunderstanding.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Then I am misunderstanding.
Secretary Duncan. They will get--what we are trying to do
is make sure they get the one grant of $5,550.
Mr. Rehberg. Correct, but they can't get a second grant.
Secretary Duncan. They cannot get a second one in the same
year.
Mr. Rehberg. Correct. Which was the change that was made to
try to get kids through college quicker, to make space for the
next group of kids coming through. And I use kids loosely, I
know there are many that are nontraditional students who are
going through as well; is that correct?
Secretary Duncan. So, again, sir----
Mr. Rehberg. By not granting the second grant, it is
slowing down the----
Secretary Duncan. Well, we are hoping it wouldn't slow
down. And again, our primary focus was on supporting the 9
million and making sure we don't see massive dropouts because
of that.

ALLEGATIONS OF MISCONDUCT IN STUDENT AID

Mr. Rehberg. Okay, let me shift gears real quickly. I was
following Mr. Coburn's conversation in the Senate last week
about short sellers. And having been involved in the markets in
the cattle business, I have a pretty good understanding of what
occurs. And there is always this belief or feeling or fear that
there is something nefarious going on within the markets that
manipulate prices and such.
Did that occur, the short selling in the for-profit area?
And I have seen some of the conversation that occurred with
conversations. I would like to know your involvement of what
you know; have you been briefed on short selling?
Secretary Duncan. I have never talked to a short seller, I
don't have your financial acumen. We have one interest, and
that is making sure more young people graduate from college
successful.
Mr. Rehberg. So you are not aware of any conversations that
occurred within the Department of Education nor any under
secretary or deputy secretaries or any--
Secretary Duncan. We have zero sense that anything bad went
on, and we have asked the IG to investigate. And we look
forward to a speedy resolution.
Mr. Rehberg. So you have had conversation on it?
Secretary Duncan. Absolutely. We have asked the IG to take
a very serious look at any allegations. We take it seriously. I
would just ask you to look at our track record to date, and I
don't think you will find one instance where folks in our
leadership team have done anything in self interest or not in
the interest----
Mr. Rehberg. And I am not suggesting they are. I am just
suggesting the issue has been raised and--
Secretary Duncan. The issue has been raised, and we have
asked in every one of these situations, we have asked for a
thorough investigation.
Mr. Rehberg. And you will share that with this committee?
Secretary Duncan. Absolutely.
And if anything is found, we will absolutely address it.
But I will just say I can speak to you with absolute confidence
today that I don't think there is a thing there.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Mr. Chairman, let me also associate myself
with the news report and the concerns that have been raised
about short selling and get a little bit of clarity on that,
and then I want to go back to a point that I raised earlier.
So there is absolutely no truth that senior Department
officials communicated with short sellers from FrontPoint or
CPMG to discuss the Department's gainful employment
regulations. Is that what you are saying?
Secretary Duncan. I don't have all the details. We are
having a thorough investigation. So a thirty-party IG will look
at it, but there is nothing that I am aware of where folks
would have profited personally by anything we are doing. I have
zero awareness of anything close to that.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.

POTENTIAL MOVE TO E-DEVICES FOR TEXTBOOKS

I want to go back to a question that I raised earlier,
because in perfect candor, I expect massive resistance in these
tough economic times to moving school districts across the
country to an equitable textbookless system that provides every
child with a modern textbook or some form of e-device that
allows them to stay current in time of news information as well
as their textbooks. They simply don't have the money. And if
they are minority, it will be even more complicated. The idea
of taxing the haves to get more resources for school districts
that have nothing or have little is an uphill struggle.
So I want to make clear what I think I heard you say, and
please tell me if I didn't hear you say it, that the Department
of Education will coordinate with the Justice Department to
ensure that school districts will not deny modern textbooks to
students; is that correct?
Secretary Duncan. Again, as I said earlier we have always
partnered with the Department of Justice. Our Office of Civil
Rights I think has done an extraordinary job over the past 2
years, has been reinvigorated, and when we see civil rights
being violated, we step in, in a heartbeat.

ENSURING EQUITABLE ACCESS TO E-DEVICE TEXTBOOKS

Mr. Jackson. Sixty million kids are about to enter your
public school system across the country. And those 60 million
kids are heading into an e-bookless or e-device environment
where most of their textbooks are simply going to be wiped out
in a very short period of time. And I want to make sure I am
being clear: The Department of Education's position will be
that it will be on the side of ensuring that every single child
in that environment will have the appropriate technology to
participate in the modern education world.
Secretary Duncan. Let me just take a couple steps further.
So you say districts won't have the money; it is interesting. I
think this is actually going to save districts money. Districts
are spending lots of money now on textbooks. I think this is a
much more effective, much more efficient way to spend. It is a
matter of reallocation. And so they cannot continue to spend
the old way and spend the new way. And so they have to make
real clear decisions there. But I think you will find less
pressure on strained districts' budgets moving forward by being
much more efficient in this area.
And just to be clear, we look at not just access here, but
access to AP classes, access to college prep curriculum. Where
we see disparate discipline, where we see disproportionate
numbers of African-American and Latino young boys being
suspended, we will challenge that status quo. And so we want to
make sure children have a chance to fulfill their potential.
Mr. Jackson. And therefore, the Department of Education and
the Justice Department would then, I would imagine, or through
your Department of civil rights, but probably the Justice
Department, would then be prepared in the event that a school
district resists moving school children in that direction to
bring the appropriate legal actions under historical statutes?
I mean, it is clear to me that if I offered a proposal in
this Congress or in a debate over the budget between Democrats
and Republicans about providing a modern education for 60
million children, which includes one of these devices, that I
am not going to be able to squeeze any blood out of this
turnip. So I am preparing to go the legal route, based upon
historical precedence, to ensure that every single child and
every single school district has access.
Now that is where this is headed. It is clear because it is
not coming from the Congress and not likely to come from the
President's proposal. But I want to make sure that the Justice
Department is going to be on the side of these kids in the
event of such an action.
Secretary Duncan. I appreciate that. And again, we just
launched this commission that I have a lot of respect for, and
I will make sure this commission is looking specifically at
this issue, of this new way, this transformative way of
delivering instruction and content to young people.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
If it rains any more, I won't see you any more down there.
Mrs. Lummis, welcome to the committee. If you have a
question or if you would like to wait, I will ask one, go back
to the Democrat side, and then ask you.
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Chairman, thank you, if you would be so
kind as to go back to the Democrat side.
Mr. Rehberg. I will go to me first, then I will go to the
Democrat side.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. All right. Great.

EDUCATION JOBS SAVED THROUGH STIMULUS FUNDING

If I remember correctly, and again, I don't know if it was
your initiative or whose initiative it was, recommended to us
last August a $10 billion emergency appropriation. And I am
always interested in what the definition of stimulus is because
my definition would be timely, and it would be targeted, and it
would be transparent, and it would be temporary. And so far, a
lot of that has not occurred. It was not necessarily targeted
to something that would be stimulative to the economy, so
frankly, it failed.
The definition was changed, of course, to jobs created to
jobs created and saved. But we don't need to have that
discussion today because I think the proof is out in the
marketplace of America's political opinion, and that is, where
are the jobs?
So the question is of the edu-jobs, the $10 billion that
was so desperately needed so quickly, if I remember the reports
correctly from recently, that 20 of the States haven't spent
even 5 percent of their appropriated dollars and that only $2.5
billion of the $10 billion has been spent. So, again, what was
the rush? Where was the timeliness that was so absolutely
critical to get out to save these jobs? And how does that fit
into creating the economy that then is going to fund the rest
of your budget as a result of an economy that hasn't turned
around enough to pay for all of the requests that we are
getting.
Secretary Duncan. So if you look at the Recovery Act and
edu-jobs together, we have saved a couple hundred thousand
teacher jobs around the country. And we can give you and are
happy to provide to you State By State----
Mr. Rehberg. Saved permanently?
Secretary Duncan. Well, I don't know if it is for the next
50 years.
Mr. Rehberg. Really? Two years, 3 years, 4 years?
Secretary Duncan. We saved north of 300,000 teacher jobs
where those teachers would have been in the unemployment lines
rather than in classrooms.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.

EDUCATION JOBS SAVED BY STIMULUS FUNDS--STATE BY STATE DATA

Secretary Duncan. And we will give you State-by-State data
demonstrating what we did there. I think, had we seen in these
very tough economic times a couple hundred thousand teachers in
the unemployment lines, not able to make car payments and not
able to make mortgage payments, that would have been a huge lag
on the economy.
[The information follows:]

SLOW EXPENDITURE OF EMERGENCY STIMULUS FUNDS

Mr. Rehberg. Could I ask you to answer the question then,
why have 20 States spent less than 5 percent if it was that
critical for those States to have that money?
Secretary Duncan. So States are going through a very
difficult time. And States are using some money last year, some
money this school year, some money next school year. They are
trying to cushion the blow. And I think States are making or
districts are making rational decisions to use this money, over
very tough budget times, to take whatever steps they can so we
don't have this disastrous impact in education we would have
had----
Mr. Rehberg. But it was sold to Congress as an emergency
that it needed to be done in August. We got called back for the
specific purpose of getting the money out the door.
Secretary Duncan. Yeah.
Mr. Rehberg. And with 20 States, less than 5 percent has
been spent to this point.
Secretary Duncan. Way more than 100,000 jobs were saved
from that, so that was real dollars, real teachers that, again,
I don't think you nor I would want to have on the unemployment
line. And Congress gave--Congress passed the law, not us, as
you know. Congress gave States and districts the right----
Mr. Rehberg. And I laud you for the 100,000 jobs that were
saved. My question is why was so little of the emergency money
spent to this point?
Secretary Duncan. Again, that is not our decision how to
spend it. Congress gave districts the authority to spend it
over a period of time, and States and districts are exercising
the authority that Congress gave them.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro.
I am sorry, Ms. Roybal-Allard. I apologize.

EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY STATE GRANTS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. First of all, Mr. Secretary, let me
associate myself with the comments that were voiced earlier by
my colleague Barbara Lee about the impact of consolidation,
competitive grants and the lack of earmarking, which in fact is
going to result in very critical programs not being able to
leverage the Federal dollars. That is a real reality. And one
of the areas that I am concerned about in terms of
consolidation is, again, the Administration's proposal to
consolidate the Educational Technology State Grants program,
which actually complements the $30 billion investment in
broadband, Internet access and other technology for our
Nation's classroom.
These grants have really been essential to State and local
district efforts to coordinate technology purchases and train
educators on how to use the technology, which is absolutely
critical, because you could have technology in the classroom,
but if teachers don't know how to use it, it is pointless.
I have seen the value of that in the Los Angeles Unified
School District, where thousands of teachers have been trained
to use it in hundreds of schools. So, without this dedicated
Federal funding, how do you expect financially strapped school
districts to maintain their technology programs and ensure that
educators can effectively use technology that will be made
available to them.
Secretary Duncan. It is a thoughtful question. Let me just
sort of give you my sense of where the country needs to go with
technology. Technology up to this point has been exactly this
siloed, stand alone investment and has not transformed how we
educate children. So you can't just go to a technology class
once a week and think that is going to get you where you need
to go. Technology has to be infused in everything we do, in
every subject matter, not just in high school but going down to
kindergarten and preschool and first grade and all the way
through. So we see technology as not an end in and of itself,
but it is a means to an end to get much better outcomes in a
comprehensive manner. So we want technology infused in STEM
areas. We want technology infused in foreign language. We want
technology infused in the arts. It is that larger vision that
we are supporting. And we will get you information, but I
guarantee you, at the end of the day, our total spending on
technology will be more than that $100 million. But it has to
be infused across the curriculum, not as a stand alone. I think
that is what has been missing historically in the vision for
education.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. I understand that, but as we are moving,
for example, I know that there is $90 million that was in the
Advanced Research Projects Agency. But a lot of what is being
done is really looking to the future. And money is being
shifted to accomplish the very things that you said, which no
one would disagree that is the ultimate goal. But in the
meantime, it is taking resources away from today's students and
their teachers. So my concern is that we are going to lose a
generation of kids because of this shift as we are looking to
the future.
Secretary Duncan. I just disagree with that assumption. We
are asking for a $2 billion increase in investments for
students now.

COMPETITIVE GRANTS AND STATE FORMULA GRANTS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. But everything is competitive.
Secretary Duncan. Okay, everything, again, is not
competitive. About 14 to 16 percent of the budget is
competitive; 84 percent is not. And we are asking for increases
in the basic formula programs. And I would argue, again,
California for the first time raised standards, college and
career standards. That is a massive breakthrough for the poor
and minority children who have been desperately underserved in
your State for far too long. Your mayor, your superintendent,
your board chair and your union leaders all could not be more
appreciative of what we did to help lead to higher standards
for those children, and that is not for children tomorrow; that
is for children today. That is trying to dramatically improve
what is going on there.
School improvement grants to LA are having a huge impact on
those dropout factories today; not future generations, those
students who year after year after year we are losing from your
schools to the streets. Your dropout rates in LA are amongst
the highest in the country, a devastating reality, particularly
among Hispanic and African-American children. We are
challenging that reality every single day.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. I am still concerned about the gap that
is being left, and I just very quickly--the example mentioned,
Even Start has been mentioned several times. That is the only
Federal program that integrates adult and child literacy and
parenting education into a single program for low-income
families. And how is that going to be filled or what guarantee
is there that that program will be filled, because now it is a
competitive grant? And again, these competitive grants usually
go to organizations that have the capability of how to put a
good graph together.
Mr. Rehberg. I will let you answer that very quickly,
please.
Secretary Duncan. When we consolidate these programs, we
are trying to get scarce resources to the communities that need
the most help. And where there are desperately underserved
communities, that is where we are making massively
disproportionate investments in the children and the
communities that need it the most.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

EDUCATION ROLE OF STATE OF WYOMING; OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

Secretary Duncan, thanks for coming to Wyoming. A couple
years ago you saw firsthand, you know, I think a first-class
State education system. We have, on an adjusted-cost basis, we
spend more per student than any other State. And I think it
shows in the quality of our schools, our classrooms; our
commitment is pretty extraordinary. It is required by the
Wyoming Constitution that the State be the driver for
education. And I think we are fulfilling our constitutional
obligation so, of course, I am a big advocate for State-driven
and locally-driven education decisions.
Coming from that perspective, I hope that the direction of
the U.S. Department of Education will be more oriented toward
sharing best practices, helping districts that are out there
achieve better results for kids, and not become a replacement
for State and local control. And that is just an editorial
comment.
Secretary Duncan. I absolutely concur.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.

STUDENT LOAN PROGRAMS AND STUDENT AID ADMINISTRATION

So now I am going to go to a question on a bit of an
another matter. I want to talk about the student loan program.
As you know, based on the Health Care and Education
Reconciliation Act of 2010, all Federal student loans will now
be administered through the Department of Education. The cost
of subsidizing the loans is on the mandatory side of budget.
But the cost of administering the Direct Student Loan program
generally flows through this committee. Now I note that the
Administration's fiscal year 2012 budget request for Student
Aid Administration is nearly $1.1 billion. This is a 26 percent
increase above the fiscal year 2011 CR level. That is $225
million more in 1 year.
It appears to me that the largest driver of the cost would
be increases in what the Department calls other services, and
that would be origination, disbursement, loan servicing
activities. Those are the basic activities of any bank that is
making similar loans.
Now I was on the budget committee when we went through this
in last session of Congress. And we were told at the time that
existing funds were sufficient to administer the program.

FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION OF DIRECT LOAN PROGRAM

So my question is this, why is an increase of this
magnitude needed less than a year after the program was
overhauled, and the Federal Government took it over from
private banks? I just find this completely inconsistent with
what we were told at the time as part of the rationale for the
Federal Government doing something the private sector had been
doing in my State extremely well.
Secretary Duncan. So what we tried to do from day 1 was, in
times of scarce resources, to try to get maximum benefit for
every single tax dollar that citizens from your State and from
around the country are investing. And by removing the subsidies
to the private sector and originating the loans ourselves, we
were able to increase Pell Grants over the next decade by over
$40 billion, $40 billion without going back to taxpayers for a
nickel. And we think that is absolutely the right investment.
We think it is the right thing to do to help many more young
people around the country have a chance to go to college, have
access to Pell Grants and not subsidize banks. And so----
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Secretary, here is where I beg to differ,
where it is going to cost taxpayers not only 1 nickel, but $225
million additional dollars is the proposal in the budget. So
how can you say that? Where am I missing something here?

FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION OF DIRECT LOANS--PROJECTED SAVINGS

Mr. Skelly. I think one issue is that you are in this
committee dealing with discretionary appropriations, and there
is an increase request for administrative costs of the student
aid programs. But for that $225 million, over time you are
going to save, according to CBO, you are going to save $67
billion over time. So it is a small investment to make in the
administrative costs, where we do get other services from
private-sector contractors to perform all those duties for us,
but they do it under a contract, not under a level specified in
the law.
Mrs. Lummis. But are you willing to admit that it is an
increase to the taxpayers?
Mr. Skelly. No, ma'am, it is a net big savings to the
taxpayer to run the direct loan program, so it saves the
Government billions and billions of dollars.
Secretary Duncan. I would argue, at a time when we are all
trying to become more efficient and more effective, if you had
more examples of where we could save the taxpayers $67 billion
for an investment of $227 million, I think that is a quite a
good value proposition for taxpayers who are really hurting
today.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lummis, I have been holding strictly to
the 5-minute limit. I would be willing, after I call upon Ms.
Lee, to yield my time to you.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much.

COMPETITIVE PROGRAMS IN 2012 EDUCATION BUDGET

Secretary Duncan, let me just go back to Congresswoman
Roybal-Allard's point with regard to, maybe it is a perception
that the Administration is overemphasizing competitive grants.
You say 84 percent are formula-driven. But virtually, as I
understand it, all of the Administration's proposed funding
increases are funneled into competitive grant programs. Now
there is a perception out there that that is the case. So I am
not--but you say that that is not the case. So I would like for
you to explain that in a bit more detail.

COMMUNITY GROUPS PARTICIPATION IN EDUCATION

Secondly, given the fact, and you didn't quite answer my
previous question, so I want to ask you again, given the fact
that there are no more earmarks, no more targeting Title I
funds to those students with the greatest and schools with the
greatest need and given this perception that all of the new
funding now is geared toward competitive grants, are you
looking internally at how you are going to help nonprofits and
organizations that have been just totally--will be dismantled,
which means our kids will lose out as a result of some of these
policy decisions that you all have been making? I mean, are you
sponsoring technical assistance for nonprofits in school
districts that contract with or provide grants with nonprofits?
I mean, just what are you all doing?

PERCENTAGE OF FORMULA GRANT FUNDING IN 2012 BUDGET

Also, explain this perception that your funding is going
into competitive grants now, because that definitely is the
perception. I was surprised to hear you say 84 percent is
formula-driven.
Secretary Duncan. We can give you this precisely. And we
would be happy to share that with you, but just very clearly,
for IDEA Grants to States, we are asking for a $200 million
increase, that is formula based; and $50 million for the
Infants and Families with Disabilities States Grant program.
For ESEA Title I, a $300 million increase. So those are just a
couple of concrete examples.
[The information follows:]

COMMUNITY GROUP PARTICIPATION IN EDUCATION

But I will say again, whether it is the Investing in
Innovation Fund, whether it is the Promise Neighborhoods
initiative, those are all designed, or the after-school
funding, they are all designed to encourage the participation
of nonprofit social service agencies, faith-based institutions.
We will continue to provide technical assistance to help them
compete. It is a great point that you make to continue to try
and let folks know what is available there.
The Promise Neighborhoods applicants, they can't come in
just as a school; they have to come in with a community, and
they have to come in with a set of relationships. And so we are
really trying to incentivize and encourage those folks who are
involved in the community. Because I think school systems and
schools can't do this work by themselves.

IMPROVING THE GRANT APPLICATION PROCESS

Ms. Lee. Well, I think it is more than letting nonprofits
and those who have been sort of--will be put out of business,
you know, more than just letting them know what is available.
It is about the process, making the process a bit less
cumbersome to apply for some of these grants and also providing
a road map or some assistance as to how they are going to
achieve that match again, because like I say, a $250,000,
$300,000 investment in an after-school program leverages $1.5
billion, $2 billion, so you have to not only tell them what is
available, but you have to make the process a bit more friendly
and also show them where they are going to pick up the rest of
this money that they are going to lose as a result of your
decision and this Administration's decision, no more earmarks.
Secretary Duncan. And so, again, I hear the concerns, and
we will continue to try and offer technical assistance to help
streamline it. As you know, I have also had a number of
conversations with the head of the Community Foundation in
Oakland, who I think is doing a great job of bringing the
district nonprofit partners, the corporate community to the
table.
I did a conference call with a number of funders who are
interested in supporting the reform efforts that are going on
in Oakland. And we will do everything we can to be a good
partner and to bring entire communities behind this effort. And
I think the work going on, particularly in Oakland, has great
promise.
Ms. Lee. Sure, Mr. Secretary. I am extremely concerned
naturally about my district in Oakland. But I am also concerned
about the entire country.
And I do know, and I can speak very clearly about members
of the Congressional Black Caucus, they share the same
concerns. And so what you are doing in Oakland is great, and I
really appreciate it, and we have a lot more to do. But I think
somehow this needs to be institutionalized within your
Department to help fill some of these huge gaps that are going
to result now in some of these really badly needed educational
efforts in many of our urban and rural communities.
Secretary Duncan. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Lummis, you get the last question.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION OF DIRECT LOAN PROGRAM

I would like to point out that the Education Department did
maintain a year ago that their budget at the time could absorb
the cost of this. And now we are being asked for 225 million
more taxpayer dollars, 26 percent above the fiscal year 2011
CR.
I would also point out that, while I heard you talking
about, in an exchange with Mr. Chairman, about the jobs that
you feel were saved, the teacher jobs that were saved by coming
in and doing that emergency appropriation that we did in
August, you look at this program, I know personally dozens,
dozens of people who lost their jobs in the private sector
because of the student loan program being moved from the
private sector to the public sector.
And so it is hard for me to listen to an argument about how
we had to come back here and spend all this money, of these
taxpayers dollars, to save jobs in the public sector, while at
the same time, we callously stole jobs from the private sector,
so we could have a program that is run by Government that we
now know is going to cost more than you told us a year ago it
was going to cost. So I just find it disingenuous.
It is as if public sector jobs are somehow more important,
more valuable than private sector jobs. And I would argue, Mr.
Chairman, that quite the opposite is true. That private sector
jobs are paying for public sector jobs to exist through their
tax dollars and that the tax dollars that are taken from the
pockets of public employees are taken from 100 percent taxpayer
dollars paid to that salaried person. So I do think the
economic analysis that you have made is only looking at one
component of what we are doing by transferring jobs from the
private sector to the public sector. We are not in the long run
doing this Nation a favor.
And Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity to
express that point of view.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Secretary Duncan. Can I express a counterpoint?
Mr. Rehberg. You certainly may.

SAVINGS GENERATED VERSUS COST OF ADMINISTERING DIRECT LOANS

Secretary Duncan. So, again, we may agree to disagree, but
we actually still have nonprofit companies in the private
sector helping to service student loans. But, again, if we
would ask any American out there, if we could save $67 billion
and help millions of more young people go to college and get a
good education, have that be affordable, is that the right
investment to make? I think you would be hard pressed to find
folks that think that that is a bad investment. If we could
save $67 billion with an investment of $225 million, and
because of that have a much, much better educated workforce
going forward, and have many young people's families who are
struggling financially have access to college, I think that is
exactly the type of work that we should be doing.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Duncan, I know you requested a hard finish
at 12 o'clock, but Ms. DeLauro would like to ask an additional
question. Would you grant her an additional 5 minutes?
Secretary Duncan. Absolutely.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Yes, I think, of the number of rounds we have had, I think
I have asked only a couple of questions, so I am going to take
some time.
Just a couple of points. I would like to add that the big
losers in moving to direct lending are the banks. And it would
seem to me that the banks are doing pretty well. And you know
what, we bailed them out to a ``fare thee well''; it is time we
bailed out those folks who are trying to get the kids to
school, who are having a very, very tough time to do it.

ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAM

I would also say that the economic recovery program was
targeted. It was transparent. It was timely, and it was
temporary, all of the points that the chairman spoke about. And
so in fact, all States received the stabilization fund for
their schools. And so there were dollars for Montana's schools,
as well as $10 billion in Title I. And I have not been there
recently, but others tell me, Mr. Chairman, that in Glacier
National Park, there are a whole lot of signs that talk about
the improvements they are doing that are a direct result of the
economic recovery program.

BENEFITS OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION PROGRAMS

Mr. Secretary, I have a question for you on early childhood
education. I commend the increase in that effort and for the
Early Learning Challenge Fund. I might add, I think this is
important--I am not an expert in this and you may be more of
one. But we have Dr. James Heckman, who is a Nobel prize
winning economist who suggests that the non-academic education
offered by high quality childhood education programs creates
lifelong benefits. And we see that what happened in the
Republican continuing resolution, was a cutback in Head Start
funds of $1.1 billion. And that means that we have got
youngsters, a couple hundred thousand youngsters who are never
going to get the opportunity to get early education. Dr.
Heckman also writes, ``For high quality early childhood
interventions, there are none of the tradeoffs between equity
and efficiency that plague most public policies. Early
interventions produce broadly based benefits, reduce social and
economic inequality. They promote productivity and economic
efficiency.''

EARLY LEARNING CHALLENGE FUND

Let me ask you, the passage of the President's Early
Learning Challenge Fund, how would it improve quality in early
childhood programs, including Head Start, child care? What
benefits would the enactment of the challenge grants offer? How
will implementation be coordinated between the Department of
Education and the Department of Health and Human Services?
Beyond the Challenge Fund, what other initiatives would you
support to expand our attention to kids in their earliest
years?
Secretary Duncan. So we have had a fantastic working
relationship with HHS. Secretary Kathleen Sebelius has been a
wonderful partner. Her staff and my staff are joined at the
hip. We actually have a joint committee working to gather
information specifically around early childhood education. So
this idea of silos or stovepipes with the Departments, I think
hopefully we prove time and time again that we are
collaborating in a significant way.
Our goal is to do a couple of things: to dramatically
increase access, particularly in disadvantaged communities, and
to make sure it is high quality. So we would challenge
communities, we would challenge States to step up to the plate
with their high standards, whether working with children who
need the most help, or the communities that have been the most
underserved.
Again, if we are serious about closing the achievement
gaps, we have to stop playing catch up. We have to stop doing
remedial work, and the best way to do that is to have our
children enter kindergarten with their literacy and
socialization skills intact. I worry desperately about those
children who haven't been read to, who don't know the front of
a book from the back of a book. That is the toughest of jobs
for our best kindergarten teachers to work in that situation.
So when our 2- and 3- and 4-year-olds can have high quality
programs, we have to do that.
I will just add one more statement that I am really
concerned that in these tough budget times, many Governors are
scaling back in early childhood programs. It is not just at the
Federal level, and I challenged all those Governors last
weekend to say that is the wrong cut to make. And you have to
be creative at tough times, but to walk away from early
childhood is cutting off your nose to spite your face.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.

SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT GRANTS FUNDS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS

Let me try to ask a very quick question here, which has to
do with the School Improvement Grants in high schools. It is my
understanding that an in-depth analysis of the grants shows
that only about 13 percent of the funding goes to high schools,
those that are most in need, and that is where we look at the
40 percent or more of students who don't reach their senior
year.
I am concerned that when we see the drop-off after the
economic recovery program funds, that these schools that are in
need, there is going to be less emphasis placed on high
schools. I just want to ask you about how the Department is
going to make sure that the high schools receive at least a
proportional share of the SIG funds? And would you entertain
the proposition that high schools should receive a share of
each State's SIG allocation that is, if you will, equal to the
percentage of high school students attending low-performing
high schools in the State?
Secretary Duncan. If we are not addressing the high school
dropout factories, we are missing the boat. So we have to do
that. I would just quickly add that so much of the creative
work going on in New Haven, in your community, is
extraordinarily exciting to me, and they are challenging the
status quo in some pretty interesting ways, doing it with
courage, working together and I think at lots of levels. The
models we have seen there can help to inform the national
conversation on this and other issues as well.
Ms. DeLauro. I know we will see you again, Mr. Secretary,
so I haven't had a chance, because I wanted to talk about the
model for teacher retention that was effective in New Haven and
how all pieces came together, but we will have another chance
to talk about that and turn around models. Thank you very much.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. As we discussed, I will ask that the members
if they have additional questions, that they put them into the
record and assume that they will be asked. And at this time,
because of my time commitment as well, the hearing is
adjourned.
[The following questions were submitted to be answered for
the record:]

Friday, March 11, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET REQUEST

WITNESS

HON. KATHLEEN SEBELIUS, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES
Mr. Rehberg. Welcome. Good morning. We will deal today with
the budget of the Department of Health and Human Services, and
we appreciate and look forward to the opportunity to hear from
and question Secretary Sebelius.
My committee and personal staff and I have reviewed this
budget at some length, and as have the members of the committee
and their staffs. At first glance the overall discretionary
spending seems to be slightly reduced from fiscal year 2011,
but on closer examination we see that this gives a false
impression.
First we see that several mandatory appropriations in
Obamacare augment this discretionary request, resulting in
greater spending levels. In addition, we see that funds from
the so-called stimulus have been directed to many of these
programs, significantly raising the level of funding, and the
Department now apparently seeks to turn those temporary
spending levels into permanent increases in the baseline levels
of spending. This is what we feared.
With the nearly $1,000,000,000,000 stimulus, we learned
after the fact that the stimulus bill was full of dollars that
did not stimulate, money that simply supported more and more
government programs at higher and higher levels. Also, we see
that in this budget, the Department has even requested money
for new programs, or has only provided limited justification or
explanation for its action in the requests.
At times it seems that some people almost think of this as
some sort of a game: Bump up the baseline through stimulus, add
new programs, cut a few, then freeze at the higher levels. We
all want a good health care system, and we all have one, but
through the Obamacare legislation, we have $2,600,000,000,000
in new spending, creating new entitlement programs, and our
national debt is climbing at an alarming rate to dangerous
levels with the continued $1,000,000,000,000-plus deficits.
When are we going to realize that this is not a question of
whether we can afford all that some want government to do? It
is the reality that we cannot afford what government already
does. Do we have to have another economic meltdown before we
see that reality?
Just by looking at the numbers and the trend, in using our
common sense we can see that we are on a path to financial ruin
if we don't stop borrowing and spending. And looking at this
budget, I question whether the administration gets it. Why? I
am not sure. It is staring us in the face. You don't have to be
in business, be an accountant, an economist, a mathematician or
a fortune teller to understand this. You don't have to be a
pilot to know if the plane you are in is diving towards the
ground with nobody trying to prevent a crash, you are in big
trouble.
We are at the point where we must make hard choices, so
there is a heavy burden on the Department today to justify what
it is asking for.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very, very much, Mr. Chairman, and
welcome, Madam Secretary. It is a pleasure to have you before
the committee this morning, and we will have a wonderful
opportunity to discuss the budget request.
And let me just say to you how much I support your mission
and the good work that you are doing at Health and Human
Services. You know, HHS is our principal agency for protecting
the health of all Americans and providing essential human
services, and the work of the agency has always reflected our
Nation's priorities and the highest moral obligation of our
government--providing health care services, educating our
children, advancing scientific research for the cures of
tomorrow.
I want to reflect on the budget and on health care where
you seek to lower health care costs for American families. In
that regard the budget request builds on the many cost-cutting
reforms that we passed last year in the Affordable Care Act. I
am glad to see that, unlike the majority's resolution, this
budget continues to move us forward on health care. On the
well-being of our children, your budget is really strong, and I
want to thank you for that.
As with Secretary Duncan's budget for the Department of
Education, which we discussed yesterday, this request also
emphasizes the vital importance of early learning and
determining child outcomes, and unlike the majority's budget,
it makes important investments in child care and in Head Start.
I cannot stress the importance of Head Start enough. For
more than 45 years, Head Start has provided comprehensive child
development, literacy and family services to over 27 million
preschoolers from low-income and working-poor families. Nearly
1 million children and their families are served every year. It
is unquestionably the most effective early childhood
development program ever developed, and I am glad to see this
continued critical investment.
On the Administration on Aging, I appreciate that although
you do not propose an overall increase, you have several good
initiatives, including one on elder justice. This is in
contrast to what we find in the majority's budget, which would
cut the Administration on Aging and impact several nutrition
programs, potentially eliminating up to 10 million new meals
delivered to the homebound elderly.
I am pleased that, unlike the budget put forward by the
majority here in the House, this request invests in continued
medical research at the National Institutes of Health, instead
of a $1,600,000,000 cut. Every dollar invested in the NIH has
more than a twofold return on investment, creating jobs,
stimulating the local economy, by working to improve the health
of Americans. And as a cancer survivor who has felt firsthand
the power of this research--I am here because of the grace of
God and by medical research--I know that this research has the
power to save lives, and I can't thank you enough for the
commitment to that future.
Thanks to NIH research, the prognosis for a woman diagnosed
with breast cancer has improved greatly over the past 25 years.
The cure rate for childhood leukemia is now 80 percent. We have
seen the approval of the cervical cancer vaccine. And though
one in six men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer, the
translation of research has improved the survival rate to just
over 99 percent. The death rates from cardiovascular disease
have dropped nearly 70 percent in the last 30 years, all of
this due in large part to NIH research. Imagine, a
$1,600,000,000 cut.
So, as a whole there is much I agree with in this request.
To take another example, I strongly support the move to
decrease the stigma of mental health services by recognizing
their value in community health centers and primary care. This
is a move that is long overdue. Just last week the
administration released a report that, among other alarming
estimates, noted that not even one in three women experiencing
depression has seen a mental health professional in the last 12
months. There is a health center in my State of Connecticut
that is leading the way in this kind of integration, and I hope
to hear more about how it can help our constituents' health,
their pocketbooks, and their quality of life.
I do have some concerns about some of the cuts in the
budget request, particularly with regard to the Low-Income
Energy Home Assistance Program, which so many families in my
area rely on, and on the Community Service Block Grant. I voted
against a proposal by the majority to eliminate the Community
Service Block Grant, but I also disagree with the 50 percent
reduction that the President's budget proposes. I believe these
cuts will have harmful consequences for American families, our
workforce, and the economy.
I am also concerned with the proposed elimination of the
Children's Hospital Graduate Medical Education. This is a
critical, modest investment we make as a Nation to ensure we
are training the next generations of physicians that will take
care of our children.
I hope we will have an opportunity to discuss those issues
today. We have much to talk about.
With that in mind, thank you so much for being here this
morning, and look forward to hearing your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. And we welcome you to this hearing.
I thank you for the quick briefing on the tsunami and your
responsibilities and response. If the committee has any
questions, they can certainly ask you the same questions that I
did, but I thank you for that, and at this time we will welcome
your opening statement.
Secretary Sebelius. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member DeLauro, and members of the subcommittee.
It is good to be with you today. I briefly told the
chairman that our medical evacuation team is standing by,
working closely with FEMA, waiting for the call from Hawaii if
needed. So we are mobilized and ready to go. And as I also
indicated to the Chairman, we are waiting to see what the
aftermath in Japan will be, but certainly our thoughts and
prayers are with those folks and the people who are, like the
Chairman's parents, waiting to see what happens in Hawaii.
I also want to recognize the hospitality of the Chairman in
this room with the quote from Hubert Humphrey. I work in the
Hubert Humphrey Health and Human Services Building. And the
quote from Dwight Eisenhower, as a Governor of Kansas, Dwight
Eisenhower as the only Kansas President, I feel right at home.
So thank you for having me here today.
In the President's State of the Union Address, he outlined
his vision for how the United States can win the future by out-
educating, out-building, and out-innovating the world so that
we can give every family and business the chance to thrive. And
our 2012 Budget is a blueprint for putting that vision into
action. It makes investments for the future that will grow our
economy and create jobs.
But the Budget also recognizes that we can't build lasting
prosperity on a mountain of debt. Years of deficits have put us
in a position where we need to make some tough choices in order
to invest for the future. We need to live within our means. So
in developing this Budget, we looked closely at every program
in our Department, cut waste, redesigned programs with a focus
on results, and in some cases cut programs we wouldn't have cut
in better fiscal times.
So I look forward to answering your questions, but first I
want to share some of the highlights.
Our entire Budget for our Department is just under
$80,000,000,000, and this committee oversees $72,000,000,000 of
that. Now, over the last year, we have worked around the clock
with our partners in Congress and States to deliver on the
promise of the Affordable Care Act. Thanks to the law, children
are no longer denied coverage because of their preexisting
health conditions. Families have new protections with the
Patient's Bill of Rights, and business owners are beginning to
get some relief from soaring health costs. Seniors have lower-
cost access to prescription drugs and preventive care.
We continue to build on this progress by supporting
innovative new models of care that improve patient safety and
quality, while reducing the burden of rising health costs on
families, businesses, cities and States, and we make new
investments in our health care workforce. And particularly, the
Budget supports workforce diversity programs that help students
from disadvantaged backgrounds achieve their dreams of becoming
health professionals. And because we know these students are
more likely to return home to practice in underserved areas,
these investments also make sure that more Americans can see a
doctor when they need one.
When you add new investments in community health centers,
this Budget makes quality, culturally competent, affordable
care available to millions more Americans across the country.
At the same time, the Budget includes additional proposals to
strengthen Medicare and Medicaid by improving program
integrity, promoting lower medicine costs and investing in the
health-information technology.
To make sure America continues to lead the world in
innovation, our budget also increases funding for the National
Institutes of Health. New frontiers of research like cell-based
therapies and genomics have the promise to unlock
transformative treatments and cures for diseases ranging from
Alzheimer's to cancer to autism.
Our Budget will allow the world's leading scientists to
pursue these discoveries while keeping America at the forefront
of biomedical research, and because we know there is nothing
more important to our future than the healthy development of
our children, our budget includes significant increases in
funding for child care and Head Start. Science shows that
success in school is significantly enhanced by high-quality,
early learning opportunities. That makes these some of the
wisest investments we can make as a Nation.
But our Budget does more than provide additional resources.
We also aim to raise the bar on quality by supporting key
reforms to transform the Nation's child care system into one
that fosters healthy development and gets children ready for
school. We propose a new Early Learning Challenge Fund, a
partnership with the Department of Education that promotes
State innovation in early education. These initiatives, coupled
with the quality efforts already under way in Head Start, are
an important part of the education agenda that helps every
American child reach his or her academic potential and make
America more competitive.
Our Budget also recognizes that at a time when so many
Americans are making every dollar count, we need to do the
same, and that is why we provide new support for President
Obama's unprecedented push to stamp out waste, fraud and abuse
in our health care system, an effort that far more than pays
for itself, returning a record $4 billion to taxpayers in 2010
alone.
In addition, the Budget includes a robust package of
administrative improvements for Medicare and Medicaid. These
proposals enhance repayment scrutiny, expand auditing, increase
penalties for improper action, strengthen CMS' ability to
implement corrective action, and address state activities that
increase Federal spending. Over 10 years they will deliver a
minimum of $32 billion in savings.
So across our Department we have made eliminating waste,
fraud and abuse a top priority, but we know that is not enough.
So for the past few months we have also gone through our budget
program by program to find additional savings and opportunities
where we can make our resources grow further. We have abolished
a grant program which was duplicative of the health law that
was passed last year. We have had CDC funding consolidated so
that the funding for different diseases is now going in a
comprehensive grant to States to give them more flexibility to
address chronic disease more effectively.
The President's 2012 Budget makes tough choices and smart,
targeted investments today so we can have a stronger, healthier
and more competitive America tomorrow. That is what it will
take to win the future, and that is what we are determined to
do.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for having me here today,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Secretary.
[The information follows:]

COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS

Mr. Rehberg. My apologies to ranking Member DeLauro. I
didn't do it exactly correctly yesterday. I am still learning
on the job, and so I understand I cannot defer to somebody else
for the first question, I have to do it myself or defer to you,
and that was a mistake. And then I thought we went back and
forth between the Democrat and Republican side, and that is not
necessarily true. So I have learned from my lessons yesterday,
and hopefully we will run a better meeting today.
So I get to ask the first question. I have brought a chart
along. Some of us, myself included, are hearing from the
community health centers of these devastating cuts that are
occurring to the community health center, and I would like you
to look at this chart and tell me if any of these numbers are
incorrect. I don't believe they are, because they are actually
your numbers. Do you see any discrepancy in the numbers?
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I cannot accurately
answer that question. I need to look at a budget number.
Mr. Rehberg. Discretionary appropriations, the enacted was
in fiscal 2010 $2 billion approximately.
Secretary Sebelius. I know H.R. 1 cut it by $1 billion. I
think that is an accurate number.
Mr. Rehberg. Yes. And this number down here is the
affordable health care, which is Obamacare in our minds, added
$1 billion. Did you get that billion dollars in fiscal 2011, or
will you get that billion dollars in fiscal 2011?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Mr. Chairman, as you know, you
and others have voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act. That
is the law of the land currently.
Mr. Rehberg. The law of the land currently is you are going
to get that billion dollars?
Secretary Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Rehberg. All right. So there is no cut in community
health centers.
Secretary Sebelius. Well, the will of the Congress is still
remaining to be seen. H.R. 1 and the House vote would repeal
that billion dollars. So the budget actually in H.R. 1 is
$1,000,000,000 lower.
Mr. Rehberg. You know as well as I do that we cannot take
the mandatory funding. That would be legislating on an
appropriations bill, and this subcommittee did not legislate.
We did not take that billion-dollar mandatory away.
Secretary Sebelius. If the Affordable Care Act is repealed,
Mr. Chairman, that billion dollars would be repealed with it.
Mr. Rehberg. But as of today, under current law, you are
going to get the additional billion dollars, so there is no cut
in community health centers; is that correct?
Secretary Sebelius. We don't have a 2011 budget, so it is
impossible for me to answer what is going on. H.R. 1 proposes
to cut our funding by $1,000,000,000 below what our 2010
funding would be. That cut is what is proposed. Whether that
will end up being the 2011 budget, I can't tell you. We don't
have a 2011 budget, as you know.
Mr. Rehberg. So the question is, if H.R. 1 goes through as
this chart shows, there will be no reduction in community
health centers. If it goes through as the continuing resolution
passed the House, there will be no reduction in community
health centers.
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, the House has taken two
actions: H.R. 1, which does cut community health centers; and a
vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which funds community
health centers by an additional billion dollars. So if you
assume the Affordable Care Act stays in place, and H.R. 1 would
leave that as a flat line, but H.R. 1 as a budget proposal cuts
our 2010 allocation by $1,000,000,000 for community health
centers.
Mr. Rehberg. As the current law exists--I can only speak
for the Appropriations Committee, not the authorization
committee of the legislation--from an appropriations
standpoint, if these numbers are true, is there a reduction in
community health centers?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, again, we do not have a budget,
so I cannot answer that question.
Mr. Rehberg. The answer is no. There is no cut. There is no
reduction, because if you get $1,000,000,000 of mandatory
funding from Obamacare, it replaces the billion dollars we took
of discretionary. Otherwise, with no changes, you would have
gotten $3,000,000,000 instead of $2,000,000,000.
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Mr. Chairman, as you know, H.R. 1
also prohibits our staff from implementing any features of the
Affordable Care Act. So those dollars that are appropriated in
the Affordable Care Act for community health centers, the
grants that would have to be outlaid, the draw down of those
funding would be prohibited by another feature of H.R. 1.
Mr. Rehberg. Are you using mandatory funding for the
implementation within the Department?
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, when the resources for
the Affordable Care Act fall within an existing service, and
this one is within our agency of HRSA, we do not have
additional new staff to do that. We have the HRSA staff who
would implement that. We read, and our lawyers read, the
Affordable Care Act amendment as H.R. 1 to prohibit our staff,
including ongoing staff, from implementing any features of the
Affordable Care Act. We could not put out grants. We couldn't
design a program. We couldn't put the money out. So, indeed,
the billion dollar cut would take place because that money
could not be appropriated.
Mr. Rehberg. So you are suggesting at this time that all
activity on the implementation of Obamacare has stopped within
the Department?
Secretary Sebelius. No, sir. H.R. 1 is not the law. I am
suggesting that this committee has voted to not only defund
$1,000,000,000 through repealing the Affordable Care Act, but
you also through H.R. 1, have suggested that we can't implement
any feature of the Affordable Care Act. So, even if the
Affordable Care Act stays the law of the land, if indeed H.R. 1
becomes part of the operating instructions for the 2011 budget,
we cannot implement that billion dollars. We cannot put that
money out into new health care centers around the country.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you. We will obviously talk further in
the second round of questioning.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Just to repeat this, in the Secretary's
answer--the question, that is--you kind of can't have it both
ways, all ways, whatever ways you want to have this--is that
there is no budget for 2011, and with the continuing
resolution, there was defunded the community health centers, no
money for community health centers. That is 125 centers that
are out there now, four in my State of Connecticut and, I
think, Mr. Chairman, one in your State. And if I am not
mistaken I think you may have been there, and I don't know
that, for the opening of the health center. But if you can't
get it there, and then you take the 2012 budget and you have
several amendments over and over again--again, I said on the
floor of the House that night it was like being in Groundhog
Day, we couldn't find enough ways or the majority couldn't find
enough ways to defund health care and community health
services.
So the money isn't there. If you say 2012, let us damn the
torpedoes, full speed ahead, let us go with it. Then the health
care centers would not have any money potentially between now
and the end of this year, some of them may go out of business,
but we pick them up for 2012 next March in doing that. But you
can't have it both ways and say that the funding is there. The
funding is not there for community health centers.
And what would happen, I want to ask the Secretary, if we
do--if the majority is successful in repealing affordable
health care, and you couple that with the $1,300,000,000 cut
made in H.R. 1, what happens, Madam Secretary? What happens to
these centers?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, our staff has
estimated that there are approximately 10 million medically
underserved people, who would lack services if this cut were
indeed to follow through. About 3 million of those folks are
currently being served by health centers, and an additional 7
million would be served with the Affordable Care Act
investment. By comparison, the President's Budget would serve a
total of about 23 million patients in 2011 and about 24 million
patients in 2012, building the infrastructure of public health
throughout this country in the most underserved areas.
Ms. DeLauro. I also might add, and this is what the anomaly
is for me, with respect, Mr. Chairman, this is a quote from you
in 2007: Community health centers are the backbone of quality
health care in rural States like Montana. Thanks to Montana's
13 centers already in place, folks living in rural areas, on
Indian reservations, and those without insurance have access to
reliable health care.
And that is not only a comment in 2007, there are comments
in 2006, a couple of them, about health centers being critical
to ensuring Montanans living in rural areas have top-flight
health care options; Montanans rely on community health
centers, and the centers rely on Congress to provide adequate
funding.
We understand what the relevance of the community health
centers are all about, and by action in two directions, by
calling for the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, using the
appropriations process to defund portions of the Affordable
Care Act like community health centers, and then cutting it
back below the 2010 level, then we are eliminating community
health centers, which is a major portion of our health care
system. It is reliable. It is accessible. As the Secretary
pointed out, it serves 20 million patients. It improves access,
quality of care. It reduces health care costs. It reduces
reliance on expensive alternatives like emergency room visits,
detecting and treating conditions like high blood pressure and
diabetes before they become severe problems.
This is addressing the need for health care that we have in
this Nation and cutting off millions of people. We have health
care here. All of us who are sitting here have health care, the
Federal Employees Health Benefit Program. The people who
utilize these centers don't have what we have, and what we have
gone down the road over the last few months would do is to end
their ability to have health care and while we maintain our
own.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.

DEMONSTRATION PROJECT WAIVER

Mr. Flake. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Thank you for being
here.
A couple of questions with regard to Arizona and other
States. As you know, States are in a world of hurt in terms of
their own budgets and deficits, and most States, the largest
single item not public education is health care, and Arizona is
one of those States in trouble. Arizona has a pilot program
going, or demonstration project, I should say, and you recently
sent a letter to Arizona saying that Arizona could trim its
rolls after that demonstration project runs out, I believe,
this fall. So Arizona will be able to save some money in that
regard.
Since then, one Representative has suggested that that such
a letter constitutes guidance from your Department and
therefore would be subject to the comment period and other
things which could delay implementation. How do you understand
that? Does such a letter constitute guidance that would--that
could perhaps be delayed by comment periods and whatnot?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congressman, in the situation you
are describing, Governor Brewer actually had discussed with our
Department the opportunity to ask for a waiver of the
demonstration project that was in effect, and she wanted to
have the waiver effective as of October of 2011. What we did in
our examination of the Arizona demonstration project was to
remind Governor Brewer that actually the project expires in
September, and that there is no mandatory obligation to renew a
demonstration project. That has been the law of the land. So
all we did in our letter back to the Governor was reiterate
what the law is with regard to demonstration projects. So there
was no need for a waiver with a program expiring. It isn't
guidance. It is just a law.
Mr. Flake. All right. So there is no comment period
required or anything.
Secretary Sebelius. Certainly not to my understanding,
because we are not offering advice or giving any kind of
demonstration waiver. It is just what the law says.

HEAD START

Mr. Flake. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Earlier in this hearing it was stated that Head Start,
which is a very expensive program run by your Department, is
unquestionably the most effective early childhood education
program ever developed. That seems at conflict with some of the
information that your own Department has put out. A recent
study released by HHS says that a national survey of 400--I am
sorry, 4,600 preschoolers randomly assigned to either Head
Start or no program, a control group, were studied in 114
different measures ranging from academic skills, socioeconomic
development, health status. The study found no statistically
relevant effects from Head Start after grade 1.
What is your Department doing to rectify that? I don't see
any cut in the spending recommended. I don't see any changes to
the program. In fact, the Department of Education is now
launching their own early childhood education program to the
tune of about $350 million they are asking for this year.
Should they be doing that? Why are they trying to build on a
program; do they have little confidence in your program?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congressman, the Head Start
program, the study that you are referring to is a comprehensive
study that was done in the 2004-2005 timeframe. It was recently
published, but the snapshot is substantially older than the
publication.
Mr. Flake. What has changed with the program since then?
Secretary Sebelius. That is what I was going to mention is
that there was some concern about the long-lasting components
of Head Start and, indeed, the quality measures that get
children school ready and not just focus on child development.
Program changes have been implemented over the last number
of years up to and including this year. There is a
determination that the lowest performing in terms of school
readiness issues, 25 percent of the programs have to recompete.
That has never been done before, so we are really trying to
look very closely not only for safe places for children to be,
but effective school-readiness strategies.
For the first time ever, I think, the Department of
Education and the Department of Health and Human Services are
working very closely together. As you know, there are a wide
variety of early education programs for children. Head Start
and Early Head Start are specifically aimed at children who
qualify because of the income level of their parents. They are
not universal.
Department of Education has always run early education
programs, and we now have a very collaborative effort together
looking at not only social and development skills, but also
learning-readiness skills to make sure that wherever a parent
chooses as the appropriate placement for his or her child out
of the house, and most children under 5 are in placements out
of the house, that they are getting more than sophisticated
babysitting, that they are really getting school-readiness
programs.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.

TITLE X

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. I just want to associate myself
with the comments of my ranking member and make a few more
comments.
The House-passed 7-month CR is, in my judgment, deeply
flawed. It is a dangerous bill. It wouldn't create a single
job. It would hurt Federal programs essential to economic
growth and compromise our security. And it seems to me at a
time when we should work in a bipartisan way to ensure the
competitiveness of our workforce, what the Republicans are
doing in this bill is slashing education and health services
vital to our long-term economic success. If the Republicans had
their way, there would be billions in cuts to medical and
innovative research that would result in job loss; and ground-
breaking and lifesaving research; cut over $100,000,000 from
New York institutions. And I can go on and on about these ill-
advised proposals in the bill, but I am concerned that I would
be talking for weeks, let alone the remainder of my 5 minutes.
So I just want to make it clear, if the Republicans really
believed the name they gave to H.R. 2, the Repealing the Job-
Killing Health Care Law, then I would like to propose that they
rename the CR the Laying Off Everyone from Teachers and
Firefighters to Bert and Ernie Act. This would better reflect
the real impact of this draconian legislation.
Now, to get specific in the couple of minutes I have left,
I think this is a deeply flawed bill. The House-passed 7-month
continuing resolution, for many reasons it is flawed. I would
like to focus on one. It eliminates all funding for Title X
family planning, and despite the fact that every dollar that is
spent on publicly supported family planning saves nearly $4 in
Medicaid costs, if our goal is to cut spending, it is reckless
to eliminate programs that save taxpayer dollars.
As the House was debating this CR, the administration
wisely proposed to increase Title X by $10,000,000, which would
increase access to affordable basic care such as contraceptives
and cancer screening.
Now, would you agree that defunding Title X would
jeopardize health care access for millions of poor and low-
income women and men who depend on it, and can you put into
perspective the real costs of eliminating Title X to our health
care system and families? How would they get basic affordable
care?
And I just want to put one other comment in perspective,
because we have good health care here, and a lot of people are
confused, and if they think there are parts of the health care
bill that should be amended, so be it, let us amend it. But
essentially we want to give everyone essentially what the
Federal Employee Health Benefit Plan has.
So I just wonder if you can put in perspective Title X.
Secretary Sebelius. Well Congresswoman, last year Title X
provided services to about 5 million Americans across the
country, and as you say, they often are lower-income men and
women accessing services from contraception and family planning
services to cervical cancer screenings, tests for STDs, and HIV
screening. It is estimated that about one million unintended
pregnancies were avoided thanks to the access to affordable
contraception, and I think that for 40 years Title X has been
proven to be an effective health strategy for millions of
Americans across the country.

HEAD START

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you very much.
What do I have, 1 minute left?
I just want to say I feel very blessed. I have eight
grandchildren. I have a 4-year-old, and I know how her brothers
and her grandmother and everyone dotes on her. And Head Start
to me--and I have visited so many of them. If Head Start can be
improved, let us improve it, but you don't provide the services
to those kids by eliminating it. So I just want to say to my
good friend, I would be happy to work with you to see what we
can do to improve the program.
I don't know if you have ever had a 4-year-old, but a 4-
year-old needs some--you have five. That is right. I should
know my good friend has five. But I am on the grandkids stage.
I want to tell you this 4-year-old is bilingual. Everyone is
teaching, reading to her, and kids who don't have that
opportunity have to get that support. And so I would like to
work with you to improve the program if, in fact, it is not
meeting the standards we think it should.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. You bet.
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, if I can follow up
on that for just a moment. The impact study did show that there
are significant improvements in a variety of cognitive skills
and parenting skills. As you know, Head Start has an important
parenting component in areas that may expire.
Mr. Rehberg. We will have an opportunity on the second
round. Thank you.
Mr. Alexander.

ACA WAIVERS

Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, good morning.
Secretary Sebelius. Good morning.
Mr. Alexander. Out of a little over 1,000 waivers that have
been granted to the Affordable Care Act, can you give us the
most compelling reason that was presented to you that led to
those waivers?
Secretary Sebelius. Certainly, Congressman. The waivers
that you are, I think, referring to, and I think there are
1,040 as of the time of this hearing, deal with one provision
of the Affordable Care Act, and that is the provision that
indicates that annual benefit limits should be up to $750,000
and gradually disappear altogether to make sure that people
don't run out of coverage at the time that they need it the
most, when they get sick.
What became clear as we began to hear from business owners
is that a wide variety of the so-called mini-med plans in place
have some benefits, but fairly limited benefits. And since the
law gave me the opportunity to have some discretion with regard
to what would be serious rate shock for people, and since there
is no viable alternative yet--before 2014, there won't be a
State-based exchange available to offer competitive coverage to
those same business owners--we determined that granting waivers
and allowing those--while limited benefits, they are better
than no benefits--to stay in place for at least the first year
so we can gather data, take a look at what really is in the
marketplace, and then have a further conversation was far
better for those beneficiaries than denying the waivers and
having that coverage cancelled.
So we have, I think--I can't give you the exact average. We
would be happy to present a list. I think it is over 98 percent
of the people who actually came forward with a waiver request
have been granted them and is everybody from self-insured plans
to a variety of small business owners and large corporations,
small corporations. It represents at this point less than 2
percent of the insured marketplace, but that limited coverage,
at least this year while we are gathering data, will stay in
place.
[The information follows:]

Waiver Request

As of February 19, 2011, 1,040 waiver applications were approved.
Applications for waivers from annual limit requirements are reviewed on
a case by case basis by Department officials who look at a series of
factors including whether or not a premium increase is larger or if a
significant number of enrollees would lose access to their current plan
because the coverage would not be offered in the absence of a waiver.
More detailed information on specific criteria can be found at: http://
cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/11-
905_2010annual_limits_waiver_bulletin.pdf.
HHS periodically posts the list of the plans that have been granted
waivers to ensure the public is aware of the waiver process and
stakeholders understand how they are affected. Approved applicants are
granted an annual limit waiver for one year. A list of annual limit
waivers that have been granted can be found at the following links:
Self-insured employers: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/
alw_employer_04012011.pdf
Health Reimbursement Arrangements: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/
files/alw_hra_04012011.pdf
Multi-Employer Plans: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/
alw_multiemployer_04012011.pdf
Non-Taft Hartley Union Plans: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/
alw_non_taft_hartley_union_04012011.pdf
Health Insurance Issuers: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/
alw_issuer_04012011.pdf
State-Mandated Policies: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/
alw_state_04012011.pdf
Association Plans: http://cciio.cms.gov/resources/files/
alw_association_04012011.pdf

Mr. Alexander. You used the term ``rate shock,'' so we are
to assume some of those arguments were they couldn't afford the
new health care bill?
Secretary Sebelius. It was that the benefits limits are so
vastly below what is contemplated by a comprehensive insurance
policy--what is in place is not necessarily an insurance
policy. It is basically some kind of minimum coverage that to
get from where they are to $750,000 in a period of months would
not be affordable. So that was the provision that Congress
wrote into the Affordable Care Act in this instance--and again,
the waiver applies to just that one situation: Does your plan
reach the $750,000 maximum limit this year? That is the only
area where that language applies.
Mr. Alexander. So there were no waivers, to your knowledge,
granted just because one argued they couldn't afford it?
Secretary Sebelius. No, sir. It is really to deal with what
their limit is now, where they are compared to--and again, what
we found--and, Congressman, I am a former insurance
commissioner and have looked at this data very carefully. There
is very little data on these mini-med plans. Many of them are
not even required to be filed. So we are gathering data right
now so we have a more comprehensive view. But it is a small
slice of the insurance marketplace, but it is coverage that
those folks have.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you.
Secretary Sebelius. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Louise Roybal-Allard.

CDDC CONSOLIDATION

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Madam Secretary.
Let me just begin by associating myself with the comments
that were made by my colleagues Rosa DeLauro and Congresswoman
Nita Lowey, and I think they have pretty much highlighted the
key issues.
I would just like to add a bit about the community clinics.
If they are to be closed as a result of some of the policies by
my Republican colleagues, it would absolutely be devastating
not only to my district, but to communities throughout the
country, minority communities and poor communities. And
community clinics really play a very key role in helping to
address many of the health disparities that exist in our
country, so it would absolutely be devastating, as was stated
before.
Madam Secretary, let me begin by commending you for your
efforts to balance financial decisions with bringing focus to
some of our most pressing health issues. But I do have some
concerns regarding parts of your plan which impact prevention
efforts at the State and the local level.
The CDC budget proposes a far-reaching or more reaching
consolidation of birth defects and chronic disease centers than
had been agreed upon by the House and the Senate last fall.
Under that agreement a consolidation involved programs that
impacted obesity. Your proposal goes beyond obesity and related
programs, while at the same time decreasing the CDC budget by
$588 million. So States and the constituents of CDC--the
constituents CDC serves are concerned because the proposal
collapses budget lines, which can result in States' inability
to address their State-specific needs.
So in order to assure specific needs are met with fairness
in the distribution of funds among States, will your proposal
direct funding to be disbursed by formula, and will CDC's
resources be allocated in a way that reflects input from the
public health community? And finally, how will this committee
and Congress be able to track how moneys are being used for a
particular issue of interest?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, I know there is
some concern about the lack of specificity to disease groups. I
think it is the view of Dr. Frieden at the CDC, and, frankly,
based on conversations with a number of public health officials
across the country, that since so many of the chronic disease
conditions have these similar underlying causes, rather than
having siloed funds, we really feel that this is a better
approach to attacking chronic disease overall.
I met yesterday, just yesterday, with the leadership of the
State public health associations, who are working very closely
with CDC, and, in fact, the senior leadership of CDC was there.
But we look forward to working with Congress as this budget
proposal moves forward. Money is anticipated being allocated in
part through a formula so every State would have resources, and
in part through competitive grants, but it is aimed at the
notion that many of the chronic disease conditions have similar
underlying causes, and that if States can actually direct these
resources in a flexible fashion to their problem that is
presenting in that particular State, this is a more effective
source of the prevention efforts under way.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. You do understand the concern.
Secretary Sebelius. I do.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Some diseases might be ignored. Also, as
part of this consolidation, the budget also eliminates the
REACH program, which for years has served as the cornerstone
for CDC's efforts to eliminate racial and ethnic disparities in
health.
So how does CDC intend to address racial and ethnic
disparities without the very successful and popular program
which has played a critical role, for example, in my district
and so many other communities of color?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, I think again, Congresswoman, the
Community Transformation Grants, I think, pick up the features
of the REACH program and, in fact, expand their scope. So it
isn't an effort to decrease the focus on health disparities or
decrease the focus on health gaps, but really an effort to more
strategically target these resources. So that is incorporated
into the proposal in the 2012 budget for the Community
Transformation Grants.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. You are going to have look at that very,
very closely.
Secretary Sebelius. We look forward to working with you and
your office. I know this is a great concern of yours, you have
provided a lot of leadership over the years, and we would look
forward to that.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Granger.

FDA REVIEW OF AVASTIN

Ms. Granger. Thank you.
I am concerned about the recent decision that the FDA made
to restrict its label for Avastin for metastatic breast cancer,
and I think your home State of Kansas required private
insurance companies to cover off-label uses of cancer drugs. It
is my understanding I think you served as the commissioner of
insurance as well as Governor during that timeframe.
My question to you is, did you see cancer patients whose
lives were saved because they had access to off-label drugs
covered by private insurance? And I know that I haven't--I have
heard from and talked personally to women in my district that
they gave amazing stories of what had happened with their--
literally their prognosis of their life span, and that they
were still here because of drugs like that.
If Kansans with private insurance coverage can get Avastin
for that type of cancer before they turn 65, shouldn't Medicare
continue to guarantee that same coverage for our seniors?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, as you know, the
Avastin decision is still in the process of now receiving
comments. The final decision has not been made yet. The data
that was presented by the scientists and the vote of the
scientific committee was pretty overwhelming in terms of the
addition of Avastin to the cancer studies was done on an
accelerated basis. So breast cancer was an added cancer that
Avastin was designed to address, and the information back about
that result of that protocol have not been encouraging. In
fact, overwhelmingly the scientists felt that there was more
harm than good. Now, that doesn't mean that individual cases
don't have information about this being the kind of last
chance, and it extended, but there is no very compelling data
about not only not life extension, but some serious harm as a
result of Avastin being used with metastatic breast cancer
patients.
But that process is under way. Our decisions at the FDA are
really guided by the scientific community. I think the vote was
11 to 1, and that was the recommendation that is out. But the
input is coming in, and it is always, I think a very, very
difficult balance of how you make a decision based on, but I
can assure you that the scientists are looking at harm versus
benefit, and what at least they found in these accelerated
studies is that more harm was caused than benefit given.
Ms. Granger. I say again, I talked to women in my district,
but I also talked to oncologists, because I said, you know, I
am hearing about this, but I want to confirm it with my
personal conversations, and that was certainly not the result I
heard from any of them.
Secretary Sebelius. I would be glad to again follow up with
your office, give you the information, and, as you know, no
decision has been made about Medicare benefits. This process is
still under way. So I want to clarify the fact that no
beneficiary is now without Avastin at this point, and what will
happen at the end of the day--but I would love to share the
research, because it is heartbreaking, and I think we are
looking for any lifesaving opportunity that exists.

CHILDREN'S GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION

Ms. Granger. And if I have still time--I don't know where
the timer is. Okay, I have got time.
The other question I had had to do with your budget and
eliminating funding for the Children's Hospital Graduate
Medical Education program. I am confirming that your budget
does eliminate that. And it has just been a wonderful source
for training funds for pediatricians and pediatrics, especially
doctors that work in the Children's Hospitals. And success
stories, if they are anywhere in health care, it is certainly
in the Children's Hospitals. So I am concerned about that and
would like you to address that about the long-term negative
impact on that training.
Secretary Sebelius. Well, again, Congresswoman, I think
that is one of the toughest budget cuts that we made in this
2012 proposal. The GME funding, the Graduate Medical Education
funding, that goes to Children's Hospitals is somewhat
different than the vast majority of GME funding in that it does
not have to be used for training. It is kind of general funding
that adds to the Children's Hospitals who are not eligible for
Medicare GME. There are some other avenues for training
pediatricians, both incentives for primary care docs and
incentives that are in--there is some GME funding in the
Medicaid program.
But I share your concerns that having additional
pediatricians and certainly the success of Children's Hospitals
has been pretty substantial, and in a better budget time we
would have never recommended that this be one of the budget
proposals.
Ms. Granger. I understand certainly. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lee.

HEALTH DISPARITIES

Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. It is really a pleasure to see you again,
Madam Secretary. I know you have a full plate moving forward as
we implement the historic health reform law, but I am glad you
are in charge of that effort because I know it is going to get
done right.
A couple of things I want to ask you, which I am asking all
of our Cabinet members, is the impact of eliminating earmarks
and what your agency is doing to help compensate for that. For
example, many communities, I mean of color especially, low-
income communities, we ensure that they receive enough money to
begin to fill the void where health services are needed. These
community groups provide jobs and services to constituents that
never would get these services or jobs. Also, earmarks allowed
nonprofits to leverage millions of dollars to bring in money to
ensure that these voids are filled.
Now with the elimination, I am very concerned about what is
taking place in terms of the economic impact in communities and
wonder if you have made any kind of analysis in terms of the
impacts of the lack of now and the void that the lack of
earmarks will create in low-income and minority communities,
and do you have the capacity to make this analysis? That is my
first question.
Secondly, just want to--I chair now the Congressional Asian
Pacific American Caucus' Health Task Force, and so we are
working with Mr. Honda, former Member of the subcommittee, and
my colleagues in the Congressional Black, Hispanic and Asian
Pacific American Caucus to put together oversight
responsibilities for our caucuses to look at the implementation
of the health disparities provision of the bill. And so I
wanted to find out what initiatives that you are undertaking to
make sure that this is implemented appropriately and, you know,
how this issue is being addressed within your Department.
And then as it relates to HIV/AIDS, I am very pleased that
you are following up to implement the President's National AIDS
Strategy, and wanted to ask you a little bit more about that,
and do you intend to provide an additional transfer of funds
during the current fiscal year as we work through the budget?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, let me start with
the Asian American and Pacific Islander Caucus. We actually
have gathered a sort of advisory group together of providers
and organizational leaders, and I had the opportunity to meet
with them recently to make sure our attention across agencies
on health disparities are particularly applicable to this
community where often the disparities are significantly wider.
So we are paying very close attention.
My Assistant Secretary of Health is leading that group, and
I would look forward to having Dr. Koh brief you about that
activity. We are going to have a major report released on
health disparities and action plan this spring, and we really
want input from the API group as we move along.
In terms of the earmarks, what we have done, I would say,
in our budget is to continue to make sure that as we leverage
assets, we are looking very closely at where the most
underserved areas are and where the biggest gaps are. So
everything from the earlier conversation that we had about
community health centers, making sure that we have the accurate
mapping to where those providers are, but also, as you know,
the Affordable Care Act has a number of streams of money for
workforce training, and particularly for minority recruitment
and workforce training, because I think having culturally
competent, culturally sensitive providers often is a key to
delivering health care; not just having a person there, but
having a person who relates to the community.
So we are paying close attention to that, and I think in
every agency from NIH through HRSA, and including all of our
CMS with Medicare and Medicaid, we are trying to make sure the
health-disparity issue is front and center. I think there is
more focus and attention on that than there has ever been in
our Department. I would say we have done a pretty good job of
writing reports in the past, not a very good job of closing the
gap.
But as you know, the Affordable Care Act, which anticipates
having affordable health coverage available for all Americans,
is probably going to be the most significant step in 2014 than
has ever been taken to close that health-disparity gap.

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES

Ms. Lee. And, Madam Secretary, the other thing, just let me
ask you on the organizations that really serve low-income and
minority communities, now that they don't have earmarks, are
you providing technical assistance or any kind of opportunities
for them to understand how to and get involved in the Federal
grant opportunities to help build capacity? Because there are
many, many gaps now and holes that they are going to--that are
out there and jobs that are being lost as a result of this.
Secretary Sebelius. We are eager to do that and have made,
as I said, specific outreach through the Asian American and
Pacific Islanders. I have met with the leadership of the
African American health community on everything from research
projects to leveraging assets. We have regular tribal
consultations about what is happening or not happening on
Indian tribes, and are providing outreach particularly to the
lowest-income tribes, who often don't have the assets to access
grants.
So we are trying to make sure we are paying close attention
to the communities who have the greatest needs, who, you know,
often don't have the resources to be applying for grants and
aren't necessarily competitive. So that technical assistance is
very much a part of what we are doing through our regional
office network around the country.
Mr. Rehberg. I will point out to the committee we are
getting somewhat conflicting reports on when our vote is. One
notification is 11 o'clock. Another one was somewhere between
11:45 and 12:15. So we will go as long as we possibly can. We
are almost done with our first round.
Mr. Lewis.

HHS STAFF INCREASES

Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, thank you for being with us.
Secretary Sebelius. Sure.
Mr. Lewis. In ancient times I had the chance to chair the
committee for a short period. I got to know Dr. Zerhouni of NIH
quite well. We discussed a lot about the fact that there is
never enough money to go around.
What was NIH doing to evaluate those people who are
contractors with them and otherwise doing great jobs versus
those who maybe don't produce a lot? How do you eliminate
people from the queue? It was a question they really hadn't
ever considered before, and that led to some very interesting
discussions and is the foundation for my own discussion with
you about our budget.
Your budget includes what I understand to be a 315 percent
increase in the Public Affairs Office, from some $4,800,000 to
$19,200,000, growing the Office of Personnel from 24 to 46.
Now, a cynic might suggest that increase in the Public Affairs
Office might very well be designed for helping to put in place
a public relations program regarding the Affordable Care Act. I
am sure you wouldn't describe it that way, but I would like to
know what you think about these increases and what you intend
to do with them.
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Mr. Chairman, we think that
certainly outreach to the public is important, and one of the
things that is happening under the umbrella of the public
affairs shop is the design and development of new Web tools to
make it apparent to citizens across this country what is
available to them, how to access it, how to get that
information out. So that we now have a great Web site, I don't
know if you have had a chance to visit it, healthcare.gov,
which for the first time ever pulls together for people to see
in an easy one-stop shop what is available to them in the
private market with prices, with a percentage of how many
people are eligible or not eligible; also what public programs
are available, kind of a one-stop shop; as well as a timeline
for implementation of health changes. And I would say that is a
significant new feature of the Public Affairs Office as well as
getting information out to seniors and others about what
benefits are currently available, what kinds of opportunities
there are, grant opportunities, moving along.
Mr. Lewis. The budget presented contemplates adding some
4,700 new employees, including more than about 1,000 full-time
positions, in the Medi-Cal/Medicaid arena. Can you tell me--
tell us how many of the proposed positions are for implementing
the new health care law, and how do you expect to sustain that
budget over time? The budget could very well find a cliff out
there, and to hire people for a year, that is one thing; if you
are hiring them for 10, that is another, especially if there is
going to be a cliff.
Secretary Sebelius. We currently, in terms of implementing
the Affordable Care Act, have about 670 people who have been
specifically added to focus on some of the new areas which
weren't part of the Department's responsibility before and are
paid for out of the Affordable Care Act implementation.
Another, I think, about 350, Mr. Chairman, are working on
various aspects of the act. So a total of about 1,000 people.
And just to put that that into perspective, in your home
State of California, the insurance department has almost one-
and-a-half times those people just in the State insurance
department. So our 1,000 employees would, by comparison, be
smaller than the largest States' insurances departments.

UNOBLIGATED FUNDS

Mr. Lewis. The stimulus bill--speaking of that cliff I am
concerned about--the stimulus bill of 2009 funded
$21,920,000,000 for HHS programs. Can you give the committee
information regarding--well, at least an update on the
remaining unobligated funds that are involved in that reserve
and what remains unobligated as we try to ourselves evaluate
where we cut, squeeze and trim maybe, and maybe not cut,
squeeze and trim?
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, we have obligated about
$118,000,000,000 of the $138,000,000,000 that was part of the
HHS program funds. About 72 percent has been outlaid, and the
obligation includes almost nearly 100 percent of our
discretionary program funds. I would say the remaining funds
are the Medicaid and Medicare health incentive payments, which
are for health IT, that is about $20,000,000,000 in that
category; the third year of a number of the grants that NIH has
funded; and some ongoing construction funds which are not yet
fully completed.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a number of questions that I want to ask, and most
of which, I think, I am probably going to save for the historic
record and ask in a second round.
So I am going to use most of my 5 minutes to just rehash a
little history. Let me first begin by saying today I turn 46.
Secretary Sebelius. Happy birthday. You are such a baby. I
am sorry, Congressman.
Mr. Jackson. That is fine, Madam Secretary.
Secretary Sebelius. I mean, wow.
Mr. Jackson. I am such a baby when I look at my guys on the
other side. And at this very hour my younger brother and his
wife are expecting their son, and my brother called me
yesterday and told me how disappointed he was that his son is
likely to be born on my birthday.
My daughter's eleventh birthday is Sunday, and she has all
of her girlfriends coming over. So I was late for the hearing
this morning because I had to go buy cupcakes and attend
parent-teacher conferences and things like that, things that
took priority. My mother's birthday is Thursday.
Secretary Sebelius. Wow.
Mr. Jackson. So this is an exciting week for me, and that
history is very important to me because when I got on this
committee in 1999, a very conservative chairman of the
committee, Chairman Porter, wouldn't let me advance an earmark
or advance funding increases for any programs that I believed
in unless it was based in good science. That is all Chairman
Porter on this committee would do, and that was fund good
science. And so I asked him to allow me to put report language
in an appropriations bill so that I could adequately determine
good science so that I might be able to fight for the programs
that I believe in based on good science, not based on just
budget priorities and budget commitments.
And I can say that I have been on this committee long
enough to know that almost no one on the other side of the
aisle was on this committee when I was first appointed to this
committee. Mr. Flake wasn't on the committee. Chairwoman
Granger was not on the committee. My colleague was not on the
committee. Mr. Rehberg, in fact, the chairman of this
committee, wasn't on the committee. He has the power, they have
the numbers, but oftentimes with the power and the numbers
doesn't necessarily come good science.
And so Mr. Porter had me put language into a bill that
produced this report, ``Unequal Treatment, the National
Academies Press'' and includes all medical doctors, literally
hundreds of them, who determined what is necessary in order to
close profound gaps in our health care system for all Americans
at your Department and at the NIH. It includes community health
centers, it includes health professions based upon the
available infrastructure to help close profound gaps that exist
in our system; and based upon the results of this report, this
committee has set out a path for addressing many of the funding
priorities that have been laid out.
And as I understand it--and I apologize for not being here
on time for all the reasons that I have stated--many of the
programs that I support and profoundly believe in as a result
of this good science which has been systematically proven--
approached structurally over the course of multiple
appropriations bills, are under attack, and they are under
attack without good science. They are under attack for
political reasons. They are under attack for budget deficit
reasons, and debt reduction reasons, and across-the-board cut
reasons. But they are not based on good science, and the
absence of that good science profoundly impacts and affects
real people. Real people, profoundly affected by the strategic
approach that we have undertaken on this committee to try and
address these priorities.
So I didn't plan on coming down here today to kick a little
tail, but I understand that a lot of the programs that I
believe in have, quite frankly, been getting kicked around, and
so let me, you know, be an equal opportunity kicker.
Let me first begin with the administration by expressing my
disappointment in the collapse of the negotiations over the 10-
year tax cut deal; that when State Senator Barack Obama was in
the State senate and subsequently came to the U.S. Senate and
then to the Presidency of the United States, we entered into in
this Congress with the expectation in December that nearly
$858,000,000,000 would be available to sustain these programs.
The partisanship that you see on this committee and the
partisanship that you see in trying to challenge some of these
programs that are worthwhile and solidly proven programs, we
were counting on that $858,000,000,000 to be here for the
community health centers, to be here for health professions, to
help close profound gaps not only in this committee, but in
committees across this Congress. And I am determined to not let
anyone in this Congress forget that the negotiations, which did
not include members of this committee, were terrible
negotiations on the part of the administration that profoundly
impacted the budget that you are presenting to this committee.
I realize that my time, Mr. Chairman, has expired.
And the ramifications of that, as I close, have
implications for everything that we fundamentally believe in,
and there are ramifications for this Congress and beyond.
And I will save my questions, Mr. Chairman, for the second
round.

COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mr. Jackson.
And I thank Ranking Member DeLauro for giving my comments
from prior Congresses about my support for community health
centers, because I do support community health centers. I have
always voted for them, and I will continue to support them, and
I will do anything I possibly can to see that they are fully
funded to the best of my ability.
So my question is if, at the end of the day--forget what is
happening around us. If, at the end of the day, I am successful
in this subcommittee of getting through the United States
Congress and signed by the President from appropriated dollars
and Obamacare dollars $2,176,000,000, are you committed to
providing grants to the 127 community health centers that were
either expanded or opened as a result of stimulus dollars?
Secretary Sebelius. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, I don't--you
are asking----
Mr. Rehberg. I am asking you if we fully fund----
Secretary Sebelius. The Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Rehberg. If we fully fund community health centers----
Secretary Sebelius. Right.
Mr. Rehberg [continuing]. The $2,176,000,000 total for the
community health centers from the Congress, will you provide
grants to the 127 centers that were either expanded or opened
as a result of using stimulus grants to your grant?
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I can't answer that
question. Some of those facilities are already funded; some are
not. I don't----
Mr. Rehberg. But that is fully funding.
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to
answer in writing. I don't want to give an incorrect answer. I
don't really even know what you are asking.
Mr. Rehberg. I think you do. I think you do. And the
question is----
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I am trying to be
responsive. I don't know what your question is.
Mr. Rehberg. In 2008, community health centers from the
Federal Government received a little over $2,000,000,000 in
fiscal 2008.
Secretary Sebelius. I wasn't here.
Mr. Rehberg. In fiscal 2009, a little over $2,000,000,000;
in fiscal 2010, a little over $2,000,000,000. If in fiscal 2011
we are successful in carrying through fully funding a little
over $2,000,000,000, the question becomes are you going to be
willing then to provide grants to the 127 centers that opened
as a result of the stimulus dollar grants that you gave?
Secretary Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I think that if you are
asking will we provide the services out of $1,000,000,000 fewer
resources, we will have to pick and choose.
Mr. Rehberg. You are not going to have $1,000,000,000 fewer
resources.
Mr. Jackson. Would the chairman yield, because I am lacking
clarity on your question as well.
Mr. Rehberg. Sure.
Mr. Jackson. Now, I understand that this hearing is about
the 2012 appropriations bill. If your question is about fully
funding the 2012 appropriations bill, then I assume that the
Secretary will fund community health centers at the same level
that she has funded them in the past under that money.
Mr. Rehberg. Including the--taking my time back.
Mr. Jackson. Can you offer some clarity to all of us, Mr.
Chairman, on what moneys you are specifically talking about in
the stimulus bill that need to be appropriated that have not
been appropriated, if that is your concern?
Mr. Rehberg. Reclaiming my time, the question becomes if
funding is provided in the fiscal 2011 continuing resolution
and, we can suggest, fiscal 2012, fully funding, whether the
source is from our appropriated dollars or from Obamacare if we
are not successful in repealing, and you get the mandatory
$1,000,000,000, the question becomes will you be able to
provide the same grants to the 127 that were either expanded or
opened as a result?
Ms. DeLauro. Would you yield, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Rehberg. No.
Secretary Sebelius. Again, Mr. Chairman, I don't know--what
I cannot do off the top of my head--I would be delighted to get
this answer from HRSA--is to give you a specific answer about
the same grants. I don't know what that means. I am not quite
sure. I can tell you that the President's budget requests
$2,118,000,000 for community health centers. House CR of fiscal
year 2011 would reduce that number to $1,176,000,000. So there
is a $1,000,000,000 gap between what the House CR is
suggesting. Could we fully fund all of the centers that are
currently----
Mr. Rehberg. What I am suggesting is, forget the billion.
We will give it back. All right? You just got it back. You are
going to get the $1,000,000,000 back.
Secretary Sebelius. Okay.
Mr. Rehberg. All right. You get your fiscal 2011 request,
and you get your fiscal 2012 request. The problem is 127
centers received 2-year grants under the stimulus, and I am
asking, are you going to continue to include them in the base
then so that they are not going to close as a result of a
continuation of the $2,000,000,000?
Secretary Sebelius. A number of those centers, Mr.
Chairman--this is why I would like to get you a very specific
answer. A number of those centers have added services. They are
not new centers. They have added mental health centers. They
have added dental chairs. They have added prenatal services. A
number of our satellites help existing health centers which now
provide additional care. There are some new start-ups.
I would be delighted to answer that very specifically, but
we intend--I think the $2,118,000,000 would fund the expanded
footprint and be able to take care of 23 million Americans.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro.

HEAD START

Ms. DeLauro. Well, I think we want to get the record that
shows that, Madam Secretary, that we are going to get the
$1,000,000,000 back, and that we are going to fund the money in
the 2012 bill. I think it has been a good day on this
committee. So I take it to the bank.
I am glad my colleague from Arizona came back in, because
with regard to Head Start, Arizona would lose about--about
3,400 kids would lose services.
But I understand your point about the concerns about
quality, and I think the Secretary talked about that as well,
as we all do. And I am a very strong supporter, as you quoted
my remarks, of Head Start.
But I also want to say to you with regard to that study
that, again, in spite of the ups and downs in achievements, and
the Secretary talked about how to try to strengthen Head Start
programs, the long-term studies--I think it is important for
you to know this--came to a conclusion that there have been
significant improvements in educational life outcomes for kids
who go through this process: increased high school graduation,
fewer grade repetitions, fewer kids going to special ed, higher
vocabulary, better emotional development, reduced mortality
rates, long-term outcomes in adults who attended Head Start.
These are not my words, but the Committee on Economic
Development.
This is the business community essentially, about 200
business leaders and universities presidents. The president, a
gentleman by the name of Charles Kolb, takes a strong stand
over the past decade in support of early education development
programs. Research shows that the programs are investments.
There is no more effective investment than the focus on high-
quality early learning, both short- and long-term investments
in relation to economic development. He supports where we are
going and where the budget is going.
Ben Bernanke--and I talked about him yesterday in the
education hearing--says the most important fiscal issue is
whether the public interest is served by the composition of the
government's budget. Even though budget balance is important,
pay-off to the early childhood programs are especially higher
as a result of the beneficial returns to the overall economy.
Nobel Prize winner James Heckman: Early interventions
produce broad-based benefits, reduce social and economic
inequality. At the same time they promote productivity,
economic efficiency, so they are both fair and efficient.
So the issue is, yes, we can correct where the difficulties
are, and there are all kinds of efforts to do that, but I want
to ask the Secretary, can you tell us what the 2012 budget
would do specifically to support this very successful program?
In addition, I want you to comment on what happens if we
have what H.R. 1 produced, which is that we cut the
appropriation by $1,100,000,000 below the 2010 level? We
haven't heard much in the way of a rationale behind the
decision apart from the general need to balance the budget. If
the majority is successful in this massive cut to Head Start,
what is the effect?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, it is our estimate
that about 218,000 children who are currently served in the
Head Start program would not have an opportunity to participate
in those early learning opportunities. We do take the critiques
very seriously about quality and about school readiness, and I
think that while Congressman Flake mentioned the Department of
Education testimony yesterday, I think there has been very
positive collaboration where Head Start had some, I think,
great practices in terms of parental involvement and social and
emotional development, the educators had some considerable
success in school readiness, and the collaboration around those
efforts to make sure that not only every parent has some
confidence that the placement for his or her child will lead
them to school success, but also beginning to give some value
rankings so parents have a better way to judge program quality.
So we are not only eager to have the President's approved
recommended budget for Head Start, but also continue to work on
the quality initiatives which I think will pay huge dividends
in the long term.

CMS PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

Ms. DeLauro. For the second that I have left, probably,
just cut to the chase. This is about the 13 percent cut in the
majority's budget in regard to CMS and the Medicare program
management. I am going to lay out the question, because I think
it is important to know what that cut would do to CMS. Would it
basically be forced into just paying whatever bills come in the
door, or not being able to pay bills and to keep falling behind
in processing, and what that may mean to the Medicare
population in terms of that 13 percent cut.
My time is up, and maybe we are going to do another round.
Mr. Rehberg. Go ahead.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Secretary Sebelius. I think the Congresswoman is referring
to a cut that, again, is in H.R. 1, $458,000,000,000 for--below
the 2010 funding levels for the Medicare Administration, and,
Mr. Chairman, we see this as very problematic. We anticipate
between 2010 and 2012, we will--we know we will have the first
of the baby boomers coming into Medicare this year. We think
the enrollment will grow from 47 million to 50 million, and
that basically $500,000,000 cut in the overhead will be at a
time when the enrollment will have grown by 12 percent. So that
cut means significant delays in claims processing, significant
hampering of our ability to work on waste, fraud and abuse, as
well as other areas.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis, welcome.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I have 5 minutes?
Mr. Rehberg. You may.

MANDATORY SPENDING

Mrs. Lummis. Oh, fabulous. Thank you.
Hi, Secretary.
I want to focus on some of the mandatory appropriations in
the new health care law and how they augment the
administration's request for fiscal year 2012 discretionary
funds. I see that your request is almost $800,000,000 less than
fiscal year 2010 funding levels, but I also know that that
excludes the mandatory spending that is augmenting
discretionary programs that is in the new health care law.
So here is my question. In light of the significant amount
of mandatory spending provided in the new health care law,
because the budget does not provide a true reflection of the
costs of discretionary programs since those augment
discretionary funding, would you be willing to provide an
addendum to your budget that shows how much by program, an
actual breakdown, is going to be spent no matter what color the
money, no matter what the source, so it includes all mandatory
and discretionary funding sources, whether they came through
the new health care law or your budget?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, first of all, I
think that is in the budget. The spending amounts that are
included in the Affordable Care Act are reflected in the 2012
budget, and they are reflected every year. They will be
reflected every year beyond that. So that currently is
captured.
I would also suggest that the practice of including
mandatory and discretionary funding in laws is not a practice
that is unfamiliar to Congress. In fact, the Balanced Budget
Act and the Deficit Reduction Act and certainly the CHIP
Expansion Act all included mandatory funding. About
$50,000,000,000 of the mandatory spending in the Affordable
Care Act actually deals directly with CHIP, the early retiree
plan and the high-risk plan, but those dollar amounts are
currently in our 2012 budget.

CMS INNOVATION FUND

Mrs. Lummis. Madam Secretary, then let us talk about the
CMS Innovation Fund, the $1,000,000,000 implementation fund.
Can you provide me a breakdown and some information on that
specifically?
Secretary Sebelius. I think it is $10,000,000,000 that is
the total amount of the innovation fund, and I am sorry--
Mrs. Lummis. Could you break it down?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, the innovation fund has not yet
released dollars for any of the grants. They have put out some
proposals that States and health systems and others are about
to come and present proposals on. But if you are asking for
spending out of the innovation fund, that has not begun. The
innovation fund just began in March of this year. It just sort
of launched, but over the course of the 10 years, there will be
a total of $10,000,000,000 available.

FY 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
Now can you tell me what the total amount of fiscal year
2012 spending is and the increase over fiscal year 2010 once
you account for all the mandatory and discretionary funds on
these historically discretionary programs?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, that is a
difficult question to answer. I can tell you what the President
has proposed, and that is what our budget reflects. We don't
have a 2011 budget. We are operating currently on 2010 spending
levels, and so it is almost--I can tell you what is proposed,
and, again, that is what is before you and before this
committee, and it is all the spending that is recommended in
those programs. That is what the budget is.
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Chairman, I don't think I am making myself
clear, so what I will do is submit a series of written
questions.
Secretary Sebelius. Be delighted to answer those.
[The information follows:]
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mrs. Lummis. As always you have the
opportunity to submit your questions for the record.
I understand we are in the grace period. They said between
11:20 and 11:30 votes would occur, so we will do as many as we
can, but not miss votes.
Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think I will
take at least a minute to say happy birthday since he has
brought us all cupcakes. Happy birthday. Did you bring for the
audience, too?
Mr. Jackson. I can't quite make it to the audience, but red
velvet for Democrats and Republicans.
Mr. Rehberg. You didn't take these from your kids. You gave
them some as well?
Secretary Sebelius. I know there is a daughter cupcake
thing.
Mr. Rehberg. Can I give one to the Secretary, please?

BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH

Mrs. Lowey. Let me just say we really do wish you a happy
birthday, and I think I will segue to the NIH.
I referenced, Mr. Chairman, the NIH before, but we will try
and follow the guidelines and eat healthily, but every once in
a while we can have a cupcake. But we really do appreciate the
important work that the NIH is doing, and I am very concerned,
I referenced it before, that in H.R. 1, the House-passed
continuing resolution--I hope we can correct it as the
negotiations go on--the NIH spending is being cut by 5 percent.
Now, let me just say when you cut the NIH, it is not only
putting some of those many proposals on the line that could be
leading to all kinds of important research, it is loss of more
than 17,000 jobs. And it includes more than 250 at just 2 New
York hospitals, Mount Sinai, New York Presbyterian Medical
Centers. And I am sure we can all say the same thing, because
these hospitals, these institutions are very devoted to medical
research.
Frankly, when President Obama talked about winning the
future, Madam Secretary, to me there is nothing more important
than investing in the National Institutes of Health. Not only
is it the global leader in innovative, lifesaving biomedical
research, it supports more than 350,000 high-paying research
positions at more than 3,000 facilities across the country. So
that is why I voted against the CR, Mr. Chair, because I am
very concerned that it would cut 5 percent. That 5 percent
would mean a loss of over, as I look at these numbers,
$100,000,000 to universities and researchers.
So maybe you can share with us, what would that cut mean to
biomedical research? What is the impact?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, the NIH-
recommended level in H.R. 1, I think, is particularly
troubling. It not only reduces overall funding to below the
2008 level, which is enormously significant, but there also is
a lot of direction in resolution of how those grants would have
to be awarded, and it is our best view, based on Dr. Collins'
analysis and the look by the leadership of NIH, that it would
really require curtailing most of the large clinical studies
under way, because we would be directed to put X amount of
dollars to X amount of programs over the years. So about half
of the 100 largest clinical studies, including those on cancer
and Alzheimer's, would probably be cancelled at this point if
that cut were to be enacted, and as you say, right now the
average denominator is about a 7 to 1 for every dollar, and in
research grants there are approximately 7 jobs created in those
local communities. So this has a huge impact not only on the
lifesaving science, but a huge job impact on communities
throughout the country.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.

HEAD START

Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Thank you.
I just wanted to follow up on the Head Start thing. Just to
clarify, the only study--and it was rereleased, done earlier,
but just released by DHS--talking about the fact that the
studies show that whatever gains are achieved, by and large
those gains are gone by the end of the first grade. Yes or no,
have there been any definitive studies, scientific studies, to
refute those claims since that time, or is the fact that we say
that programs are changing, we are doing better there now, is
that just anecdotal?
Secretary Sebelius. That, I would say, Congressman, is the
largest comprehensive study that has been done in the last
decade. As I say, it is almost 5 years old, 6 years old, and
there have been significant improvements. There hasn't been a
similar comprehensive study. There have been smaller studies
which actually show better results outcomes and ones that we
are--but that study in and of itself does show that there are
significant cognitive improvements in those children as they
hit school.
And again, I know that while that improvement level may
level out, the notion that we don't start 5-year-olds
significantly behind their peers, I think, is a major step
forward for the low-income kids served by Head Start and Early
Head Start.
Mr. Flake. You talked about the cost, and it will lead into
my next question as well. Douglas Besharov of the University of
Maryland estimates that it costs us $22,500 to keep one child
in year-round Head Start. Now, typical preschools, that cost is
about $9,500, so we are double the costs of a typical preschool
for this very, very, very expensive program that seems to have
results that, if anything, level off or disappear by the end of
first grade. So I hope that that is cause for more alarm than
we are seeing.
And then it just troubles me that now when we see the
Department of Education now jumping into early childhood
education to the tune of $350,000,000 is what they are
proposing that we appropriate, I can tell you it is falling on
skeptical ears here.

NIH PUBLICATIONS

But with regard to costs and what your agency is doing, I
saw the other day that there is a press release, NIH News,
National Institutes of Health is releasing a cookbook
encouraging families to eat healthfully, a cookbook that is
costing the taxpayers an estimated $150,000. What is NIH doing
releasing a cookbook for $150,000, and why are we funding it?
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a--I am
sorry, Congressman.
Mr. Rehberg. He is not chairman yet.
Secretary Sebelius. Sorry, sorry. There is a directive to
NIH as a component of a number of their programs to put the
evidence-based science into the community vernacular and allow
people to take advantage of it. In this particular incidence,
it is science based on healthy eating and healthy diet. And so
the cookbook is a way of translating what they know, the
science, to produce into a vernacular that hopefully people can
take advantage of.
Mr. Flake. I might suggest there are a lot of other people
putting cookbooks out there. There is a congressional cookbook,
for crying out loud.
Secretary Sebelius. Is it based on NIH science? I am not
sure. If this is an example, I think we have a little problem.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake, if I might, we have about 7 minutes
left in the vote. I would like to ask----
Mr. Flake. That is fine.
Mr. Rehberg. It started. And if anybody has a burning
question you would like to ask, I would certainly grant you
that opportunity. Otherwise you could submit it for the record.
Ms. Lee.

ADAP FUNDS TRANSFER

Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. I just wanted to go back to
the question on HIV and AIDS as it relates to last year. The
administration transferred about $25,000,000 in fiscal year
2010 funds for the ADAP program to help shore up the treatment
programs for people living with AIDS. A number of States now
have almost abandoned them. So I wanted to see if you had any
plans to provide an additional transfer of funds during the
current fiscal year as we work through this budget.
Secretary Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, we are working
very, very closely with States. As you know, it was
$30,000,000, and it was specifically because State resources
had dropped so precipitously, and we are monitoring this very
carefully to make sure that we can adjust resources as we move
along.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Mr. Chairman, let me enter, a unanimous
consent, one letter for the record, if you don't mind, and I
have two very quick questions.
Mr. Jackson. Madam Secretary, I understand that the NIH
Director plans on dismantling the NCRR, the National Center for
Research Resources, to implement a new IC, institute center, on
translation research, resulting in several NCRR programs
needing to be moved to this new IC. Specifically, I am
concerned about the IDeA, Institutional Development Award, and
the RCMI, the Research Centers in Minority Institutions,
programs currently at NCRR. I understand that RCMI will be
housed at NIMHD, the National Institute for Minority Health and
Health Disparities, but not at IDeA. If both programs are
currently being administered by the same staff, and they work
well together, for me it makes sense to keep both programs
together.
Madam Secretary, I wish I could bring this to your
attention so that you could please try your best, consistent
with the plan that we have been following at least for the last
10 years in the committee, to ensure that this program is
appropriately housed at NIMHD at the NIH--these alphabets are
killing me.
And I would ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to again
submit that letter for the record and to allow the Secretary an
opportunity to take a hard look at this issue.
[The information follows:]

Secretary Sebelius. I will.
Mr. Jackson. Very quickly, Mr. Chairman, my final question.

LIHEAP

Secretary Sebelius, this past year the LIHEAP program
served 460,000 households in Illinois. Illinois is currently
ranked the third highest recipient of LIHEAP funds, and my
district continues to be the largest recipient of LIHEAP. Even
at the current $5,100,000,000 funding level, these funds can
only provide one in five eligible households in this country
with heating and cooling assistance.
Could you explain to us what the cuts in H.R. 1 would do to
the LIHEAP program for current low-income residents? And I'll
submit the rest of my questions for the record.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
You have 10 seconds, or you have got to give the cupcake
back.
Secretary Sebelius. It would be very difficult, and it
would turn--the budget returns LIHEAP to its historic levels,
but there is no question it is a very significant cut.
Mr. Jackson. Madam Secretary, thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. We thank you for being here today. Sorry for
allowing you the opportunity to have 20 minutes off. We were
looking forward to until noon, but thank you for taking the
time to come up and be with us.
Secretary Sebelius. I will see you again April 1.
Mr. Rehberg. Yes you will.
Meeting is adjourned.

Tuesday, March 15, 2011.

PELL GRANTS

WITNESS

MARTHA KANTER, UNDER SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Opening Remarks by Mr. Rehberg

Mr. Rehberg. Good morning and thank you all for coming this
morning. This begins a series of oversight hearings we will
have on various issues of interest to the three departments
that we are responsible for, plus related agencies.
And you just get to be the first. We welcome you.
I don't think I need to describe too much the situation we
find ourselves in. In an attempt to help as many students,
long-term students and middle-income, fulfill the dream of
going to college and bettering themselves in the career market,
a number of changes have been made over the course of the years
that has made the program more expensive for the Federal
Government.
But that is not necessarily always a bad thing, unless of
course a deficit is run and then decisions have to be made of
either having to find the difference between what was
appropriate and what was desired, what was used and what we can
afford. And unfortunately, we find ourselves in that situation.
So, in an attempt to at least identify some of the possible
solutions, we asked Ms. Kanter to come in and give us some
testimony and discuss and answer our questions. And maybe you
could enlighten us as to what the Administration is working on,
how Congress fits into that, and ultimately, we can come to the
conclusion of how to make up the difference between the
financial shortfall that seems to be existing in a semi-
mandatory program.
So, without further ado, I will call upon our ranking
member, Ms. DeLauro.

Opening Remarks by Ms. DeLauro

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to say thank you to Secretary Kanter, for
joining with us today. And Mr. Skelly, it is always good to see
you here at the table.
Pell Grants are the foundation of our student aid system,
which seeks to make sure that students with low and moderate
incomes can afford a college education. And right now, Pell
Grants are helping more than 9 million people go to college.

INCREASING COST OF THE PELL GRANT PROGRAM AND INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF
ELIGIBLE RECIPIENTS

There is no doubt that the cost of the Pell Grant Program
has been rising rapidly. As I understand it, the single most
important factor has been growth in the number of eligible
students. Between 2008 and now the number of students receiving
Pell Grants has increased by more than 3 million. The Great
Recession that started in 2008 was a major factor contributing
to this growth. People who have lost their jobs and incomes are
going back to college to acquire new skills for the economic
recovery. That is exactly what we would hope that people would
do; take advantage of the opportunity to retool their skills
for the jobs of the 21st century.
The question for our subcommittee and the Congress is, do
we say to these new students we cannot afford Pell Grants for
you? Do we cut Pell Grants for everyone to try to offset the
growth in the number of students eligible?

CUTS TO PELL GRANTS IN H.R. 1

That is the approach the majority took in H.R. 1, which
passed the House last month. The legislation cuts the Pell
Grant by $845 for almost every student in the program. That cut
is particularly serious because Pell Grants have barely kept up
with the cost of going to college, even with the increase
enacted a couple of years ago in the Recovery Act.
At last Thursday's hearing, I asked Secretary Duncan and
his budget director what H.R. 1 would mean for the average
percentage of college costs covered by Pell Grants. They
replied that the percentage would fall to its lowest level in
38 years.

PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR PELL GRANTS

I hope that the House will change its mind about cutting
Pell Grants and that we can find ways to keep this commitment
to students. The President's budget rightly places a high
priority on maintaining this foundation of college student aid
but proposes some changes to other student aid programs to
produce savings that could be applied to Pell. It also proposes
a change to the Pell program to eliminate the year-round Pell
option that has turned out to be much more expensive than
originally expected. And I look forward to learning more about
the proposals.

IMPORTANCE OF PELL GRANTS

Fundamentally, we need everyone in this country to be able
to afford to go to college if they have the gumption and the
talent to do so and if they are willing to work hard at their
studies. College cannot be just for people whose families have
enough money to afford the cost. Broad access to college is
important for raising people's job prospects and income. It is
vital to the future of our economy since the industries that
will keep us competitive require people with high knowledge and
skills. It is crucial for the continuing functioning and
flourishing of our democracy.
Remember, it was not that long ago that education was only
the purview of the rich. We in the Congress have worked hard to
change this. And that is the fundamental power of this
institution; to help make opportunity possible for middle class
and working families. By doing so, we have further expanded the
middle class in this country.
According to the U.S. Census, the average college graduate
makes almost $22,000 more a year than the average worker with
only a high school degree. Over the course of a lifetime, that
adds up to close to $1,000,000 in earnings.
Senator Claiborne Pell understood the importance of
education to maintaining American prosperity. And as he said,
and I quote, the strength of the United States is not the gold
at Fort Knox or the weapons of mass destruction that we have
but the sum total of the education and the character of our
people.
That is what is at stake here, the very strength of our
Nation. We do not hear China or our other international
competitors saying, oh, we are spending too much on higher
education; we need to cut back. Neither should we. We should
find a way to keep our commitment to Pell strong so that
millions of students can continue to take their futures in
their own hands.
I thank you.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Kanter.

Opening Remarks by Under Secretary Martha Kanter

Ms. Kanter. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify this morning on the Pell
Grant program.
To increase our Nation's economic prosperity and security
we want American workers to out-educate, out-innovate and out-
compete the rest of the world. Today Americans with college
degrees earn 40 percent more than high school graduates and are
twice as likely to be employed. Community college graduates
earn 29 percent more than those with high school diplomas. And
looking ahead, at the new jobs in our Nation, almost half of
them are going to require some postsecondary education.
Given these realities and the administration's commitment
to a $1,000,000,000,000 deficit reduction over the next decade,
President Obama has set a national goal for the U.S. to once
again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the
world.

NEED TO INCREASE NUMBER OF WORKERS WITH A COLLEGE DEGREE

Today only 42 percent of American workers under age 35 have
a college degree. And that places us ninth in the world in
terms of college attainment. By contrast, countries such as
Canada and South Korea, more than 55 percent of young adults
have degrees, have college degrees. So to get back to first in
the world, between now and 2020 we need to increase by 50
percent the number of graduates with degrees. That means 8
million more students above the expected growth due to
population in our graduates.
So, for four decades, the administration and Congress have
supported expanding higher education opportunity for low-income
Americans through the Pell Grant Program. In the past 2 years
alone the number of students, as was said, who received Pell
Grants, grew from 6.2 million to 9.4 million Americans; a 52
percent increase. In large part, due to the growing student
demand and an increase in the maximum Pell Grant award to help
students pay for college, the cost of the Pell Grant Program
has grown significantly, as you said.

PELL GRANT FUNDING AND MAXIMUM AWARD

If no changes are made in the program funding would need to
increase by more than $20,000,000,000 from 2011 to 2012. This
is for three reasons: First, because costs have been rising as
notably more students go to college; second, between 2009 and
2011, funding needs were partially addressed outside of the
regular appropriations bills; and third, shortfalls
accumulating to $11,000,000,000 going into 2011 also must be
addressed in 2012.
The fiscal year 2011 continuing resolution passed by the
House, H.R. 1, would address these funding challenges in the
wrong way, in our opinion. It would cut the maximum grant by
$845 in 2011. And if these cuts were extended into next year
with no further action, the maximum award would be cut by more
than half.
The administration has proposed a balanced approach that
makes tough choices needed to protect the $5,550 Pell Grant. We
have a commitment to several principles: First, as I said, to
protect the maximum award at $5,550; second, funding Pell
within the framework of the 5-year freeze on discretionary
spending and without forcing cuts in other priority
investments; and third, putting Pell Grants on a sound
financial footing for future years.
The President's 2012 budget request for Pell Grants in the
amount of $28,600,000,000 supports these goals. We urge the
Appropriations Committee to provide these funds as part of a
coordinated solution to protect millions of students from large
cuts in the maximum Pell Grants.

PELL GRANT PROTECTION ACT

We proposed a series of steps in the Pell Grant Protection
Act which will require involvement by the Committee on
Education in the Workforce. The single largest step is
eliminating the ability of students to get two Pell Grants in
one year, a policy that costs far more than we expected,
without delivering clear evidence that it is meaningfully
advancing college completion.
Because our proposal is effective for the 2011/2012
academic year and families are planning right now, I urge
Congress to move quickly. And I hope we will have an
opportunity to talk more about this policy today. In addition,
the act would eliminate student loan subsidies for graduate and
professional students. Today the Federal Government pays the
interest on these loans while the students are in school. But
because many students will be able to repay their loans easily,
we believe that the Pell Grant program is a higher priority.
These are tough cuts. Moreover, the Income-Based Repayment
Plan enacted by Congress in 2007 and expanded last year is
available to help borrowers who struggle to afford their loans,
who are seeking and receive graduate degrees.
We have also proposed reforms to the loan programs to give
students more choices and free up resources for the Pell Grant
program.

COLLEGE COMPLETION INCENTIVE GRANTS

In addition to helping students and families pay for
college, our 2012 request includes targeted investments to help
economically disadvantaged students enroll in and complete
college, which helps to meet the 2020 goal. This includes the
College Completion Incentive Grants, which is a program that
would reward States and colleges that increase their number of
graduates with a college degree or certificate.

FEDERAL ROLE IN STUDENT AID

By requesting both authorizing and appropriation
legislation, the administration recognizes that there is a
shared responsibility for protecting the $5,550 Pell Grant.
More than ever, our Nation's students depend on Federal aid
to enroll in and complete higher education. Just 5 years ago,
two out of five full-time students had a Pell Grant, a loan or
both. Today it is nearly four out of five. Protecting the
$5,550 Pell Grant for all students will require a coordinated
effort, as I said, and we look forward to working with the
Appropriations Committee and the authorizing committees on this
important issue.
In closing, let me just add that this administration is
deeply committed to deficit reduction, but not at the expense
of education. To accomplish our goals, we are cutting where we
can so that we can invest where we must. I am available to
answer any questions you will have.
And thank you for the opportunity to prepare this overview.
[Prepared statement of Under Secretary Martha Kantor
follows:]

PELL GRANT ELIGIBILITY

Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Ms. Kanter.
One of the things I learned as I was getting to know Pell
Grant authorizing legislation and the appropriation shortfall
better, both for this hearing and in preparation for chairing
this subcommittee, was that an individual can go to school for
as long as 9 years on Pell Grants without the necessity to
complete a degree. Has there been conversation within the
Administration of trying to address that issue?
Because the taxpayer, the hardworking middle class taxpayer
who is out there but didn't get a chance to go to college and
perhaps didn't want to go to college, became a productive
member of society and is out paying taxes to fund this program.
And when they find this out--and I have asked the question in
town hall meetings all over Montana--I say, do you realize
that, up until July 1st of 2008, there was no limit to the
number of Pell Grants one could get. And first of all, my
question is, can those people that were on Pell Grants that are
still on Pell Grants prior to July 1 of 2008 remain on Pell
Grants indefinitely for life, even without the requirement of
getting a degree.
Ms. Kanter. Well, first, Congress authorized the Pell Grant
to be available for 18 semesters, so that equates to 9 years,
as you said.
Mr. Rehberg. Without necessity of getting a degree? You
don't have to get a degree during the 9 years?
Mr. Skelly. You have to be enrolled in a degree program to
get Pell in the first place.
Mr. Rehberg. Right. But there is no completion requirement;
you don't actually have to get a college degree. You can be
getting Pell Grants for a period of 9 years without getting a
degree.
Ms. Kanter. You could. But frankly, 99 percent of students
are getting Pell Grants for 6 years; 75 percent of the students
are getting Pell Grants for the first 2 years. So less than 1
percent of students, it trails out to a very small number of
students.
Mr. Rehberg. My first question was about those that were on
Pell Grants prior to July 1 of 2008, there is no lifetime cap?
Mr. Skelly. No. The cap was implemented starting in 2008.
We looked it up, and there were only 700 some students we
thought were getting a Pell Grant for more than 18 semesters
back then, so it is not a huge number. It is less than 1/10th
of 1 percent.
Mr. Rehberg. In our discussions then with the
Administration to try to make changes to save Pell Grants,
which is what the authorizing changes that you are suggesting,
would it behoove us to set either a yearly limit to try and
move students through quicker and/or require a degree, and if
not, then after a period of time--not ding them the minute they
quit college, but after a period of time--have a loan repayment
on the grant because they did not complete the work with the
funds they used and availed themselves of?

PROPOSED PELL GRANT PROTECTION ACT

Ms. Kanter. I think you will see in the President's
proposal two performance-based opportunities. One is called
First in the World, which would make grants specifically to
institutions of higher education to increase college completion
and productivity. So those would be, the focus on graduation,
completing college, maintaining quality, is a focus there.
Mr. Rehberg. Is that in addition to a Pell?
Ms. Kanter. Yes.
Mr. Rehberg. In addition. So why not make it----
Ms. Kanter. This is for all students.
And the second one is grants to States to improve
completion.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Then I am not following you. I thought
that was an additional program. You are not suggesting----
Ms. Kanter. Those are within the Pell Grant Protection Act.
Mr. Rehberg. No, within the Pell Grant----
Ms. Kanter. Right, right. You get a Pell Grant, but
institutions will be incentivized.
Mr. Rehberg. I guess that is my problem with the program,
is now you are telling colleges what they are supposed to be
doing, and that is graduating students. I am looking at it from
a different perspective. I am looking at the 9.6 million
students that are going to be on Pell Grants, that are availing
themselves of the opportunity for funds but then not completing
the work.
Ms. Kanter. Well, many of them are leaving because of
financial hardship. So many of them are part time. They are
raising families. They are working a job. In community
colleges, over two-thirds of the students have jobs.
Mr. Rehberg. So the Administration is not seriously
considering any kind of an authorization change to require some
kind of repayment if they do not complete the work?
Ms. Kanter. We are looking at all performance-based
mechanisms, but we have proposed several that we think will
dramatically increase college completion, maintain quality and
allow the Pell Grant program to be available for part-time
students.
Mr. Rehberg. So you would seriously consider some kind of a
recommendation to require a grant repayment through a loan if
they do not complete the work after 9 years?
Ms. Kanter. We are really not looking at that opportunity
right now. It is something that we could look at in the future.
But we think that our proposals are going to incentivize States
and institutions to increase the number of students completing
college.
We don't want to shut out the part-time students. And those
students are predominantly, if you look at the numbers, are the
ones that have to go part time because they have got many
responsibilities. Texas did a study of students who left
college, and their goal was to bring those students back. And
they found that the students who left predominantly left
because of financial reasons.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.

CHARACTERISTICS OF PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Just a couple of points. So for a full time 4-year program,
6 years could be the longest maximum time frame a school could
use, is that right, for the Pell Grant?
Mr. Skelly. Eighteen semesters.
Ms. DeLauro. Right. But the part-time folks are what you
are talking about. And let me just ask you, because of your own
community school background. The youngsters who are going to
our community schools--or that are not youngsters, they are
older, the average age is--I have talked to folks in community
colleges--from 19 years old to 58 years old. Now, are they
mostly part time?
Ms. Kanter. Many are part time returning to college for a
second career. Actually, almost half of the Pell Grant
recipients are age 23 or higher. And many have been displaced
by the economic downturn, as you know; 84 percent of the
students of that group have incomes less than $30,000.
Ms. DeLauro. And so was that the rationale in terms of
allowing for this part-time population, if you will, when
Congress talked about the number of semesters involved, to
allow folks to be able to complete it under this kind of a
basis, was a consideration the part-time nature?
Ms. Kanter. Yes.

RAPID INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS

Ms. DeLauro. Okay. I want to get to a bunch of questions
about the number; why the rapid increase in Pell recipients?
Why is it increasing so rapidly? Do you have estimates of how
much of the increase is due to unemployed people? Do we have
numbers that say people are going back for new skills? How much
is due to reduced incomes and assets as a result of the
financial crisis, the resulting recession? Is the growth
largest in particular kinds of institutions, such as community
colleges? How about for a particular group of students: older
students, part time students, students with families of their
own? What are the kind of demographics here, if you will?
Ms. Kanter. The growth in the number of eligible students
has been 40 percent. The weak economy has driven more students
with financial need back to college. And I think the focus on
the fact that we are not first in the world anymore, the fact
that the new jobs, about half of them are going to require
postsecondary education or training, is drawing lots of people
back to college. These are older students. I went to Warren,
Michigan. I saw people laid off from the assembly line. They
were training for a health career. So people are having to go
back and choose a second career or even to move up in the
career they have or change jobs completely. So these are some
of the reasons that students are coming back in droves.
Ms. DeLauro. I think it is important to reiterate again
that today the average earnings of a college-educated person is
$43,000 while someone with just a high school diploma averages
about $27,000. So the need for the skills and the training to
be able to move forward I think is pressing.

RISING COSTS OF POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION

In tuition and fees at colleges and universities, I would
expect that we would be seeing significant increases,
especially at public colleges and universities as State budget
shortfalls lead to less State support. Has that been the case?
Ms. Kanter. Tuition has gone up, but I think there is a lot
of confusion about tuition. And the total cost of attending
college varies greatly. There is a sticker price. So, for a
private 4-year institution, a sticker price averages $27,000.
The net price actually is $11,320. Room and board is $9,700. So
the total net for a private 4-year is $21,000. A public 4-year
is $10,080. And a public 2-year school is $6,590.
A lot of people confuse the cost, the total cost of
education with tuition. Tuition is often used as a shorthand
for the total cost of attendance. So three-quarters of students
attend public colleges where the tuitions are, as I said, and
after financial aid, net tuition at a public college is
affordable. But room and board cost more. So the Pell Grant
allows students to pay for the full cost of college, and it
really is essential.
Ms. DeLauro. How have Pell Grants been doing keeping up
with college costs? And we know that Pell Grant amounts do not
increase automatically. The amount is set in the annual
appropriations bill. It has been increased from time to time.
But how have the Pell Grants been keeping up with college
costs? Where do we stand now in terms of the percentage of
costs of college attendance covered by Pell Grants relative to
where it was 10 or 20 years ago?
Ms. Kanter. I looked at the cost of Pell Grant escalation
over 32 years, and 38 years since the program started. Three
decades ago, Pell Grants covered two-thirds of the cost of
college education at a public institution. Today it is covering
one-third.
Ms. DeLauro. So we would go back 38 years if we implemented
this?
Ms. Kanter. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PELL GRANT PROPOSAL

I apologize for missing the first part, so if the question
has been asked, forgive me. Your budget, the Pell Grant,
assumes that the authorizing committees are going to make
certain changes. As the chairman has pointed out before, that
may not happen. If it doesn't, what are the plans? Where is the
administration going to go here? It could mean that taxpayers
are on the hook for an additional $8 billion beyond the budget
proposal. What are your plans if the cuts aren't made to the
programs as the administration has advocated?
Mr. Skelly. The budget does propose legislative changes,
and we hope they will be made by Congress. It would be the
Appropriations Committee and the authorizers. It has to be a
collective effort. The process from Congress is up to the
Congress to do.
If you don't enact the kinds of changes, such as the
elimination of the two Pell this year, you are going to have a
shortfall. We suspect, by 2012, you actually have a shortfall
of about $20 billion. The President has requested additional
funds for Pell of $5.4 billion. He is hoping to have changes,
such as the two Pell elimination, that will save about $7.6
billion, and the other changes in mandatory programs that
offset these proposals save another roughly $7.7 billion. If
you don't make those kinds of changes, all you have is the same
amount of money that we have in the current continuing
resolution, $23.2 billion; you would have to have a very
drastic cut of over half the Pell Grant in 2012.
Ms. Kanter. Let me just add that all 9 million students
will see a reduction in their grant. And as Mr. Skelly said,
next year the Pell Grant would be cut in half. So it would
devastate the ability of these students who are financially
needy to go to college. If Pell Grants are funded at the $17.5
billion that the House proposes and reduced to a $4,705 maximum
grant in 2011, at that funding level the maximum grant is going
to plunge to $2,220 in 2012, which is an unprecedented 60
percent reduction. That is why we are so concerned about this.
We are taking steps on our own to look at the expenditures
and save a projected $4 billion over 10 years. We will improve
the accuracy of the student aid award. So we have a whole menu
of things that we are accomplishing in our budget proposal for
the Pell Grant Protection Act.

STUDIES RE IMPACT OF PELL GRANTS ON HIGHER EDUCATION COSTS

Mr. Flake. Shifting gears for a second.
Under Secretary, there are some studies, the Cato Institute
has done a few, which seem to indicate that Pell Grants aren't
necessarily responding to the cost in higher education; they
are driving it. Do you put stock in such reports? To what
extent is the increase in Pell Grants and Federal assistance in
general, what kind of a driver is that for the cost of higher
education rather than a response to it?
Ms. Kanter. We had a 2001 report from the National Center
for Education Statistics, NCES, which found that there is no
association between Federal student aid and changes in tuition.
This is particularly true with Pell, which, unlike student
loans, are not award to all students. Moreover, the size of an
individual's Pell Grant is a function of the maximum grant size
and the out-of-pocket ability to pay for college, how much the
family has or the student has, not the cost of attendance.
Mr. Flake. 2001, 10 years ago, we have seen a significant
increase in Federal assistance since that time. Would the same
hold true today, do you suppose, if a study were to be done
today?
Ms. Kanter. I have no reason to think that wouldn't be
accurate today. In fact, I talked with Mike McPherson from the
Spencer Foundation about this, and I am sure there is other
data to say that tuition and Pell Grants really are not related
or not driving up the cost.
Mr. Flake. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. Let me first commend yourself, Secretary
Duncan, and President Obama, for the work that you are doing to
ensure that higher ed opportunities for students of all ages
and all backgrounds are affordable.

SECOND PELL GRANTS

The funding made available through the Pell Grant Program
continues to provide a real cornerstone of opportunity for many
students who might not otherwise be able to afford to go to
college, technical institution or community college.
In my district, for example, student populations are older;
they are year-round students. The maximum Pell Grant was
$5,550. The provision though in H.R. 1 will reduce it by $850,
which would be extremely detrimental.
Also, in the budget request, the provision that limits Pell
Grants to one award per year, this, again, is going to present
a unique hardship for nontraditional students, older students,
persons seeking to fast-track completion of their degree work,
and they may not be able any longer as a result of this to
obtain two grants in a year. So what is your perspective on
that in terms of the potential adverse impact of these
subpopulations of students, as it relates to their studies, say
during the spring or summer sessions? That is one question.
The second one is I understand, and I wanted to see what
your perspective is and if this is accurate, that low-income
and minority students, especially at 2-year and technical
skills preparing institutions, fail to apply for Pell Grants. I
don't know if this problem is prevalent. What are the
implications for this if that is the case?
Ms. Kanter. Let me take the first one. We don't have all
the data we need yet on the characteristics of students who
receive a second Pell Grant. But we do know that they are less
likely to attend public 2-year schools; 27 percent of second
Pell aid versus 34 percent overall. And we know that students
for whom the policy was intended to benefit, that is who we
tried to benefit for the second Pell. We know that the summer
enrollment grew only 1 percent. So the whole idea was to
accelerate the time to degree, to shorten the time to degree,
accelerate graduation, and we weren't seeing that in the
initial data set that we looked at.
We made some really tough choices. And our highest priority
was to protect the $5,550 Pell for everyone. The other thing I
would probably add is that the second Pell Grant, while great,
escalated costs so much more than we had originally estimated,
which was $300 million; now it is in the billions, and we
couldn't afford that. We didn't see that it was accelerating
for school.
The other thing that I think is important to is that part-
time students can go and use their Pell Grant to go to summer
school. That was not clear from a lot of the media reports. So
if you are a part-time student and you are on your Pell Grant,
you can go in the summer. That was another factor that we
looked at.

GRANTS FOR MINORITY STUDENTS

Ms. Lee. Let me ask the second question as it relates to
minority students. Is that accurate, do you know if in fact
low-income and minority students fail in larger percentages to
apply for Pell Grants?
Ms. Kanter. Well, we have a huge outreach effort for low-
income minority students. We know that about 40--when I looked
at the Pell numbers--about 49 percent of all Pell recipients
are Caucasian students and about 45 percent are Hispanic or
African-American students. However, there are more students
that are eligible for Pell that are not yet in the pipeline. So
we have several things that we are doing.
One is the college access challenge grants that were made
available to every State. It was $150,000,000 every year for 5
years to increase opportunity and outreach for low-income
students. States have sent us lots of creative ways that they
are looking at doing that outreach.
The other big program we have is the GEAR UP program, which
is focused specifically on middle school and high school
students to get that pipeline ready for college.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to say, Dr. Kanter, it is so nice to
see a community college gal here in Washington. And in my home
State of Wyoming, the community college system is so augmenting
to the single University of Wyoming, our only a 4-year degree
granting institution. And without our community colleges, we
wouldn't have that full complement of education opportunities
for a broad spectrum of people. And so I am just delighted to
see a community college person at the helm.

TEACH GRANTS VS. PRESIDENTIAL TEACHING FELLOWS

A few questions, could you walk me through, I don't quite
think I am there, in understanding the discrepancy in the
budget authority between the old and the new programs, meaning
the TEACH grant versus the Presidential Teaching Fellows? As I
look at it, the new program would cost $185 million; the old
program, fiscal year 2010, $27 million; fiscal year 2011, $22
million. It looks like a huge increase to me, but I understand
there is some scoring issue that I may not be completely aware
of.
Ms. Kanter. Right. Our intent was to convert the existing
program to a new program that would incentivize students in
their senior year who were far more likely to actually enter
the teaching profession than incentivizing them in the freshman
and sophomore years, where students are just being introduced
to whether they really are committed to a teaching job, and
then to give back over 3 years after graduation in the teaching
profession and to reward high-performing institutions that
States would designate as high-performing to get those TEACH
grants.
So I think the whole effort was to take existing funds and
refocus them in this new way to reward the high performers to
actually help the not-as-high-performing institutions move
toward that level of excellence and then to shut down the poor
performers. Actually, historically, when you look at the
program today, only certain States designated only 38
institutions as poor performers. And that was a concern in the
breadth of the numbers. We have 1 million teachers to get those
million teaching jobs over the next 5 to 10 years. So we have
got to incentivize the full range of students to be competitive
for those jobs.
And this program rewards high performers, and it was taking
existing funds and moving them into this new method.
Do you want to add anything, Tom?
Mr. Skelly. I would just add the one technicality was that
the TEACH grant program is one where if students don't persist
in teaching, that the grant becomes a loan. And under the
Credit Reform Act, loans sometimes have savings to the Federal
Government. So, for example, in 2010, there was a $153,000
downward adjustment to the cost of the program. If you take
into account that downward sort of adjustment, the receipts
that we get under the Credit Reform Act, the cost of the new
program is about the same as the cost of the existing TEACH
grant program.
Mrs. Lummis. It would be helpful if you could put something
in writing that explains that to me. I didn't quite--that
didn't quite connect with me when I read this. And in spite of
the merits of that proposal and the goals of it, why is that
not a State function? Why is that a Federal function?
[The information follows:]

Costs Under the Teach Grant Program

The TEACH program awards annual ``grants'' of up to $4,000
to eligible undergraduate and graduate students who agree to
serve as a full-time mathematics, science, foreign language,
bilingual education, special education, or reading teacher at a
high-need school for not less than 4 years within 8 years of
graduation. For students who fail to fulfill this service
requirement, grants are converted to Direct Unsubsidized
Stafford Loans with interest accrued from the date the grants
were awarded. It is currently estimated up to 75 percent of
recipients will not complete their service requirement, and
thus see their grants converted to loans.
Because of this provision--where grants are converted to
loans--TEACH is operated as a loan program and uses the rules
established in the Credit Reform Act of 1990. Budget authority
reflects the estimated net present value of all future non-
administrative Federal costs associated with awards made in a
given fiscal year. The estimated costs of outstanding loans are
evaluated annually, through the re-estimate process, to reflect
updated assumptions and actual experience. The total change in
costs for all outstanding loans in the TEACH program at the end
of FY2010 is depicted in the 2011 re-estimate. The net re-
estimate (the aggregate of the upward and downward adjustments)
is $5.5 million. This means the estimated Federal cost of prior
loan cohorts (2008 through 2010) is now lower by $5.5 million.

Ms. Kanter. Well, the idea is to use precious Federal
resources to identify models of high-performing programs. So we
are giving money to States to do the rewards for designating
the excellent performers, but it takes existing funds and we
think uses them far more effectively and efficiently.
Mrs. Lummis. More effectively and efficiently than State
funds or than just the way the Federal funds are being----
Ms. Kanter. No, no, no. The existing funds. In other words,
we are spending a lot of time reforming the existing Federal
dollars that we have to be put toward performance-oriented
programs like you see in the TEACH grant. That is what we are
trying to do, is take existing funds and use them in better
ways.
Mrs. Lummis. I am looking at the fact that your budget
increase request is 12 percent, and it is actually even a 34
percent increase if you don't get the authorizing committee
changes that are proposed. That is a whopping increase at a
time when we are spending money we don't have. So I am just
curious about why the emphasis on spending more at the Federal
level when education is really a State responsibility.
Ms. Kanter. Well, we see it as a partnership between
States, local institutions and K-12 schools and the Federal
Government. So this is our portion, our effort to really
incentivize excellence, to reward the high performers and to
invest in education, as the President has said, so that we can
really create the kind of American prosperity and security that
we all want for this country.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
We are completing our first round, so you came in under the
wire.

INCOME-BASED REPAYMENT PROGRAM OUTREACH

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Well, I apologize for being late, but I
had another hearing at the same time. I would like to talk a
little bit about the income-based repayment program, which was
created to ensure that students who invest in their college
education do not find themselves in insurmountable debt. And
since last fall, only 200,000 students have enrolled in the
program. Since we know that there are millions of students that
can benefit from this affordable loan payment, what is the
department doing to reach out to borrowers to increase
participation?
Ms. Kanter. Well, we have a number of outreach efforts, not
only through Federal student aid, and you will see us
displaying a lot of information about the income-based
repayment plan on our Federal aid Web site. But as I mentioned
before, the college access challenge grants are given to every
State to really do the kind of outreach for students, not only
who are coming up into the pipeline of college but who are in
the college pipeline. So our largest program, TRIO, is focusing
on students who are in college and ways to help them over the 4
years to however long that they are in if they are a part-time
student get the education they need and use the availability of
the income-based repayment (IBR) to plan their future. Whether
they are going to finish college or go on to graduate school,
the IBR is available to them.
So we have to do a lot more outreach. We have a lot of
plans under way in Federal aid to continue to do that. And
frankly, the outreach happens at the institutions. The outreach
happens because the Federal aid staff are reaching out to
students when they are converting. We have servicers, many
contractors, private contractors that we are using to actually
provide guarantees on the back end and do the education of
students who are actually taking loans, they are consolidating
loans, they are figuring out how to pay for college. And so, in
those programs, we are incentivizing those contractors to make
sure that IBR is something that they can discuss with students
on the back end.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. And if you have the written information,
don't forget Members of Congress. We are out there talking to
students, going to our universities and our schools, and we
could also be a resource and be able to distribute some of that
information as well.
Ms. Kanter. We would be glad to get that information to
you.

SECOND PELL GRANT

Ms. Roybal-Allard. I would like to ask you another
question. I know that you have already touched on the year-
round program, but the popularity of this program indicates it
is filling a real need, especially among older and
nontraditional students who are trying to complete their degree
faster.
And the Administration has said that the year-round Pell
program has not accelerated graduation rates. And it seems to
me that this evaluation is really premature given that the
program has been in place for only 18 months. Last week
Secretary Arne Duncan told this committee that there were about
2 million jobs waiting for skilled American workers to fill
them. And wouldn't it serve our economy better to encourage
students to finish their degrees than to enter the work force
as soon as possible?
Ms. Kanter. This is an example of where we had to make a
really tough choice. And because the cost escalated so much and
because we knew that part-time students could continue their
education in the summer, we chose to propose that the reduction
in the summer Pell, suspending it or eliminating it at this
point, is a choice that we had to make. It would be fantastic
if we could continue it, but we just didn't feel we could
afford it. Our highest priority was to maintain the $5,550
maximum award for students and to help the full-time students,
who wouldn't have a second Pell, be able to continue their
education if they decided to go to summer school. We did only
find a 1 percent increase in summer school enrollment. So that
was also part of our consideration.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Okay. So if this program is being
eliminated; have you explored other options to help students
who are making good-faith efforts to graduate ahead of schedule
and to accelerate their studies? Are there other avenues that
you are looking at?

EFFORTS TO INCREASE COLLEGE COMPLETION

Ms. Kanter. The two proposals that we have made for the
College Completion Incentive Grants to States on the one hand
and reforming of the FIPSE program, and on the other hand, to
give money directly to institutions to accelerate degree
completion and increase productivity; those are sort of the two
centerpieces of that fund, would actually be producing higher
levels of completion, which means they would have reforms in
place to do better outreach internally for existing students to
keep them on track. We looked, and we are going to be issuing
some information to you hopefully very soon, on college
completion strategies that we have studied across the country.
But I was saying earlier, Texas went after every student
that went to college but didn't finish their degree, had an
outreach plan for every institution of higher education over
several years, and actually, half of the students returned and
graduated. So it is models like that that we have looked at
across the country to see what can we do with a small amount of
incentive funding to actually increase those completion rates.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.

STIMULUS SPENDING FOR PELL

It is no secret in this committee that I am particularly
critical of the stimulus because it didn't stimulate the
economy, which is what it was intended to do. That is what it
was advertised as. It was going to be timely. It was going to
be targeted, and it was going to be temporary. And one of the
temporary issues, even though I think that many of the things
that money was spent on the stimulus are good programs, good
social programs and are worthy of our consideration in the
Appropriations Committee for spending, it didn't stimulate the
economy. It was spending, not building an asset for the
immediate jump starting of the economy.
Your area is one of those areas, because while I can
justify perhaps backfilling money to fulfill a shortfall in
Pell funding because of unanticipated costs because of new
eligible students, the difficulty is in my mind that then
somehow this becomes permanent. What kind of a policy decision
was made within the Department to suggest that $619 increase in
Pell Grants as a result of the stimulus dollars would then
become the de facto base to be built then into an ongoing grant
expenditure, thereby exacerbating our problem of trying to find
a way to pay for it? Because two other programs I support--
Title I and IDEA--were specifically told, don't make this
permanent. IDEA was specifically told, don't make this
permanent; spend it on things that are a one-time expenditure.
But somehow, in the Pell Grants, we made a determination that
the new base as a result of the stimulus becomes the new de
facto maximum grant.
Ms. Kanter. I think in general our goal is to educate as
many students as we can so that they can get the jobs and, as I
mentioned, they will earn 40 percent more if they graduate from
college. So it was a stimulus going forward to actually have
the Pell Grant keep pace with inflation and move the country
forward in the larger sense.
Mr. Rehberg. So, in fact, then, it was not temporary. It
became then in the minds and the eyes of the Administration the
new de facto base?
Mr. Skelly. It also became the base in the appropriations
statute that the Appropriations Committee each year sets as the
maximum level for discretionary funding.
Mr. Rehberg. The last Congress, the last majority.
Mr. Skelly. The only Congress we had last year.
Mr. Rehberg. Which also made the promise that this was
temporary; it was going to be stimulative; the economy was
going to turn around. And again, where are the jobs? So it was
spending and not stimulative.
And then the Administration made the determination it is
more important to increase the base in Pell than continue the
ongoing expense of the same temporary spending for IDEA in
Title I. So you have decided that college kids are more
important than our disabled and our low-income Title I
students, is that correct?
Ms. Kanter. I don't think so. I think we look at every
program and what we need for the country, so that when I look
at the people who are 23 years and older who are earning less
than $30,000, who receive Pell Grants, 84 percent have less
than an annual income of $30,000, that $619 means that they
could take one to three classes. That is what it translates
down to, or it means $619. When I was a community college
president, it was $400 for the people to become emergency
medical technicians, paramedics.
Mr. Rehberg. Which then, unfortunately, creates an
additional problem for us because of the higher grant level and
the changes in eligibility.
And going back to Ms. DeLauro's comment about one of the
problems is the higher number of eligible students, we are
probably, if we do not get the authorization legislation
through, going to have to come up with an additional $20
billion that can't be spent then on Title I and IDEA. We have
created a problem where we are pitting groups against each
other.
And it doesn't seem fair at a time where that was the
second highest increase, I think in the history of Pell, a one-
time shot. I think the last one was back in the 1970s when I
might have been able to take advantage of the Pell. It was the
second highest level. It became the new floor. And
unfortunately, then it is pitting group against group within
the Labor/HHS/ED budget. And somehow we are going to have to
come up with an additional $20 billion because of our desire to
use temporary money to then create a new floor.

PELL GRANT PROTECTION ACT PROPOSAL

Ms. Kanter. Well, as I said in my remarks, we have prepared
a set of solutions that when taken together would close the $20
billion shortfall and allow us to fund the Pell program; you
know, the direct lending, putting that in place saved the
government--$6.8 billion a year going forward. This set of
solutions, suspending the second Pell Grant and the other
proposals that we are making in the Pell Grant Protection Act,
would actually cover that $20 billion shortfall and not affect
the lives of more than 9 million people to not be able to
continue their education and get into the workforce to become
taxpayers.
I mean, that is our dream; that we can get every American
getting as much education as they can to be able to get into
the economy and move the country forward.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me also, Mr. Chairman, welcome, a number of students
who are in the audience here. I think they may be Pell Grant
recipients and probably SEOG recipients, et cetera, and are
counting on, are truly as they should, counting on the
opportunity to be able to access funds in order to be able to
complete their education so that in fact they are not
unemployed and have to collect an unemployment check, but
rather that they can go to school, they can get a degree, and
they become, you know, a taxpayer. So listen carefully to the
debate, listen very carefully, I might add, to know where your
fate lies in this instance.

ECONOMIC STIMULUS

Let me also just say in terms of the $619 increase, there
is a question of stimulus; what stimulates the economy? Getting
kids and older adults to school so that they can make a living,
spend the money and continue that multiplier effect that access
to education has. It is extraordinarily stimulative. If you
talk to any economist about what stimulates the economy, it
isn't the tax cuts for the richest 2 percent of the people in
this Nation that stimulates the economy--and those who have
constructed these cuts in these various areas are the same
group of people who would like to see those tax cuts continued
permanently. And what do people at that level do with their
money? They take it and they put it in the bank and they
collect interest on it, rather than allowing young people to be
able to go to school to take that $619 and to be able to
usefully apply it to their future education, and it stimulates
everything after that.

IMPACT OF H.R. 1 ON EDUCATION

I will just make one more comment. If we are talking about
education and pitting groups against one another, just take a
look at H.R. 1 with the full-scale assault on education. As to
whether or not it is preschool and Head Start, special ed,
whether it is K-through-12 education or whether it is higher
education, we seem to be dealing with planned obsolescence
coming out of H.R. 1 and what the future of education is in
this Nation. And it is only a goal in recent years that
education for middle class families like the one that I came
from have an opportunity to send their kids to school so that
they can realize their dreams and aspirations and, yes, become
economically viable.

SAFEGUARDS TO PREVENT STUDENT AID ABUSE

Let me move to the issue of strengthening the rules and the
safeguards to keep proprietary schools from abusing student aid
programs with their students. Can you provide us with an update
on those efforts and what you are trying to accomplish with
them?
I am going to deal with a follow-up as well so you have a
chance to answer it. H.R. 1, passed by the House last month,
includes a rider that would prohibit the Department from
finalizing the rules it is still working on and from
implementing some of the rules it has completed.
What precisely would that rider prevent you from doing? Am
I correct that it would completely shut down all efforts to
establish a process for excluding from Pell Grants and other
student aid those institutions with the worst records in terms
of loan repayment rates and debt-to-income ratios? Not only
could you not implement the rule you are working on, but you
couldn't develop or propose alternative rules on the subject?
I don't know if I am correct that the rider would prevent
the Department from enforcing a new rule that requires certain
schools to give prospective students information on tuition
charges, completion and placement rates, median levels of
student debt for the program the student is considering
entering. I always thought disclosure would be something that
we would all want to see in these areas. We need to deal with
reducing fraud and abuse in Federal programs, which is part of
the content of this hearing. And wouldn't I be right in saying
that the Department is trying to do this in the area of student
aid and proprietary colleges? Yet the majority responds with a
rider to shut down these efforts.
Ms. Kanter. Our priority in proposing the gainful
employment rule is doing the right thing for students and
taxpayers. Consumer protection is driving our rulemaking. The
current law includes the gainful employment provision, which
has never been defined. We are now defining this provision so
that students and taxpayers would have a minimum standard of
expectation, especially in these difficult economic times. You
will see us already publishing the 3-year default rate and the
graduation rates. And if you go out to the Federal aid website
and you are a student and you want to go to different colleges,
you can, in the interest of open government and transparency,
you can put in the school you want to go to and see how much it
cost, what the graduation rates are, what the default rates are
and so forth. So there is a whole list of information about
every single institution that is helpful.
It is unacceptable, we believe, to burden students with a
debt that they can't afford in exchange for degrees that they
won't be able to use in the labor market. That is the sort of
principle. It is especially problematic when we impose this
kind of burden on low-income students who overwhelmingly have
taken part in these programs and can least afford the debt.
We have received over 90,000 comments. We have read every
single comment. We have listened very carefully. And we think
when we propose the rule, we will have incorporated the
meaningful feedback and the improvements from all people that
we have heard from, and it has been many. We think we are
proposing a reasonable rule, and we look forward to that.
Ms. DeLauro. So we need your rule in order to cut back on
waste, fraud and abuse in this system.
Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
And I apologize. There are three hearings going on at the
same time, maybe more.
And I appreciate your appearing before our committee.

IMPACT OF H.R. 1

Let me make it clear that in my view the deeply flawed
House-passed 7-month continuing resolution would slash Pell
Grants by more than $3,000,000,000, which would cause more than
9 million students to face a reduction in the amount of
assistance they receive. I am very pleased that the
administration proposed to increase funding for Pell. This is a
perfect example of contrasting priorities.
While one side is seeking to slash the most important
student financial aid program, the other is prioritizing
initiatives to further educate students.
Now, I want to also make it very clear, we all agree on the
need for fiscal restraint, but we cannot win the next century
by slashing the programs that matter most. I am particularly
concerned of the impact of reducing Pell when the cost of a
college education keeps going up. Tuition at 4-year public
schools has risen 40 percent since 2001. Borrowers typically
graduate with more than $17,500 in debt. So the students and
families in my district and throughout the country desperately
need help.
So if you could share with us whether the Department of
Education has an estimate on the number of Pell recipients who
could not attend college without financial aid?
Ms. Kanter. Our numbers are, if this H.R. 1 were to go
through, that 10,000 students would be shut out completely. But
all 9-plus million students would be dramatically affected. And
our concern is, as I said in the beginning, if nothing is done,
next year all of the Pell Grants would be cut in half. I did
look State by State at each one of your States and each one of
your districts to see how many thousands of students would be
affected. We hope that you will consider this in a conversation
with the other committees, so that we can come to a solution
that would make sense.
In terms of tuition rising, the number one driver is the
stagnation of State funding for higher education. So what we
hope to do is really incentivize States and use our Federal
funding wisely to bring back support in States for higher
education and K-12. The demand for public and private post-
secondary education is at an all-time high, as I said. And I
talked about higher graduation rates and higher employment
rates once students come out. And we need those students in
Pell. We have got 49 percent of students are Caucasian, as I
said, and 45 percent are Hispanic or black. So we have got
driving huge numbers of students who are going to be the future
of California receiving those Pell Grants, and we want to do,
as we said before, more outreach and more support so that we
can have those graduates reflect the country's population going
forward.
Mrs. Lowey. I really appreciate your comments.
And Mr. Chairman, I do hope we can work in a bipartisan way
to resolve this. I know I have visited a school like
Westchester Community College. Many of these kids are first
generation going to school. And if they get less than $845,
that can make the difference for them.
And what was interesting to me at both Westchester
Community or Manhattanville College or many--I have many
colleges in the district--these kids are working two or three
jobs. They are just struggling.
And I remember talking to Joe Hankin at Westchester
Community College, they can't even pay for the books. So
getting them books, helping them pay tuition. They can't go
back and say, hey mom, hey dad, can you help me?
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me some time. And
I do look forward to working together on a budget that cuts out
unnecessary spending. I think we all want to do that. But we
have got to help our young people get that education they need
and go to college. I worry that, because they are all working,
they don't even have enough time to study.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

COLLEGE COMPLETION RATE FOR PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS

Sort of continuing along the lines of that discussion, an
adjunct question about Pell Grants. Do you have any data
demonstrating that college completion rates for Pell Grant
recipients have increased as Pell Grants have increased?
Ms. Kanter. Nationally we have been stagnant, as Secretary
Duncan has said, for decades. So, right now, about half of the
students who are enrolled are graduating from college. And for
Pell Grants, it is close to that. Pell-eligible students are in
college somewhere around 45 percent, rather than 50 percent, so
that we don't have this huge gap. The country itself, all of
our higher education institutions, in partnership with States,
in partnership with the Federal Government, have got to
increase college completion while continuing to maintain
quality. We want students to get a first-class education.
Everyone in this room, more than everyone in this room, is
probably getting or got a first-class education, and we want
those students to have that available to them.
Now, I mean, what is difficult is that college completion
has remained stagnant, and we have got to find those incentives
that are going to get us the result that we want.
Mrs. Lummis. And I have an adjunct question there, since
you brought up that point. Have you looked at alternative ways
to incentivize college completion for Pell Grant recipients
besides the amount of the grant?

COLLEGE COMPLETION INCENTIVES

Ms. Kanter. Yes. We have two proposals that would be paid
for within the Pell Grant Protection Act. As I mentioned
before, I don't want to be repetitive, but one is the College
Completion Incentive Grants that would be given to States to
give to institutions that are high performers in terms of
completion and have the productivity results and the
innovation, which is what we want, to drive more students to
completion and jobs.
The other grant fund is called First in the World; we can
get you more information on that. But those are grants directly
that would be competitive nationally directly to colleges and
universities to showcase what they can do to increase
dramatically the number of students getting a college degree at
a 2-year or 4-year institution.
Mr. Rehberg. Will the gentlewoman yield for a moment?
Mrs. Lummis. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. The point was made earlier, while that is
interesting, those two new programs, money going to the States
and the colleges, it is paying colleges to do what they are
supposed to be doing already. I think your question was, is
there incentives for the individual to finish their college
degree, as opposed to paying colleges more money to do what
they are supposed to be doing in the first place?
Mrs. Lummis. A great point, Mr. Chairman.
I am curious about whether there are nonfinancial
incentives, mostly out of my concern that since we are spending
money we don't have, we have to be more creative than we used
to be, instead of just trying to use financial incentives. It
seems to me that when you don't have any money, you find other
means than money to incentivize. And so that was really the
nature of my question.
Ms. Kanter. I mean, we have some programs in place that
include mentoring and tutoring. The TRIO program is a great
example, or GEAR UP for younger people to be able to stay on
track to actually get into college. So those are programs where
students are getting mentors. They are working in communities.
We have got a lot of those incentives.
But financial reasons are the greatest hardship and the
greatest reason why students leave college. And so we know that
the Pell Grant has been an incentive to keep them in and keep
them moving toward their degrees.
Mrs. Lummis. Do we know if TRIO participants have a higher
graduation rate than non-TRIO?
Ms. Kanter. I don't have that research, but I would have to
come back to you with that information.
[The information follows:]

Studies Showing the Results of the Trio Programs

Numerous studies have been performed examining the outcomes of TRIO
program participants. These studies have shown a consistent association
between participation in TRIO programs and improved outcomes for these
participants. For instance, a January 2009 study of a random sample of
Upward Bound participants found while Upward Bound had no detectable
effect on the rate of overall postsecondary enrollment, the type of
postsecondary institution attended, or the likelihood of earning a
bachelor's or associate's degree, it did increase the likelihood of
earning a postsecondary certificate or license. Additionally, it showed
the longer a student participated in the program the more likely they
were to enroll in and graduate from a postsecondary institution. This
applied particularly to certain subgroups of students, including those
who did not expect to complete a bachelor's degree program. Upward
Bound was able to increase the rate of postsecondary enrollment by 6%
and completion by 12 percent. A separate study, released in February
2009, studied Upward Bound Math-Science program, and found an
association between students that participated and an increase in
enrollment in more selective four-year institutions, and in degree
completion overall.
Studies examining other programs within TRIO have found similar
results. For instance, a study released just this month showed, when
measured with analytic models that account for differences in the level
of services and type of supplemental services offered to students,
positive and statistically significant impacts on persistence in higher
education and degree completion were produced by the Student Support
Services program. Finally, in the Ronald E. McNair Postbaccalaureate
Achievement program, a study from March 2008 displayed for every 100
participants, 98 completed a bachelor's degree program, 44 received an
M.A. as their highest degree, 14.4 earned a doctorate, and 12.1 earned
their first professional degree.

FEDERAL EDUCATION BUDGET PRIORITIES

Mrs. Lummis. Another question if I might, Mr. Chairman.
Does the Department of Education prioritize within the
Department of Education budget on expenditures? You know, my
personal bias at the Federal level is for higher-ed spending
than for K-through-12 because I see K-through-12 spending as
being a State responsibility. Do you make those kinds of
determinations, whether they are different from my conclusions?
Do you make those kinds of judgment calls within the
Department?
Ms. Kanter. We have gone through every single program,
which ones we can reform, which ones we have eliminated,
proposing consolidating 38 programs. We have made some really
tough decisions to suspend the second Pell Grant. We have the
financials behind each one of those decisions that we can share
with you at a later time if you would like to see the process
we are going through.
But somebody said, everything is on the table. And for us,
we are scrutinizing program by program, can we get more out of
it? Someone said, can you get more orange juice out of the
orange? And so how much productivity can we get? How much do we
have to invest? I think the overall message is invest in
education and make the cuts that we have to make that we wish
we didn't to move things forward.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Dr. Kanter.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much.

MINORITY ACCESS AND OUTREACH TO PELL GRANTS

Following up on what I had asked with regard to low-income
students, minority students, applying for Pell Grants, looking
at this ``Apply to Succeed'' by the Advisory Committee on
Student Financial Assistance, one point they made is that it
says the problem is disadvantaged students often do not use the
Web, especially of the Latino population having difficulty with
the Web, and that is a growing population. There is still a
digital divide, I know, in communities of color. And are Pell
Grant applications, are they only Web-based, or can people
apply for them in a variety of ways?
Ms. Kanter. You can fill out a paper copy. It is really
much easier to facilitate Web-enabled delivery. But that is
available. Federal student aid offices, I ran one for 16 years
as a community college president, it was open all the time. So
students who couldn't get into the Web, they had the Web right
there, so they could help the students get that assistance.
But frankly, we need a lot more outreach, and so the GEAR
UP program has been one where we have actually demonstrated--
Secretary Arne Duncan and I went to one of the high schools
here to look at how Web-enabled were they and how many students
could actually get in and understand that this was going to
apply.
One of the things we have done is in the Web-enabled FAFSA,
we have not only cut out many questions that the government
already had the information for, but we also made it easier to
port in, in our relationship with Social Security and the
Treasury and the IRS, tax information from the prior year. So
we are trying to simplify what is done. We are actually going
to have a pilot where we are looking at a really limited number
of questions. You know, how to make it really easy for students
to get that application finished, and that is a high priority
for us.

PROPRIETARY INSTITUTIONS

Ms. Lee. Let me ask you about these proprietary
institutions, because oftentimes they paint very rosy pictures
as relates to training in the culinary arts, health sciences,
technology. Oftentimes, though, they promise employment after
graduation or certification, but what we found, and I think you
know this, is that, in many instances, students are securing
Pell Grants and loans without even obtaining a degree or
certificate, that sometimes they are very misleading in terms
of the types of programs leading to a job, finding now that
many for-profit institutions, I think it has grown by 160
percent in the past, but only 10 percent of students consume 25
percent of Pell Grants and 21 percent of all Federal loan
dollars.
So what is going on with these proprietary institutions,
also for the for-profit institutions, given that their
graduation rate--what is it 20 percent for a bachelor's degree
and 60 percent for programs of 2 years or less and 40 percent
of these loans go into default--so can you kind of give us an
understanding of what is taking place with the for-profit
institutions, the proprietary institutions and Pell Grants and
students getting a job at the end of the program?
Ms. Kanter. Well, I think when you look at the entire
sector of higher education, for-profits are educating about 10
percent of students in higher education. We have 6,000
institutions across the country. They have dramatically grown
over the last decade. They specifically have had a spike in the
number of 4-year baccalaureate programs. That has grown
dramatically. And our agenda is to do the right thing for
students and for taxpayers.
So we are proposing a gainful employment rule to define a
provision so that we would have a minimum standard of
expectation that, on the one hand, would serve over time to
reduce the high default rates and, on the other hand, like we
are doing for all of higher education, increase the number of
graduates that are getting through with high quality programs.
So that is pretty much all I would say.
Ms. Lee. Do you require these programs to have a
correlation or a match with, say, Department of Labor
statistics showing which sectors are employing people or can
they provide any type of training they so desire just to get
the money in?
Ms. Kanter. Well, I think all of higher education is
providing programs to meet the needs of industry. So we look at
health care, we look at the IT sector, or we look at any number
of fast-growing sectors, bioscience, you know, half of all new
jobs will require some or more postsecondary education. We will
have program data to show how these programs are doing. And it
is helpful that over time, those programs will be targeting the
high-performing students that will be graduating and getting
the jobs that are available, but we have a lot more to do on
the basis of protecting taxpayers and students from waste,
fraud and abuse.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Kingston.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

IMPACT OF PELL GRANTS ON COLLEGE COSTS

Madam Under Secretary, one of the things that I have seen
as the son of a college professor raised or reared in Athens,
Georgia, that when the HOPE scholarship came along, there was a
lot of tuition inflation. And it was a great thing for those
students that had the HOPE scholarship, but for those who did
not, their tuition went up, and universities in general spend
more money. And I was wondering if you studied that effect in
terms of Pell scholarships on campuses where a substantial
portion of the student population is on Pell?
Ms. Kanter. I gave a little while before you came a
description of the cost of tuition, and I cited a study from
the College Board that showed there was no correlation between
the Pell Grant and college tuition. I can tell you that I think
a lot of confusion is because of the sticker price of college.
And I will just use another example. I used private before. I
will use public 4-year institutions this time. The sticker
price is $7,610. The net with the Pell Grant is $1,540. Room
and board is $8,540. The total net is $10,080. So, you know, we
have a big escalation; people talk about a cost of college
being $50,000 a year. That really is not the case. When you
remove the sticker price, you look at the Federal and State aid
and then you look at also the opportunity for many of the
students who receive Pell to have work study as well to help
offset.
One of the biggest factors is the growth in the price of
books. I know this from my personal experience. I was mentoring
a student. I always mentored a student when I was college
president, and one student didn't come back, and it was because
he couldn't afford the books. He was too ashamed to tell me. So
we have a whole spectrum of cost of college, and we don't see
any correlation. We know that there are some other studies
maybe done some years back. And I was asked a question, is
there a more recent study? And we will try to ask the experts
to get as many of the recent studies as we can to look at the
effect.
Mr. Kingston. How old was your study?
Ms. Kanter. This study was in 2001, and it was done by
NCES, the National Center for Education Statistics. It was a
large Federal study.

FREE APPLICATION FOR STUDENT AND FORM

Mr. Kingston. I want to get to Ms. Lee's question a little
bit in terms of the student forms. I know that you are--I
believe you are looking at making changes to the Free
Application For Student Aid Form. What are you doing to that?
Ms. Kanter. My dream is no form at all. My dream is, could
we do for everyone in this country what we do for people who
receive Social Security? You qualify or you don't. So that is
kind of driving the philosophy. We want to simplify the Pell
form. We want to simplify the access for students. Technology
is a digital divide still in this country. That is why the
broadband going to the rural areas in the country, I have been
at a lot of broadband meetings about 6 months to a year ago to
see, can we get this technology to everyone? Can we get the
application available that is easy to fill out?
In the first year, we cut half the questions, almost half
the questions, out of the form. We already had the information
reporting over with the IRS prior-year tax information to help,
again, further simplify. We want to make it easier for students
to get in. And then the focus there is, once they are in, we
want them to finish.
Mr. Kingston. I am not sure that philosophy is something I
would accept and embrace readily. I am not sure it is wrong
either. But I do like the idea that you have to do something to
earn somebody else's hard-earned tax dollars going for your
tuition. And filling out an application isn't that bad.
But my interest in it is, I can't stand some of these
repetitive questions on applications, and I think they can be
very helpful. But I think there is a certain amount of
screening that, you know, listen, you are getting a tax,
somebody else's hard-earned tax dollars paying your way to go
to college, and filling out a form isn't that bad. It kind of
removes some sense of entitlement on it.
But will it save some money doing this, save some
administrative costs.
Ms. Kanter. We have an income verification program that we
have proposed as one of our parts of the Pell Grant Protection
Act, so that we would be there doing a much better job in
verifying eligibility using the technology that is available to
us with the IRS to identify people that qualify and people who
don't. So there are cost savings there.
Mr. Skelly. Several hundred million dollars. We do have
some overpayments and underpayments actually in the Pell Grant
program. By allowing students to pre-populate their form with
IRS information, we think it will actually save us quite a bit
of money.
Mr. Kingston. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
Ms. Roybal-Allard.

YEAR-ROUND PELL GRANTS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. I just want to go back for just one
second to the year-round Pell Grants and just make one point,
because it is very difficult for me to understand how the
elimination of this program is really going to make a
difference to the bottom line, because you mention that the
cost of the program escalated at a greater rate than had been
expected. And while I understand that cost is a concern, the
fact is that, as I understand it, all students are restricted
to a total number of nine, restricted to nine total number of
Pell Grants. So, over the course of the student's education,
the cost remains the same. I mean, it becomes neutral.
So given the importance and the number of people that want
to expedite their education, the importance of getting people
into the workforce that are educated that can take jobs, it
just doesn't make sense that this program is being eliminated.
But let me just go on to, first of all, to associate myself
with the comments that have been made by my Democratic
colleagues about the importance of Pell Grants and how they
truly are the cornerstone of financial aid that make college
available and the completion of college a reality for so many
students, in the millions.
And again, I think we also need to look at the broader
picture. This isn't just about students being able to fulfill
their dream; this is also about the future of our country.
Expert after expert, economists are telling us, and we know
that we fall far behind the rest of the world in STEM programs,
that we don't have enough engineers. Businesses are telling us
that we need to graduate more people. They are asking us to
bring in foreign students to take high-paying American jobs
because they can't find Americans who have the qualifications
and can fill those jobs.

HISPANIC SERVING INSTITUTIONS

So the last place we should be looking to cut would be in
education, which brings me to H.R. 1 and the $100,000,000
proposed cuts in funding to Hispanic institutions. Now, this
money is used again to enhance the academic quality and fiscal
stability of these institutions, which are already underfunded.
And this is a very important component of our efforts to
increase access and improve academic outcomes for our Nation's
largest minority, the Hispanic community.
So like Pell Grants and other Federal financial aid
programs, these universities are important to giving that
access to college for minority students. So, in your opinion,
what impact will this $100,000,000 cut to Hispanic-serving
institutions have on students?
Ms. Kanter. Well, I actually did some research on the
growth of Hispanic-serving institutions in the Nation. And I
went back to in the year 2000, we had 230 institutions; in
2008, we had 281; and we have 176 emerging Hispanic-serving
institutions on the horizon. So I did a quick calculation; it
has been a 22 percent increase since 2000 in the number of
institutions that are serving predominantly Hispanic students.
So it is the fastest-growing population in the country.
These grant funds, obviously, are directed to college
completion, ways that we can get students into the pipeline and
actually using those grant funds to showcase what works so that
as these predominantly Hispanic-serving institutions become
fully Hispanic-serving institutions, they can apply those
strategies and ways to increase student success.
I mean, it is all about, how can we have these fast-growing
populations be the leaders in the future as we go forward in
this country? And what can we do now with Pell Grants, with
college completion, with these access grants and success grants
to really allow that to happen? So this is about innovation.
And I think my first remark was, we have got to out-educate to
out-innovate to really out-build so the Nation will be strong
going forward. And it really is about our economic prosperity
and our national security.
Mr. Rehberg. I think we probably have time for one more
round, if that is okay with the committee. Those of you that
want to stick around, I will stay here until everybody has had
an opportunity.

REMEDIAL COURSES

I sometimes suggest that I made the top half of the class
possible. If it hadn't been for me, there would have been no
top half. So I know what bonehead math is.
Ms. Kanter. You graduated.
Mr. Rehberg. I did graduate. I know what bonehead math is
in college. They have now come up with the term remedial,
because I took it, it was 001. Can you get a Pell Grant for
remedial coursework in college?
Ms. Kanter. Yes, you can. And what is very exciting is we
see a lot of innovation in the country. I will point to CUNY,
the City University of New York, just established a new
community college. It is focused on having students go full
time and do their remedial in an accelerated amount of time to
get a jump start. Now, we know many students can't go full
time.
Mr. Rehberg. How many do you think, what is the percentage
in the number of students that are taking a remedial course
under a Pell Grant?
Ms. Kanter. Well, nationally we have got about 40 percent
of students come into higher education needing one or more
remedial courses. It is mostly math or English and some
science, and that is what they need. So Pell Grants are
comparable. It is not predominantly more. It is about the same
number. Students are lower-income. They might have gone to not
as good schools as students coming from high-performing middle
class communities. We have got to take that into account.
But frankly, what we want is all students to get their
remediation done as quickly as possible. We have a lot of
partnerships with K-12. It starts in early learning, frankly;
30 percent of children aren't ready for kindergarten.

COLLEGE COMPLETION AND GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS

Mr. Rehberg. Let me ask you a question, and I spoke on the
House floor about the gainful employment issue. If this were
applied university-wide, not just for proprietary schools,
would the administration support legislation that suggests the
same standards of gainful employment for all universities, not
just proprietary?
Ms. Kanter. Some elements we have already done for all
institutions. We are actually publishing graduation rates and
default rates.
Mr. Rehberg. I am suggesting anything that is applied to a
proprietary school is applied to every other school equally.
There is no difference between a proprietary and a
nonproprietary school in my mind. If we truly want to solve the
issue of gainful employment, it needs to be across the board.
We can't pick and choose segments of our society who we want to
apply the standard of gainful employment to without applying it
across the board. So the Administration would support that kind
of legislation?
Ms. Kanter. No.
Mr. Rehberg. Across the board.
Ms. Kanter. No, we would not.
Mr. Rehberg. Why not?
Ms. Kanter. I think we need more study, obviously, about
this. But there are differences in the foundation of why these
schools were created.
Mr. Rehberg. But the problem is if they are not turning out
the kind of student we are asking them to turn out; somehow
because they are for-profit or nonprofit, there is a
difference? I thought it was about the kids. I thought it was
about the education. I thought it was about putting out a
productive member of society. And all of a sudden, we are
making the determination it doesn't matter how they get there.
Ms. Kanter. Congress focused on proprietary schools.
Mr. Rehberg. The new Congress has made a change in the
appropriation bill, H.R. 1, saying, wait a minute, slow down,
if it is good for one, shouldn't it be good for all.
Ms. Kanter. Right. If all institutions did not have profit
motives as the mission, some schools----
Mr. Rehberg. So profit is what determines whether somebody
gets an education or not correctly or appropriately? Where have
we made the determination that the institution of the
university is different or better if it doesn't turn out the
same product or a good product?
Ms. Kanter. Some schools are predominantly focused on
training students, proprietary schools, training students for
specific careers. That really is the gainful employment
legislation. That was one of the 14 program integrity rules
that we looked at. So we are focusing narrowly on that rule.
And we looked at the spikes, as I said before, in default rates
and low graduation rates, and we think we are going to be
proposing a rule that is reasonable.
Mr. Rehberg. But if you are going to make a determination
that it is the degree that counts or the education that counts,
then there shouldn't be any difference whether it is for-profit
or nonprofit. Frankly, it is appalling that anybody would
consider there to be a difference or a problem that ultimately
it is about the kids or the adults or the education, not
necessarily how they get there. So you are now creating a wedge
of how they get there without necessarily looking at the other
side and saying, maybe an institution that is nonprofit is not
producing what we want in our society, and that is an educated
workforce.
Ms. Kanter. Well, we have programs in place, as I said, and
I think the two new ones that are part of the Pell Grant
Protection Act to look at college completion and graduation in
the macro sense. We are publishing graduation rates and default
rates for all institutions of higher education. This particular
sector focused on proprietary schools to graduate students in
specific careers with especially high default rates and lower
graduation rates has been the focus of our rulemaking.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. I am sorry, no.
Ms. DeLauro.
Mr. Rehberg. I am sorry, I apologize.

GAO REPORT ON FOR PROFIT INSTITUTIONS

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I just would add a point on this that I think it is
important to note, that reports are that the for-profit
institutions represent 11 percent of higher education students,
26 percent of the student loans, and 43 percent of loan
defaulters, which is probably why we are taking a hard look at
that.
But I don't want to go into detail, but I will just
commend, and maybe we should have a copy of this for everyone,
that for-profit colleges, GAO's, and we support the GAO efforts
here and their testimony, undercover testing finds colleges
encouraged fraud and engaged in deceptive and questionable
marketing practices. I suspect that is one of the reasons why
we are taking a very hard look at what they do and what those
outcomes are, which makes enormous sense if we are going to be
investigatory and have oversight as to where some of our
Federal dollars are going and how it is being used.

FINANCIAL IMPACT OF CUTS TO PELL GRANTS

If Pell Grants are cut, the result is students and families
will borrow more. I have been told that Pell Grant recipients
already take out loans. They have higher levels of debt than
other college graduates; is that correct?
Ms. Kanter. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. And what would be the consequence of more
borrowing to compensate for less Pell Grant assistance?
Ms. Kanter. Well, we don't want--we want students to borrow
as little money as they have to. So one of the things that we
want, I saw a number of reports that 50 percent of students are
borrowing, undergraduates, are borrowing from high-cost service
providers and also using credit cards. So one of the things we
are doing is making Perkins Federal loans available to more
students in this proposal that we are offering so that students
would have lower interest rates so that they wouldn't be
hopefully having the high cost at the back end to follow. We
are not requiring them, but it would be made on a voluntary
basis.
The bottom line is we have got to educate students not to
use credit cards in community colleges. The report I saw was
over 90 percent of students are using credit cards and high-
cost loans that they could have used their Stafford capability.
So we have a high priority to really look at this and get
better outreach to students, better financial literacy. We have
a contract with the State of Tennessee now to get us a good
curriculum that can be used all over the country on financial
literacy. We are looking forward to that.

IMPACT OF H.R. 1 CUTS TO PELL GRANTS

Ms. DeLauro. Because my time is running out, I have a
couple of things I want to try to cover. The disruption caused
by a cut in Pell Grants for the upcoming academic year: what
would happen if Congress was to enact the cut in Pell Grants
made in H.R. 1, because the Higher Education Act requires that
we publish by February 1st information on Federal student aid
amounts for the upcoming academic year? So with that,
information has gone out with regard to the financial aid
packages for the fall semester so that students and families
can make their plans. What would happen if that cut would take
effect for the fall semester? Wouldn't that----
Ms. Kanter. I mean, 9.4 million students would be affected.
It creates tremendous uncertainty on the part of individual
students who are independent and the dependent ones, their
families, on what they can count on. So can they go full time?
Can't they go full time? Is that Pell Grant going to be there
for them or not? And we know that when things are unstable,
students walk away, and we don't want that to happen.
Ms. DeLauro. The point I want to make is that cutting the
Pell Grant funding, and I have the citation here, will reduce
the number of low-income students receiving bachelors degrees
each year by about 61,000. What would be the effect of H.R. 1
on the mandatory supplement to the Pell, what would happen in
the mandatory part of the Pell Grant in 2014 if the cut
proposed by H.R. 1 were to be enacted and left in place for the
following 2 years? Would we end up cutting the maximum Pell
Grant not just by $845 but by more than $1,500 when the effect
of the mandatory piece is considered?
Mr. Skelly. Yes, you would. That is the way the formula,
the law works.
Ms. DeLauro. That is the way the formula works. So, in
essence, we could almost be eliminating the funding or actually
the mandatory piece would get primarily eliminated.
Mr. Skelly. If you maintain funding at $17 billion in 2011
into 2012 and actually into 2014, there is a rippling effect on
the mandatory contribution that comes from the SAFRA or
legislation, and it would also be cut.
Ms. DeLauro. Just if I can, Mr. Chairman, this is Evamarie
Trimachi, a 41-year-old single mother and third-generation
welfare recipient, earning an associate's degree at Gateway
Community College, moved onto a bachelor's and is eyeing a
master's. Federal education grants were essential for her move
from a tax burden--these are her words--to a taxpayer. And that
is what she said at Gateway Community College not three weeks
ago. That is what the value of this program is all about. Thank
you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

EDUCATION BUDGET PRIORITIES

Dr. Kanter, I know you are here to defend the Department's
budget and the President's budget, and I am here to say that I
come from the point of view that we can't afford the
President's budget. So as a member of the Appropriations
Committee, part of my job is to find where to reduce the
President's proposed budget. And if I want to look at the silo
of the Department of Education, in other words not pit
education, the education budget against other budgets, do you
prioritize the full funding of the Pell Grants as the highest
priority in the Department of Education budget? Is full funding
of the Pell Grants the number one request of the Department of
Education?
Ms. Kanter. Well, because it is such a large portion of our
revenue and our budgetary authority, without the full funding
of the Pell Grant, we would see massive cuts, not only to
students but in the Department of Education. Our goal is to
maintain Pell at $5,550. That is our top priority for higher
education. But again, we have proposals that Secretary Duncan
talked about for K-12. We have an early learning proposal, and
we look at this as a pipeline. We can't look at one part
without looking at the other parts of our program.
And with Pell, we have proposed a way to cover the $20
billion shortfall for the next decade. So we think we have been
reasonable. We have made some really tough choices. The second
Pell is a very tough choice for us. We didn't have all the
data. We would rather have not cut that second Pell as a
request. We are working with servicers on the back end in the
Direct Loan program so that students can be provided the kind
of loan counseling that we talked about. We have a variety of
ways that we have reduced spending. And for overall, within
Pell, we figured out a proposal to pay for it, do our best, and
hopefully, it can be part of the other proposals.
Mrs. Lummis. Excuse me, Dr. Kanter.
It is unclear whether the administration's proposals will
pass, that will initiate the cost savings that you want to put
into the Pell. So if the administration's legislative proposals
don't pass, then maintaining a maximum Pell Grant will cost
$44,000,000,000. Do you have a fallback position in case the
President's proposals for changes in other programs don't pass?
Ms. Kanter. Well, we look at this as a coordinated program
that you would be working with the other committees to really
come up with a solution, because we think within the Pell
proposal, we have come up with a series of proposals in the
Pell Grant Protection Act that are going to maintain Pell
availability.
Mrs. Lummis. So that is your way to saying we don't have a
fallback position, right, no fallback.
Ms. Kanter. Well, we will deal with reality, but we hope to
make our case today that this is a top priority of the
administration and that we don't want to see 9.4 million
students coming away from college at the time when we need them
to get into the economy through higher education.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank you again for your presentation and the
leadership.
I am not sure about Wyoming or Montana, Mr. Chairman, but I
know how critical this program is. And meeting with these kids,
visiting the colleges, as I often do, I said it before, but I
want to say it again, that these kids are not, they don't have
a hand out. I mean they are working two, three jobs. And I meet
with them on a regular basis.
And if you look historically, I was just reviewing the
chart, there was only one time that the Pell Grant was ever
reduced, and it was only reduced $100. So, again, if you meet
with these youngsters, the $845 cut will prevent many of them
from getting that opportunity. Now, I don't know that every one
of them is going to be a Member of Congress or a lawyer or a
doctor or engineer, but if we want to create jobs, if we
believe that education has some role in creating jobs, which I
do, then I would not want to be the Congress, again only one
other Congress went down $100. But for us to reduce it by $845
is really a shame and embarrassment.
We can think of many other places, I am sure you can, many
other subsidies, many other places where we can find the money.
And I am with you on finding the money and reducing the budget.
Just look at the oil industry. I filled up my car this week,
$62, and they are getting, what is it, $40,000,000,000 in
subsidies, help from this Congress and from past Congresses.
And yet the average worker is filling up a car, $62. The
agricultural sector. We can keep looking.
So I just want to appeal again that, maybe you can share
with us, when was the last time the maximum award was under
$3,000, and how have tuition and other fees changed since that
time? While you are looking--oh, you have the answer, okay.
Mr. Skelly. The last time the maximum grant was under
$3,000 was 1997.
Mrs. Lowey. And how has tuition increased and other fees
decreased since that time?
Mr. Skelly. Well, they have gone up. In 1997, that maximum
grant paid approximately 37 percent of the cost of attending a
4-year public school. The $5,550, that is in the President's
budget this year would provide about 31 percent of the cost.
Mrs. Lowey. Well, I would just say to my colleagues that to
me, the most important thing is helping our young people get
that education. And many of our kids have been very fortunate.
My district is very diverse. There are some that can pay for it
very easily, and others, frankly, would be dropping out without
that $845. So, again, I think we can repeat, since we are still
on the green light, for the average Pell recipient and her
family, maybe you can tell us the average income of the Pell
recipient?
Ms. Kanter. Well, I can tell you that for students 23 or
over, which represents almost half of the Pell recipients,
their income is $30,000 or less.
Mrs. Lowey. Or less. And where would they get the
financing? If we want them to stay in school, and my colleagues
respectfully asked the questions, what else should they turn
to, where would they get the financing? We know they are
working. They are working two or three jobs. They have parents
who are struggling; they can't get the money from their
parents. Where would they go? Who would they turn to if we
signed off on these cuts?
Ms. Kanter. A lot of them will leave, especially next year,
if the Pell were to be reduced to below $3,000, which would
take us back decades. But absent that, their only other hope is
to get more loans. And we are trying to not burden people so
that they can go into the economy with the least amount of debt
possible.
Mrs. Lowey. So I don't know how we can achieve the goal of
leading the world in college completion by 2020, and my time is
up so I won't ask the question, if the cuts to the Pell program
in H.R. 1 were to become law.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. DeLauro. Mr. Chairman, if I might just ask for
unanimous consent to enter into the record the testimonies of
these youngsters who were at this forum on the value of Pell.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
We are going to then go to Ms. Lee. And if there are any
additional questions that the committee would like to have
submitted for the record, we will entertain that as well.
Ms. Lee.

PELL GRANT ELIGIBILITY FOR FELONS

Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. Could you explain this
lifetime ban as it relates to formerly incarcerated
individuals? I know for drug felonies, there is a lifetime ban.
Is that for all formerly incarcerated individuals convicted of
a felony? What is the status of that at this point? I know we
have to go back to the drawing board in terms of the law.
Chairman Frank and others, we have worked on this for years.
But can you kind of clarify and explain where we are on this?
Ms. Kanter. At this point, I would have to get back to you
on that. I am really sorry, but I don't have all that data
available.
Do you have that, Tom?
Mr. Skelly. Some of the laws have changed on drug
convictions. You have to be engaged in selling or doing
business in dealing drugs.
Ms. Lee. Right. But I mean, after you get out, once you
have done your time and paid the price and coming back out to
become gainfully employed to become a productive member of this
society, what do you do?
Mr. Skelly. You certainly can get education and hopefully
be rehabilitated, but we will have to get back to you.
Ms. Lee. But can you get a Pell Grant now?
Mr. Skelly. I don't think you can qualify.
Ms. Lee. That is still a lifetime ban. Is it a lifetime ban
for only those convictions relating to drugs, selling?
Ms. Kanter. We would have to get back to you, and we will.
Ms. Lee. Okay. Could you kind of get back to us and explain
the entire policy, the entire law, what the bans are, what
convictions this applies to, if it is for all formerly
incarcerated individuals, for all convictions, or what it is?
Mr. Skelly. Students who are in jail in either a Federal or
State institution are ineligible.
Ms. Lee. I know that. I am talking about when you complete
your time, you do your time, you get out, just like with food
stamps. I have worked with the ranking member for years on
this. You know, there is a lifetime ban in terms of eligibility
for food stamps for those who had been convicted of a drug
felony. If it were armed robbery, you could apply for food
stamps, but a drug felony, you can't. And just so everyone
knows, this disproportionately affects African-American men,
and it really is a barrier to moving forward in terms of
becoming productive members of society, and many end up back in
jail because they just don't have that pathway out.
Ms. Kanter. Right. We have a group in the Office of
Vocational and Adult Education working on corrections with
several agencies. So we will bring you the latest status of the
report. We can give it to all members of the committee if you
would like.
Ms. Lee. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Dr. Kanter.
We appreciate your being here.
Mr. Skelly, once again, we will probably see you again and
again and again, but we thank you for your time today.
Meeting adjourned.
[The following questions were submitted to be answered for
the record:]

0Wednesday, March 16, 2011.

FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

WITNESS

HON. HILDA SOLIS, SECRETARY OF LABOR

Introduction of Witness

Mr. Rehberg. [Presiding] Good morning. Welcome. It is nice
to have you.
This is the third in our series of hearings. We try to keep
it as much as we possibly can to the fiscal year 2012
discussion, although we seem to leak out to other issues. But
we will do the best we can do keep it to the topic at hand.
And Secretary, we welcome you. I normally don't give an
opening statement unless I feel compelled, and today, I don't.
So I will turn it over to Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning, Madam Secretary. I want to welcome you
here and say thank you to you, and that I am looking forward to
having you testify in support of your budget this morning.
Let me begin by saying how much I support the good work
that you are doing at the Department of Labor. And I would just
say, on a personal note, I am excited for your being at the
Department of Labor, but I think I would speak for my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle that we miss you here in
this august body. But it is great to see you in this position.
And I am delighted to see that America has a Secretary of
Labor who clearly believes in her mission, whose stewardship
clearly supports the goal of good jobs for everyone.
I want to thank you for what you and the President have put
forward in this proposal. I know that this budget represents
very difficult choices. And in some cases, I may have made
different calls, but the budget stands in a sharp contrast to
the plan outlined by the majority in H.R. 1, which includes
radical spending cuts that will cost Americans jobs and
jeopardize our prospects for economic recovery.
To cut the deficit, the majority could have ended
$40,000,000,000 in subsidies to oil companies, $8,000,000,000
in agricultural subsidies to big businesses, $8,000,000,000 in
giveaways to multinational corporations who send their jobs
overseas, but instead, the majority wants to eviscerate
spending for Workforce Investment Act programs.
This effectively terminates the Federal Government's role
in the workforce development, something that did not occur
under President Reagan's administration, not even under
President Nixon. Eight million people could lose this vital job
aid entirely.
In the past, members of both parties have understood the
crucial role of Government in helping Americans help themselves
through workforce development. They knew that unemployed and
underemployed citizens rely on these services to find a job and
to retrain.

workforce investment act

In fact, the Workforce Investment Act supports job training
programs all across the country with proven results. WIA
programs have seen a 233 percent increase in participation in
recent years from 3.4 million workers served in 2008 to just
over 8 million in 2010. And even in this tough economy, over
half of the people seeking help, 4.3 million Americans
nationwide, have found jobs with the help of these services,
despite four job seekers for every available job.
I have visited several career centers in my district in
recent weeks, have seen firsthand the difference that WIA
makes. Case in point, Stratford, Connecticut. Ray Barbaresi, 31
years working for Sikorsky Aircraft, laid off. He used the good
offices of the One-Stop center and is now reemployed in
Milford, Connecticut, doing similar kinds of work that he was
doing in the past.
There are 3,000 One-Stops in this country. And if the
majority's budget gets enacted into law, millions of Americans
will find a sign on these centers that reads ``gone out of
business.'' This is a huge loss to many of them who found
employment through the One-Stops.
To take just one example, Elizabeth Strader of eastern
Connecticut was able to move from bussing tables in a
restaurant to working on a submarine project at Electric Boat,
thanks to WIA-supported technical training. Stories like these
happen all across America.
In Montana, Gina, a 31-year-old woman who had been laid off
from her commercial door sales company, managed to pursue nurse
training through WIA. She now works as a charge nurse and makes
much more than she ever did before.
In Rock Springs, Wyoming, a dislocated worker named Justin
was able through WIA training to get his CDL, his commercial
driver's license. He now has a job as a truck driver and can
support his family once again.
The jobless are not the only ones to benefit. Businesses
also rely on these job training programs to fill vacant
positions with qualified and skilled workers. These cuts will
hurt them, too.
If they cannot find the workers right here, they will go
elsewhere. We cannot allow that, not when we are trying to
create and retain more good jobs in America.

workforce innovation fund

So I am glad to see that, unlike the spending plan outlined
by the majority, this budget maintains funding for employment
and training programs while promoting reform. It proposes a
Workforce Innovation Fund to test new ideas and to replicate
proven strategies for delivering both employment and education
programs at a lower cost per worker. And there are efforts to
pursue in the innovation fund making a reform of the system.
Last year, we recommended new funding for this proposal.
This year, I see that you suggest that we redirect funding from
some of the slower spending accounts within WIA to finance the
proposal. In doing this, I am glad to see that the local
resources used in One-Stop career centers are maintained.
This budget also maintains a commitment to the most
vulnerable among us, including small increases for employment
and training programs that target Native American communities,
migrants, and seasonal farm workers, disadvantaged youth, and
our veterans.
The majority claims they have walled off veterans services
from cuts, but their budget does not include the additional
resources that the Secretary had requested for returning
military personnel and for homeless veterans. And it totally
ignores the fact that 130,000 veterans get employment and
training services through WIA.
I am also glad to see that, unlike the majority's proposal,
this budget works to ensure that workplaces are safe. H.R. 1
would cut OSHA funding by 20 percent, meaning 800 less health
and safety inspections. This budget, on the other hand,
includes $6,000,000 to improve regulatory standards to protect
workers, $6,000,000 for additional whistleblower
investigations, and will enforce laws that protect those who
face reprisal for reporting unsafe or illegal activities.
I hope that whatever differences that we have, we can all
agree that workers who show up at their jobs every day, who
perform the tasks that are assigned to them, should expect to
get the wages and benefits they have earned. The increases here
for worker protection agencies, such as the Wage and Hour
Division or the Employee Benefits Security Administration, will
ensure this happens.
There is so much I support in this budget request,
particularly in contrast to the approach adopted by the
majority. I look forward to discussing it in more detail.
No investment is more critical than investment in our human
capital, and it is programs like this that are the essence of
good government. They work to make opportunity real and
benefit, above all, the families of working people who need
help.
These are people who have played by the rules. I hope we
will do what we can to see that we have the resources to
continue putting America back to work.
I thank you, Madam Secretary.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Solis. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.
And we must continue to remind ourselves that one of the
reasons that we passed H.R. 1, which is no longer in effect
because it was voted down in the Senate, is because the
Democrats did not complete their work in 2011.
I apologize for that because it would have been nice if we
could have just focused on fiscal year 2012. But since they did
not get their work done, we continually find ourselves having
to deal with continuing resolutions.
So, hopefully, under new management, we will have an
opportunity to work together with you. Once we complete their
work on fiscal year 2011, we will continue on with the work of
fiscal year 2012. And I look forward to hearing your testimony.

Opening Statement

Secretary Solis. Thank you very much.
Well, first of all, thank you very much for inviting me to
present today, Chairman Rehberg and also Ranking Member DeLauro
and Members of the subcommittee. It is a delight to be here
and, I think, a good opportunity to be before you to testify
today.
Since I came before you last year, there have been a lot of
changes. But what has not changed is the desire of the American
people for us to work together, and I think that is something
that we all remember and know that we have to keep working on.
Undoubtedly, we will not agree on every issue or every
investment, but I hope that we can agree on many and that we
can also agree on the end goal. And that is to continue to
bring our country out of this recession with a stronger
economy, better opportunities for all working Americans.
In the President's 2012 budget, it reflects difficult
choices that we have had to make, striking a balance that will
put our Nation on a sustainable fiscal path while also
investing in programs and activities that will fuel economic
growth and prepare our Nation to succeed in the 21st century.
For the Department of Labor, that means ensuring that everyone
has or can compete for a good and a safe job.
As the President has said, to win the future, we must out-
educate, out-innovate, and out-build our global competitors. I
am proud that our employment and training programs are
preparing our workers for jobs in growing industries, and I am
also proud that our budget reflects our commitment to
innovation.
For example, the Workforce Innovation Fund, which we will
administer jointly with the Department of Education, is
designed to support efforts to make the public workforce
investment system efficient, streamlined, and targeted to serve
our growing customer base. But it is also an example of where
we made tough choices in the budget.
Last year, our workforce innovation proposal largely
consisted of new money. But recognizing the need to reduce
spending, the current budget redirects funding from the slower
spending State-wide set-aside to create this competitive grant
fund.

GREEN JOBS

We take the President's goal of deficit reduction very
seriously. We are working very hard at the Department of Labor
to strike the right balance between reducing spending and
making strategic investments that will support American workers
and businesses in our economy.
A critical piece of the 21st century economy will be
renewable energy. We can't cede this playing field to our
competitors abroad, and American businesses get this. That is
why we have had an incredible demand by employers for resources
to help support more training in green job sectors, especially
during the Recovery Act grant competitions.
In response to the demand, the budget requests $60.0
million for the Green Jobs Innovation Fund to provide
opportunities for nearly 10,000 workers to gain industry-
recognized skills through training programs which partner with
local employers. And I have to underscore that because, many
times, people do not understand what these partnerships do
require, I would say, on almost 100 percent basis, that they
are coupled with an employer.
Our budget maintains our commitment to helping vulnerable
communities and our veterans to be productive members of our
Nation's labor force. We included targeted investments in the
workforce programs that serve Native Americans, migrant farm
workers, and, of course, our Nation's veterans, including $2.0
million additional to help veterans successfully transition to
civilian employment and an additional $3.0 million for homeless
veterans. In each case, we have also targeted women veterans
and their military families.
The ability of our young people to qualify for jobs of the
future is threatened by the challenges that they face today,
including high levels of unemployment, and that also reflects
the fact that many of our veterans are finding it very
difficult to obtain employment.

JOB CORPS

To help them compete in the 21st century, we need to get
them into good jobs now. Therefore, the President's budget
requests additional funds for the YouthBuild program and for
Job Corps operations.
But again, we make this request in a responsible manner. We
made a tough choice by reducing Job Corps construction funds by
$27 million to cover higher costs for operating the Job Corps
centers. As you will hear tomorrow, I know you will be hearing
more about proposals to strengthen the integrity of the
Unemployment Insurance program, and we look forward to working
with the Congress on these initiatives.
At the Department of Labor, we also take seriously our
obligation to both protect workers and to protect those
businesses that play by the rules and provide their workers
with safe and fair workplaces. No worker should have to worry
about whether they are going to come home safely at the end of
a shift or to get paid for the work that they do.
And no employer should have to compete against companies
that cut corners on safety or evade the law. In fiscal year
2012, the budget builds on recent gains for worker protection
agencies by proposing increases of $132.0 million over the
fiscal year 2010 appropriation.

OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION

Some of the highlights of our worker protection request
include the following: the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, which must ensure that all employers live up to
their obligation to provide a safe workplace. And the 2012
budget provides resources we believe are necessary to help us
meet that challenge.
The request includes additional resources for OSHA staff to
ensure that everyone is playing by the rules. It maintains and
expands our commitment to compliance assistance programs,
including the Voluntary Protection Program and the free On-Site
Consultation Program that focuses exclusively on small
businesses.
It includes an increase of $6.4 million to expand the
agency's regulatory program to meet the complex safety and
health threats in today's workplaces and respond to the
President's executive order that we review, revise, and update
our regulations that are already on the books.
Lastly, the Congress has greatly expanded whistleblower
protections throughout new industries. So our request is a $6.0
million increase for OSHA to meet that challenge.
Last April you may recall the Upper Big Branch mine
disaster, resulted in the needless loss of 29 miners, and that
was the worst mining disaster since the creation of the Mine
Safety and Health Administration, MSHA. In light of the
tragedy, the budget request includes additional resources to
ensure that MSHA has the tools that are necessary to protect
our miners.
This request is detailed in my testimony, but I wanted to
point out that it includes funding to continue to reduce the
backlog of contested citations at the Federal Mine Safety and
Health Review Commission. We must tackle the backlog to ensure
that we are holding accountable mine operators who fail to meet
their legal and moral responsibility to operate safe mines.

EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

I also wanted to highlight a few other priority areas at
DOL. The budget request also contains a program increase of
$41.4 million for the Employee Benefits Security
Administration, known as EBSA, which protects employee benefits
for more than 149 million people by safeguarding integrity of
718,000 pension plans and 2.6 million health plans.
Our request for the Wage and Hour Division includes a new
multi-agency initiative to prevent misclassification, which is
when an employer treats workers as independent contractors in
order to avoid their legal obligation to pay taxes or to follow
employment laws. We support the use of legitimate independent
contractors, but we do not support denying workers the
protections they are entitled to, denying taxpayers the revenue
they are entitled to, or employers who do not play by the
rules.
Before closing, I want to emphasize that we strongly
support evaluation and efficiency at the Department of Labor.
We are constantly scrutinizing ourselves and looking for
opportunities to work better and smarter.
We have adopted a rigorous self-evaluation program----
Mr. Rehberg. We have to move on quickly here.
Secretary Solis. Okay. Well, with that, I will conclude my
oral testimony. More details can be found in my written
statement submitted for the record.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Rehberg. Great. We will put it in the record.
Thank you very much.

GREEN JOBS UNALLOCATED BALANCE

Madam Secretary, I would like to dwell a little bit on the
green jobs for a minute because we see in your fiscal year 2012
request, you have asked for $20,000,000 in addition to the
$40,000,000 that was in the fiscal year 2010, bringing it up to
a grand total of $60,000,000.
And I guess one of the issues I would like to bring up is
the $500,000,000 that was allotted or allocated for green jobs
in the stimulus--a failed stimulus, by the way, according to
your own figures. But you have quite an unspent balance within
that account already. Why is it necessary to ask for an
additional $20,000,000 when there is already money in the
account, unless, of course, it is going to be spent by the end
of this accounting period, which I believe is somewhere in
June?
The second question I would like to ask then is what do you
have to show for it within the green jobs? Is industry showing
any interest at all? How many have you trained, and how many
have you placed?
Secretary Solis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, our request is to--again, as I said in my statement,
is to actually draw down other funds to help provide for this
innovation fund. And what we are doing is actually asking--
looking at, in fact, programs that we can help establish that
would be more competitive, that will actually give us better
feedback, that will help us to ascertain where the actual
positive results need to be placed.
Mr. Rehberg. So you have no mechanism now, I understand,
under the workforce investment----
Secretary Solis. No. We do.
Mr. Rehberg. You do?
Secretary Solis. Yes, we do. We do have internal mechanisms
now, and we have----
Mr. Rehberg. And then tell me how many have been trained
under the green jobs, and how many have been placed?
Secretary Solis. Okay. What I would tell you is, the $500.0
million that was given out for job training, covers a slew of
areas. So, when we talk about green jobs, we are also talking
about apprenticeship programs; partnerships with utility
companies; partnerships with different industries; and
providing training to, I would say, at least 38 percent of the
participants that were included in the----
Mr. Rehberg. But that doesn't change the fact that 88
percent of the money has not been spent to this point, at least
in the most recent data that I have received. So I guess the
question is, it should be pretty easy to give me a number. How
many have been trained under the green jobs concept, and how
many have been placed?
Secretary Solis. Well, because these programs started up
initially--as soon as a grantee receives a grant, you don't
begin immediately--you have to set up an infrastructure. You
also have to do recruitment. You also have to put all those
tools in place and gather the appropriate infrastructure
needed.
So it takes time to do that. And we are now----
Mr. Rehberg. Except that it was stimulus dollars.
Secretary Solis [continuing]. In the second half of the
program. We are in the second part of the program where, we are
now getting that feedback now from our grantees. So I can't
tell you the full effect of these programs just as a result of
them starting up. Maybe later in the year, because that is
typically what happens.
Mr. Rehberg. But, Madam Secretary, they were stimulus
dollars, and so they were supposed to be timely and targeted.
Secretary Solis. And I will tell you----
Mr. Rehberg. And we are over 2 years into this, and you
have got 88 percent of the money is still not spent?
Secretary Solis. Well, I would tell you that much of the
funding levels go out somewhat scattered over a couple of
years.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. So you can't tell me how many have been
trained and how many have been placed?
Secretary Solis. The fact is that the funds are available
over an 18-month period. So it isn't as though you can get them
all out in the front because we had to stagger some of these
grants.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. I will ask then in writing for you to
give me how many have been trained and how many have been
placed. I also noticed that there was----
Secretary Solis. We actually--Mr. Chairman, we actually had
a good demonstration project in your State.
Mr. Rehberg. I am asking for totals.
Secretary Solis. And we actually served 2,400 people in
Montana, in a unique program that we did, and they got one of
the biggest grants, $5.0 million to work with utility
companies, to put people into the trades and construction. And
I can tell you that the progress that I am seeing there was
very positive. I will provide that information to give you a
more complete outlook of what took place.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Secretary Solis. But the partnership there, I think, is an
excellent opportunity for people to understand that it isn't
just about training for the sake of training. It is actually
combining resources with those individuals in the trades.
[The information follows:]

Green Jobs Training Program

ARRA green jobs training grants were awarded in January 2010 and
include: Energy Training Partnership (ETP), Pathways Out of Poverty
(Pathways), and State Energy Sector Partnership (SESP) grants. ETP and
Pathways grant have a period of performance through January 2012 and
SESP grants through January 2013. Data reported reflects grant start-up
and implementation activities and subsequent training outcomes achieved
during the first year of grant performance.
As of December 31, 2010 (most recent data available), the ARRA
green jobs training grantees have achieved the following performance
outcomes:

23,009 individuals have been served through the grants

18,271 individuals have begun education/training
activities

The number of individuals that have received services
is higher than the number that have begun education and training for
several reasons: many individuals have received critical services to
address barriers to training and employment, such as assessment and
case management, but have not yet enrolled in training activities;
grantees reported activities through a set point in time (December 31,
2010), so some participants had just started receiving services but new
training classes had not started when grantee reports had to be
submitted; and natural attrition as occurs with all workforce
development programs.

Of these 18,271 individuals, 8,649 individuals have
completed education/training activities:

Of these, records suggest that 4,925 were unemployed
upon beginning training.

Of these, 1,700--approximately 35 percent--had entered
or obtained a new position of unsubsidized employment as of December
31, 2010. Note, entered employment is reported for participants that
successfully completed education/training activities prior to entering
or obtaining a new position of employment. Many trainees have been
incumbent workers (workers who were already employed upon entering
training) who undertook training in order to retain their jobs or
upgrade their skills. These outcomes are not counted as ``entered
employment''.

Additionally, 7,505 credentials have been awarded to
training participants.
In addition to these grants, there were two additional green jobs
competitions under the authority of the Recovery Act--Green Capacity
Building, and State Labor Market Information Improvement Grants. These
grants had purposes other than direct training. The total amount for
the five grant competitions, after set-asides for administration and
technical assistance, was $490 million. As of the December 31, 2010
financial reports, 19.4 percent of this total was expended and 41.8
percent was obligated. Training-focused discretionary grants generally
have an initial start up period that lasts approximately 6-9 months.
During this time grantees are receiving training on grant requirements,
preparing to offer training activities to workers, and completing other
critical, required start-up and preparation activities. Expenditure
rates are lower during this start-up period, while obligation rates are
higher. For this reason, obligation rates are the more appropriate
indicator of these grantees' activities, and obligation rates for all
of the grants are appropriate for where grantees are in their period of
performance.

Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Excuse me. I understand that with the
workforce investment, it was amended to include labor
organizations. Your Under Secretary last year said that the
administration would be willing to amend that to suggest that
it doesn't need to require that component. It could be part of
the----
Secretary Solis. It can be either/or.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, in the authorizing legislation, it was
``must.'' And so, the administration would be okay with----
Secretary Solis. I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that many of
the grants that we have given out include a variety of people
and not all exclusively one group over the other. I mean, that
is just a fact. So I want to be clear on that.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. So you would support then if we needed
to change the authorizing legislation so that it did not
necessarily----
Secretary Solis. I am not saying to change it right now, we
are looking at funding the best proposals. And we get some of
the best proposals have both--we have some with union and some
non-union. We are not excluding anyone.
Mr. Rehberg. All right. My time has expired.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Let me just mention the information I have
about this program, which started in January of 2010. There is
a 3- to 9-month startup period in terms of getting off the
ground, which means that many of the grants are just now
beginning to match individuals with employment opportunities.
I know that the Secretary will provide some of this
information, but as I understand it, as of the quarter ending
September 30, 2010, which is the most recent data available,
nearly 10,400 participants have been served through these
grants. And of the participants served, close to 8,400 have
received education and training, including 313 in on-the-job
training activities.
Approximately 3,600 participants have completed education
and training programs. After 8 months of the grant awards, 500
participants completed job training, entered a new position or
employment.
I had a direct experience with a One-Stop center, where I
went to talk specifically about the green jobs program, and
this gentleman, actually the day that I was there, had just had
an interview and was hired with the green jobs training that he
had received under the program.
Let me move to another area because you did talk about
businesses, Madam Secretary. I had the opportunity to see the
letters that were sent to the Education and Workforce Committee
by the Boeing Corporation in advance of your testimony last
month. They wanted the committee to know of the partnership
that they have forged with the workforce system in Washington
State; St. Louis, Missouri; South Carolina.
And I know that this parallels what I hear from Connecticut
employers, who work with our workforce areas on a variety of
partnerships involving recruitment and training to meet the
workforce needs. And I actually have a copy of the Boeing
letter, which I would like to, with unanimous consent, submit
for the record.
Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
But also ask you, Madam Secretary, can you discuss some
other examples of this type of partnership, including the
partnerships with small businesses?
Secretary Solis. Yes. Thank you very much for the question,
as well.
I know that there is a lot of debate about who partners
with us, and we have made a big attempt, to really include many
business partners in these grants. And in fact, we have several
success stories.
For example, in Arizona, Maricopa Workforce, working with
the connection business service team to help perfect sales
persons' abilities there. We know that we have actually been
able to provide assistance there; and as a result, a qualified
veteran who went into the program, was able to get a job right
away.
I know in the Chairman's State, in Montana, in the Butte-
Silver Bow area, which is served by a WIA grantee known as
Career Futures, Inc., we recently got testimonial from a
personnel director at Butte-Silver Bow government, who told us
that the department notifies Career Futures for all employment
opportunities and relies on them to refer trained and work-
ready applicants.
So we know that there is a good effort working with local
businesses including in Dallas-Fort Worth, where I believe
Representative Granger has been very uniquely involved. They
are helping to revive the aerospace industry by making sure
that that high-talented workforce has the ability, if there are
layoffs, to quickly get into other upscale jobs so that talent
would not be lost.
And I think that is very noteworthy, and I appreciate the
work that has been going on in Dallas-Fort Worth with our big
partners. Some of them are Lockheed Martin, Bell Helicopter,
Textron, and Vought Aircraft, and they work very closely in
Dallas with the Tarrant County workforce development board.
So I think there are some very positive stories that can be
told.

JOB CORPS

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Thank you.
Let me move to a Job Corps question, near and dear to my
heart. Job Corps is the most effective Federal program aimed at
recovering the roughly $469,000 each high school dropout costs
our economy and the Government over the course of their
lifetime. In addition, economists show that investments in Job
Corps yield a significant multiplier effect, $2 for every $1
spent.
My counterparts on the other side of the aisle proposed to
virtually eliminate Job Corps in H.R. 1 by reducing its budget
by 80 percent. Slashing the Nation's most cost-effective,
accountable, and market-driven solution for the millions of
youth who leave our schools unprepared for the workplace, in my
view, is a wrong move at the wrong time.

IMPACT OF JOB CORPS CLOSINGS

What impact would these cuts have on States and districts
like Kentucky and Montana that have multiple Job Corps centers?
What impact would it have on States like mine, in Connecticut?
It is my understanding that the average-size Job Corps
center supports 228 local jobs, which equates to approximately
600 jobs in Montana alone and an estimated $47,000,000 in local
economic activity.
Mr. Rehberg. I am going to allow the Secretary a short
answer. We have a little workforce training issue up here. He
forgot to reset the clock, and your time has expired. But if
you would like to answer briefly?
Secretary Solis. Yes, thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. Do it briefly now, and then you can come back
around and have some extra time and complete the answer.
Secretary Solis. Well, according to our data, if H.R. 1
were to pass, we would first see a rescission of about 300.0
million. That, in fact, will have a definite impact. In program
year 2011, that runs past September 30, 2011, another program
cut could possibly have a dramatic impact on our programs here
and would actually result in perhaps half of our Job Corps
programs folding.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Secretary Solis. And others that would also be----
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you. And I am sure Job Corps will
probably come up again.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE OF GULF WAR VETERANS

Madam Secretary, you touched on it in your opening
comments, but I would like to expand on it a little more. On
Friday, March 11th, the Bureau of Labor Statistics released new
data that put the unemployment rate of the Gulf War II era
veterans at 11.5 percent, well above the national unemployment
rate.
Those Gulf War veterans between 18 and 24 have an
unemployment rate of about 21.9 percent. While this percentage
is not significantly higher than nonveterans in the same age
group, it is still troubling that over 1 in 5 of our young
service members are returning home and entering the
unemployment lines rather than the workforce.
I also note that your statistics show that the veterans are
likely to work in the public sector, in comparison with the
nonveterans, like 30 percent to 15 percent. Much of this, of
course, can likely be attributed to the veteran hiring
initiatives in the Federal Government, as well as the desire
for service members to continue public service.
My question is, in addition to the current programs, what
more can the Department of Labor do to have veterans
reintegrated into the civilian workforce and particularly in
the private sector?
Secretary Solis. Thank you for your question, Congressman
Alexander.
I am very proud of our Veterans' Employment and Training
Service VETS programs. In fact, our Assistant Secretary there,
Ray Jefferson, is a West Point graduate who is also disabled.
He has done a tremendous job working with the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce to create liaisons so that we can make sure that the
employers have information about available incentives for them
to hire many of our veterans around the country.
And we are embarking on this with other agencies. So it is
not just us. It is VA. It is also DoD, and it is all our
partners that work on this. But we are also looking at
increasing our TAP program, which is the Transition Assistance
Program, that will actually provide more support before the
veteran exits, for those that are getting ready to exit, and
keep them in the loop for a longer, 6-month period after they
depart from the military, to help them with the kind of
coaching, resume writing, and training that is available for
them that many of them are not aware of. In addition, for their
families because we are finding that that is also a hardship,
We are also boosting our efforts to relay information and
enforce the compliance with Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act, which is USERRA, which you probably
know about, that employers need to have the ability to hire
back veterans as they come back from their tours.
We are doing everything we can. I spent time also in Camp
Pendleton about a month ago and visited with our Helmets to
Hardhat program, where we actually have an apprenticeship
program there that is training veterans for jobs in
construction, welding, and pipe trades all very good-paying
jobs. And once they leave Pendleton and they go back to their
community, they will continue to get training, if they want to
continue in that trade, up to a journeyman. And those salaries,
as you know, pay very well.
So we are doing everything we can. But if you have
suggestions or things that perhaps we are not looking at that
we might take note of, I would be more than happy to talk to
you about that.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will wait until
the next round.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.

BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL LABOR AFFAIRS

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Madam Secretary. I want to thank you for your
service, and I would like to highlight your request for an
increase of $8,800,000 for the Bureau of International Labor
Affairs efforts on behalf of worker rights.
We have to ensure that our trading partners enforce the
labor rights provisions of their own laws, as well as our trade
agreements, to protect our workforce. We cannot allow our trade
partners to undercut American workers by exploiting their
workers overseas, including exploiting child labor, to undercut
wages.
How will the request build international relationships that
improve global working conditions and strengthen labor
standards around the world? Because again, unless we really
focus on this, we are not focusing with a laser beam on
creating jobs here at home when we can lose them to employers
overseas.
Thank you.
Secretary Solis. Thank you. Thank you for your question,
Congresswoman Lowey.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs, ILAB program, as
you know, traditionally had a major focus in child labor, and
we work with several countries, 60 countries, to be exact, in
about 50 projects that we fund, helping to initiate projects
that will help to combat trafficking of children and using
child labor in those countries. We have actually been able to
help 1.4 million children as a result.
But taking this a step further in ILAB now, we are also
promoting better labor and worker protection rights in
different countries, which I think will help complement what
the President and what some of the Members of Congress would
like to see in our trade agreements. So by working at that
level, I think we also help to bring up the standards of
workers in other countries, their wages, so that--number one,
we can defray that magnet that attracts people to want to come
to this country, and more importantly, create an incentive for
people to have better-paying jobs in their own country.
And as an example, I will give you one, say, in Cambodia,
where this practice has been going on now through the Better
Work program for the past 10 years, what they do there is have
a system of working with the government, with big international
corporations, as well as with the International Labour
Organization.
And what they do is help to regulate how work is done,
making sure that women and children are not abused. And then,
for consumers, kind of provide a seal of approval from the work
product so people will know that those products were not made
because of bad labor practices. It is something that works, and
I think it can help us also, as I said earlier, in our U.S.
trade agreements.

FUNDING FOR TRAINING IN HEALTHCARE

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
Healthcare systems in the United States, both private and
public, are facing a widening gap between the number of
positions and the number of qualified applicants to fill them.
Nowhere is this more evident than the shortage of nurses and
nurse faculty.
In fact, in 2008, almost 50,000 students were denied
admissions to schools of nursing primarily due to an
insufficient number of faculty. In my district, there are a
number of excellent community college programs to help train
nurses and other healthcare professionals. But it is still
insufficient to meet the demand for these services.
We have to train our workforce for growing fields,
especially in this economy in which people are losing jobs late
in their careers and fear that they don't have the training or
skills to find new employment. If you can comment on the
department's strategy for increasing training opportunities in
healthcare-related fields and what role can the community
colleges play in expanding career opportunities in the health
field?
Secretary Solis. Thank you.
We had received under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, ARRA, funding of approximately $250 million,
which was spent on job training programs that would help
provide assistance for people that wanted to get into
healthcare, and it really starts with many community colleges.
Many of the projects that we funded included community colleges
to help expand their nursing programs, but also they're what we
call ambulatory care programs. That is really where people can
get into the healthcare industry and then move up the ladder.
And while visiting one of the programs out in Congresswoman
Matsui's district in Sacramento, I saw a wonderful display of
what was happening there collectively with a health association
of hospitals. So that there was an entry line for not just the
job training on the job, but also the job. And it was very,
very competitive.
I also know that we provide assistance for people who want
to get in, for young people even, into pharmacist assistants
positions. I saw that at one of our Job Corps programs, where
we are actually incentivizing young people, especially
disadvantaged youth, to get into these careers.
That is the only sector that has grown in the recovery over
the last two years consecutively, the healthcare industry. And
we are adding more and more jobs there.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
I think--do I have a minute left, or is the clock working?
I shouldn't ask that. [Laughter.]
I guess it is done.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Granger.
Ms. Granger. Thank you.
The program that you mentioned a minute ago about from
Tarrant County, I am very familiar with. It is excellent
training. The people that graduate oftentimes have jobs before
they finish the program. And if not, they go straight into
good-paying jobs. So I hope that continues.

EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT (``ERISA'')

In this financial crisis we are in, people are looking at
their retirement and planning for retirement, sometimes having
to re-plan. Some people have raised concerns with me that the
new proposed rule from the Department of Labor on ERISA
fiduciary investment advice might actually restrict investor
access to much-needed investment--their education, their
guidance. And we certainly want them to know that they are
doing.
How can we ensure that Labor's fiduciary rule and the
ongoing efforts at the Securities and Exchange Commission are
aligned and help offer investors more, not less education and
guidance?
Secretary Solis. Thank you for your question,
Congresswoman.
And I do want to say that this question also came up at one
of my last hearings. And I do want to reassure the committee
that we are working very closely with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, SEC, and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, CFTC, and they meet on a regular basis.
In fact, this has come up quite a bit, and my understanding
is that we are working together on developing that standard. My
concern is making sure that we set up a good system that is
transparent, so that this consumer really does get the benefit
of the best information and is not being gouged, so to speak,
or that there is a conflict of interest.
That is really what we are trying to do with this
particular regulation. Fiduciary responsibility means that we
have to be responsible. We want to make sure that the public,
our consumers, are aware, and that is really the basis for this
rule.
And if there are any questions, I would further ask that my
Assistant Secretary Phyllis Borzai come in and meet with you to
give you a thorough briefing on what it is we have been doing.
But I can tell you right now people have been misinforming
folks that we have not been collaborating with SEC, and that is
not the truth.

OLDER AMERICANS

Ms. Granger. Good. I have one more question.
The fiscal year 2012 budget proposes moving the Senior
Community Service Employment Program out of DOL and over to the
Department of Health and Human Services. I hear positive things
about the program from older workers in my district. So can you
tell me why you want to move the program to another agency, and
can you alleviate their concerns that the move would have a
negative impact on the program?
Secretary Solis. It is a transfer of the program. This is
how I see it. Most of the older American or aging programs are
housed in HHS, and this is the only one that is housed at DOL.
And it just makes more sense, as we are looking to try to
streamline and make programs more effective, that seniors would
actually get more robust help if they were placed in HHS
because then they would be able to get counseling. They would
be able to get other services that they could be entitled to.
So that is what the change is about.
We have met with Secretary Sebelius, and they are very open
and accepting of this proposal. And I, of course, am very
concerned about making sure that seniors are not left behind
and that they do continue to get this help.
I have seen it work in my own district when I was a former
Member of the House. And it is quite telling to see how people
are energized again, to be able to share their expertise in a
work setting and also feel self-worth, but also get a little
stipend because they are providing that work.
So I don't think that is going to go away, but I will tell
you that that is what the purpose of moving the program over to
HHS was about.
Ms. Granger. Makes sense. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. You bet.
Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. I think Mr. Jackson got here before me.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Mr. Jackson. I am sorry.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. That is two, Kevin. [Laughter.]
Ms. DeLauro. The right will protect you. The right side
will protect you.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, thanks
for yielding me the time.
And Secretary Solis, thank you for your testimony. Two very
quick questions, and then we can get very quickly to Ms. Lee.

EFFECT OF H.R. 1 ON UNEMPLOYMENT

And I think I will ask my questions first. In this level of
unprecedented unemployment, can you explain to the committee
what the effects of H.R. 1 will have on your ability to reduce
unemployment? That is my first question.
And secondly, Madam Secretary, I am concerned with the
President's budget proposal to reduce the State and local
program funding through the Workforce Investment Act by nearly
50 percent. My State has used these funds to address nursing
shortages in underserved areas, support a high school academy
for healthcare careers, and expand access to services through
online technology.
Early last week, I received a letter from Warren Ribley,
Director of the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity. In his letter, he states that the proposed cuts
made to State and local programs would ``effectively halt
Illinois's track record at shoring up high-growth sectors that
lead to good new jobs for our citizens.''
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to insert Director
Ribley's letter into the record.
Mr. Rehberg. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Jackson. Madam Secretary, while I understand tough
choices must be made when it comes to cutting the budget, I
wonder what led the administration's decision to cut funding to
the WIA State and local program funding over other programs
under consideration?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, just those two questions.
Secretary Solis. Thank you.
The potential cuts that have been talked about by Members
here on the panel, would actually affect our 3,000 One-Stop
Centers. And I would say to you that it would have, in my
opinion, a very negative effect at this time when people are
seeking employment and still seeking services.
What that means is that local veterans, disabled, women,
dislocated workers, many of whom are men in this particular
market, will be severely affected, as well as our youth. You
will see a slowdown in terms of those offices closing. They may
not all close at one time, but I think gradually you will see a
good maybe 50 percent go right away, and then the rest.
That will have an impact because we service anywhere from
30 million people that come through our doors. And when people
do go through our programs, whether it is the dislocated worker
program or any of the training programs, their success rate is
much higher than someone who never made it to a One-Stop.
In addition, I would say to you that we also couple other
services within One-Stop Centers. For instance, right now, we
have made help available to people to do their tax returns
there. We are also providing what we call ``VITA services''' to
help people with that. Not only Unemployment Insurance, UI,
services, but we also serve in some places as incubators for
small businesses. So people who want to start up their
businesses also have that opportunity to do that.
I am also very concerned for returning vets. One-Stop
Centers may be the only lifeline available to them in, say, a
rural community where you have maybe a post office and a One-
Stop. One-Stops have computers, Internet access, and other
things which many rural areas do not have.
So it would have an effect, I would think, in a very
dramatic way for people who are seeking services. That is not
where you cut services in a time of recession. We are still
seeing very high, high rates of unemployment with disparate
groups, with minority groups, with veterans, and with people
who, and I have to tell you in all frankness, people that are
over the age of, say, 50. It is very hard to place some of
these people.
Also, for half of the unemployed, 7 million, have been
unemployed for more than 6 months we are hearing stories where
business people are saying that they will not hire individuals
that have been unemployed that long. And that, to me, is
discriminatory and should not be an allowed practice.

LONG TERM UNEMPLOYED

Mr. Jackson. I appreciate your raising the question. I do
want to hear an answer to the WIA question.
But Congressman John Lewis and I are contemplating filing
an amendment to the 1964 Civil Rights Act that would raise the
idea of employment status. That is those employers who are
asking job applicants how long they have been unemployed as
fundamentally discriminatory.
Is that something that the Labor Department, from your
perspective, will consider, and what are you doing with respect
to that?
Secretary Solis. Well, we are aware that there have been
statements made, and we obviously want to curtail that and want
to make sure that businesses know that just by someone being
unemployed that long does not mean that they are not qualified.
Some, in fact, do not have to utilize a lot of our training
because they are highly trained.
You have a lot of people with B.A.s and Ph.D.s. You have
people that are highly technically trained. What is happening
is you still continue to see four out of five people competing
for one job. That is the problem, the job creation.
It is not about just the training. It is about making sure
that businesses have the confidence to hopefully speed up the
process to hire people up. And we are also working on that,
too, to give them incentives.
With respect to the State funding and the innovation fund,
if I might, Mr. Chairman?

WORKFORCE INNOVATION ACCOUNTS

Mr. Rehberg. Quickly.
Secretary Solis. I would just tell you that our innovation
fund does not take any money from the State, local governments.
It is from the programs that we administer, and it is a way of
helping us look at how we can be more competitive and actually
streamline and make our programs more effective.
So it is not going to hinder that at all, and I will have
my ETA Administrator follow up with you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Secretary Solis. Nice to see you again this
week.

GOLD STANDARD EVALUATIONS

As you know, we are spending thousands of billions of
dollars in this country that we don't have. We are borrowing it
from China, from Japan, from our own people, from the Fed. So
this committee has an obligation, this Congress has an
obligation to make sure that the money that we are spending,
the money that we don't have that we are spending has a
measurable impact on our economy.
And when it comes to your agency especially when we want to
know that it has a measurable impact on economic mobility and
on employment and on the economy as a whole. That is how we
recover. So my focus is going to be on measurement, on how we
know we are getting the bang for our buck.
How do I know that the employee in Rock Springs, Wyoming,
my home State, that was mentioned earlier, came at a reasonable
cost to the taxpayers who put up the money and are borrowing
the money to make sure that this one individual in Rock
Springs, Wyoming, has a job? And so, that is my focus in my
questions.
Now here is where I am going with this for my first
question. Could you explain how this gold standard evaluation,
which is underway at the Department for Adult and Dislocated
Worker Programs, is going to work? I want to know how it will
be conducted and when we might see results and whether or not
it will give us a sense of the cost and benefit of programs
under your auspices?
Secretary Solis. We are looking at a thorough evaluation of
many of our programs at the Department of Labor. In fact, we
have hired a principal evaluator to help us do this because, in
past years, we realized that this has not taken place, and we
know that there have been a lot of questions about the types of
programs that are being offered and what have you.
When we look at the gold standard, we are looking at
setting up a form of analysis that would look at a control
group for a certain portion of time to make those evaluations
to see how successful, in fact, these programs are or are not
and how we can make improvements.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you.
Another case in point. I want to focus on a youth program.
The stimulus bill provided $1,250,000,000 for youth summer job
programs. It also received $1,000,000,000 in regular
appropriations for fiscal year 2010. So we are looking at about
$2,300,000,000, $2,400,000,000 available for these programs
through fiscal year 2010. And the goal was to help young people
gain long-term employment beyond the summer months.
We checked out this Web site that the State of Wisconsin's
Department of Workforce Development posted. It said they
received $11,700,000 from stimulus. It served 4,000
participants, according to the stimulus data. But then it also
said that one of the goals--of course, allowing people to have
ongoing employment--only 3 percent of the program's
participants stayed beyond the summer. And so, that cost
taxpayers nearly $91,000 per job.
So my question is since that is just one example of a cost
per job, do you think that is an adequate return on taxpayer
dollars when you look at the whole unemployment situation, and
how can we adequately go on with programs that have that sort
of a cost to the taxpayers when they can't find a job that
produces $91,000 in income for their family in a year?
Secretary Solis. Well, I don't have that data in front of
me, but I will certainly come back to you on that amount. But I
will tell you that in our American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act ARRA monies that we gave out for summer youth employment,
we actually were able to see well over 300,000 students
employed during the summer.
Now what tends to happen, even though you have these
programs that are set for summer youth, sometimes the local WIA
boards are able to extract the money and carry it into the
year. Not all students will stay that long because they go back
to school, and that is also something that happens.
But it doesn't mean that the program has failed. And again,
I will come back to you on that because I have not seen that
amount in any form presented to me.
But I would just say that what is happening right now is we
have a terrible problem with unemployment of our youth overall.
It goes anywhere from 25 to 26 percent, and in communities of
color, it is even higher. And on Native American reservations,
it is about 80 percent, and it is a disgrace.
So we need to do more. I don't think the time is right now,
but we can probably better target and do something more
systematically there. But I will take a look at it. That is why
we need to also reauthorize the Workforce Investment Act, which
I think will help us streamline and really get a handle on what
the local, regional folks need and not a top-down decision.
[The information follows:]

Summer Youth Employment

As a follow up to the Secretary's hearings on the FY 2012 budget,
the Department is providing data on summer employment under the
Recovery Act. Through January 31, 2011, 420,286 youth have been served
with Recovery Act Youth funds. Of those participants, 368,747
participated in summer employment, well above the Departmental goal of
x. The Recovery Act provided $1,200,000,000 in funds for WIA Youth
activities, not $1,250,000,000. Because the Recovery Act allowed the
Department to retain one percent (1 percent) of the funds for program
administration and oversight, the actual allotment to the States and
outlying areas and Indian and Native American grantees was
$1,188,000,000. Additionally, PY 2010 WIA Youth Formula funds totaled
$924,069,000, not $1,000,000,000. Based on the WIA Youth Recovery Act
allotment of $1,188,000,000 to states, outlying areas, and Native
American programs the cost per participant served through 1/31/11 is
$2,827 and the cost per summer employment participant is $3,222.
In addition, specific to Wisconsin which was discussed in the
hearing, the WIA Youth Recovery Act allotment for Wisconsin was
$13,808,812 and their number of youth that participated in summer
employment under the Recovery Act was 4,386, for a cost per summer
employment participant of $3,148 or slightly below the national
average.
As stated in the Recovery Act (and Congressional explanatory
statement), the funds for WIA Youth activities were focused on summer
employment, which is a subsidized work experience, not full-time or
part-time employment. The goal as stated in the Recovery Act reads
``the work readiness indicator of the WIA shall be the only measure of
performance used to assess the effectiveness of summer employment.''
The data indicates that 79% of the youth who participated in summer
employment increased their work readiness skills.

YOUTH BUILD

Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you, Madam Secretary, and thank you for your
leadership.
First of all, let me just say on the summer jobs, you know,
we worked last year to try to increase it to a couple billion
dollars. That would have been maybe 500,000 to 800,000 of our
young people. We need more money in YouthBuild, and we don't
need these cuts, as I think H.R. 1 zeroed out funding for the
program.
So I look forward to getting more information. But I think
that we need to look at how to hire more of our young people,
especially during the summer, because it helps them with their
resume building, but also it helps bring food into their
families. Given this economic downturn, it is extremely
important.

UNEMPLOYMENT CRISIS

We are just beginning to emerge from the worst unemployment
crisis in the last 70 years, with 14 million people still
unemployed. More than 40 percent have been jobless for over 6
months. Now we know that the unemployment rate is, what, 8.9
percent?
Secretary Solis. Yes.
Ms. Lee. Communities of color, minority unemployment still
15.3 percent for African Americans and 11.6 percent for
Latinos. And this is what your department, I believe, reports,
although many of us know it is more than that.
Workforce area, we are seeing record numbers of unemployed
individuals coming into One-Stop centers across the country,
looking to find work, preparing resumes, preparing for the jobs
that the economy is beginning to create.
Now let me ask you because so many people have been
unemployed for so long that now we have a crisis where there
are about 4.7 unemployed workers for every available job
opening. We have people, and we call them ``99ers''' who are in
the category of being unemployed for more than 99 weeks now,
who have hit a wall. No more unemployment benefits.
We have been trying over and over again--Congressman Scott,
myself, and others, Congresswoman DeLauro, Congresswomen
Roybal-Allard, Lowey, and many--to try to figure out how to
extend those benefits for the 99ers so that at least 14
additional weeks will be provided to make sure that they don't
fall through the cracks.
Now we have had a difficult time because, of course, under
PAYGO we know we have to find a pay-for. We are trying to
identify where we take the money to provide for the extension
of unemployment benefits. But what we also recognize is under
the pay-as-you-go rules, there is a designation for an economic
emergency. And this is an economic emergency for those
individuals, I think a couple of million people.
And so, I want to know from you, have you looked at this
from your department? We are working with the White House now,
and we are working with our leadership here. But we are trying
to figure out a way to find, and we can't get a CBO score yet
because we haven't been able to get that far. But our office
estimates $14,000,000,000 to $16,000,000,000.
But this money will be put right back into the economy. It
is an economic boost. You know, 99ers are consumers. But in
addition to that, I think it is our moral obligation to really
help those who are falling through the cracks and have nowhere
to go now.
Ms. DeLauro. Would the gentlelady yield for one second
before the Secretary responds?
Ms. Lee. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. I met with a group of 99ers in my community
just about a week ago. I asked each one of them what they were
doing before unemployment. One young man was a graphic
designer, was 12 years at a place. Bank teller, accountant,
social services director.
So as you pointed out earlier, people who were qualified,
trained, and who had skills in order to be able to get jobs. So
I just wanted to add that to what the----
Ms. Lee. Right. These are people who are looking for jobs,
but because there are only 4.7 unemployed persons for one job,
they need help. They need just a safety net.
So can you kind of explain what your department is doing,
if anything, or how you think we need to move forward to ensure
that they receive these benefits?
Secretary Solis. Well, yes, it is a great concern, and you
heard me earlier talk about that. And it is something that we
are focused on. And we will work with you, and we will work
with the White House and those that agree that this is a matter
that we need to prioritize.
But it is difficult because I know that even in the
Congress, as we try to get an extension for unemployment
benefits, the last time it was difficult to arrive at that. So
I know that that is something that folks here have to also have
the political will to move forward on.
And I know that, and you are right. It is absolutely right
that every dollar that is expended generates another $2. It
keeps another small business open. It keeps that gas tank full.
And these 99ers, in many cases, through no fault of their own
lost their job because an industry went down. And that is why
there is a need to extend, TAA, Trade Adjustment Assistance,
extension for people that are going to be losing their jobs or
have lost their jobs and also to help continue to provide
assistance for more training.
Because I know that some people do have to make a career
change because perhaps that area that they were focused on is
no longer there, and it just behooves them to get involved in
our training programs. We have put out a Solicitation for Grant
Applications, SGA, for TAA community college so that we could
start looking at ramping up programs where we know are going to
have a positive outcome, in nursing and different places where
we know there is going to be jobs or renewable energy.
Mr. Rehberg. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Secretary Solis. We can talk more about that.
Ms. Lee. I look forward to talking to you.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you.

JOB CORPS WORKS

Welcome, Madam Secretary. I just want to make one point
about Job Corps because it is an example of a Federal program
that works and really does deserve a strong investment.
The fact is that at a time when unemployment is very, very
high, 83 percent of Job Corps graduates are still able to find
a job and go on to higher education or enlist in the military.
So it really is a program that works that we need to preserve.

H.R. 1'S EFFECT ON OSHA'S PROGRAMS

I would like to change focus now and talk a little bit
about OSHA and what H.R. 1 is doing or proposing to do with
OSHA in terms of its cuts, which I believe are very reckless
and irresponsible because they endanger the lives and health of
millions of American workers while also penalizing responsible
businesses.
It is my understanding is that OSHA would be forced to lay
off 20 percent of its inspection staff and virtually halt the
development of new safeguards to protect American workers.
These layoffs will likely fall disproportionately on the
bilingual inspectors hired over the past 2 years by this
administration in recognition of the changing nature of our
workforce.
And the cut to State plans, which protect 40 percent of the
Nation's workers, would be devastating in an already critical
State budget environment. States would be forced to conduct
10,000 fewer inspections, leaving workers in those States with
significantly less protection.
In California, the estimate is that OSHA would lose over
$5,000,000 in funding and would be forced to conduct nearly
1,500 fewer inspections. I am sure, Madam Secretary, that you
know that every day in this country more than a dozen workers
lose their lives in preventable workplace accidents. That is
close to 100 lives that are lost a week.
It is obvious to me that we should be increasing workplace
safety enforcement and oversight, not cutting it. Would you
explain the differences between the cuts being proposed by
Republican colleagues and the President's budget's request and
how they will impact the health and safety of American workers?
And also if H.R. 1 would eliminate OSHA safety and health
statistics funding, what impact would this have on workers and
their employers--employees?
Secretary Solis. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Yes, as you said earlier, we are projecting that if H.R. 1
were to be implemented, we would lose about 20 percent of our
ability to provide safe protection in the workplace. And what
that means in terms of staff, we are looking at possibly well
over 400 investigators.
And in particular, of course, because we recently hired in
the last 2 years individuals who now serve the populations that
have not been served adequately in the past, they would
probably be naturally the first ones to go, and it would, I
think, again create a crisis where you are going to see more
fatalities or injuries in the workplace.
And you are right that we need to work closely with our
State plans because those in the line of enforcement are very
valuable players out there, and I know States are undergoing
tremendous preserve having to deal with their deficit spending
as well. And in many cases, this is the first thing that will
go, and that also is something that people need to be mindful
of.
That is why it is important that we are asking for the
support that we are for our OSHA enforcement. We believe we
have really been able to streamline and use our ability to be
more targeted in our approaches.
So we can't go out and police everywhere. No, we know that.
But what we can do is look at places where we know that the
hazards are higher--in construction, in some of the service
industries, in the hotel area, for example, or people that are
dealing, say, in refineries or in places where chemicals
abound.
Those are places where we are strategically looking at--for
example, in farming, because we know that there have been many,
many abuses with farm workers and their children. So that is
something also that we are mindful of.
We would see a reduction in terms of fewer workplace
inspections, about 19,000 total between the Federal and State
programs. That is a lot of people that are not going to have
assurances that we are going to have boots on the ground, so to
speak. And I would tell you that we have done a tremendous
effort in the past few years under previous administrations to
have a Web page available so businesses could go online and
understand exactly what kinds of compliance assistance is
available, what they can do to help remedy and prevent
workplace injuries.
If that goes down, you are going to see hundreds of
thousands of businesses that are not going to have access to
that information, which is probably the second most highly used
U.S. Federal agency Web site right now that businesses go to.

EFFECTIVENESS OF JOB CORPS PROGRAM

Mr. Rehberg. Madam Secretary, the sky is green. In fact,
Rodney told me just the other day the sky is green. I heard it
out in the hall. The sky is green.
Unfortunately, just because we all said it does not make it
true. Job Corps's nearly $2,000,000,000 education and
professional training program that also provides living and
housing expenses, clothing, childcare assistance. It even pays
participants to receive driver's licenses. These social
services, just like the job training, seem to be wholly
duplicative of other Federal subsidies.
But Job Corps is different. It is a residential program,
and it provides education and/or job training for economically
disadvantaged youth. And here is the problem, Madam Secretary.
If we don't rubber-stamp and fully fund Job Corps, we are
told that we are abandoning the children that need us most. We
must get beyond the rhetoric and divest ourselves of the overly
passionate personal attachment to programs that have been
proven to be ineffective.
The $1,700,000,000 request would fund 45,000 positions.
That is nearly $38,000 per person, more than the annual cost of
most public colleges. This is the most expensive cost per
participant program in the department, if not the entire
Government.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, there are 15.5
million 16- to 24-year-olds that are not enrolled in school.
Job Corps serves just 45,000, or 0.4 percent of 1 percent of
this population each year. For nearly $2,000,000,000, we are
serving 0.4 of 1 percent of school dropouts.
A 2007 Office of Management and Budget assessment found
that the program cost exceeds the benefits. Yet we continue to
rubber-stamp this budget because it is for the kids.
A 2006 longitudinal study found that a Job Corps graduate
earns just 22 cents more than their non-Job Corps peers. The
study concluded by stating, ``Because overall earnings gains do
not persist, the benefits to society of Job Corps are smaller
than the substantial program costs.'' This is not a political
statement. This is a fact.
Lastly, the Department of Education's Institution of
Education Sciences conducted its own assessment of Job Corps'
educational component in April of 2008. It found that there
were no discernible effects when it came to progressing in
schools and only potentially positive effects of completing
school.
So, Madam Secretary, 0.4 of 1 percent of 15.5 million
eligible young adults, earning just 22 cents more than their
peers, and no discernible effect at progressing in school. How
do you justify the budget?
Secretary Solis. Mr. Chairman, I would tell you that I am
very proud of our Job Corps programs. In fact, I don't know if
you have ever visited any of our Job Corps programs.
Mr. Rehberg. Absolutely. I have got three in my State, and
I visit them----
Secretary Solis. They are very, I believe, constructive and
very appropriate for individuals that need a second chance. Not
all of them have bad backgrounds. Some of them just were plain
out of luck or they felt that after completing high school, and
many of them do have a high school degree----
Mr. Rehberg. Madam Secretary, I am not discouraging helping
anybody that is in need. I am not discouraging any program
within the Federal Government that lifts people up and helps
them.
Secretary Solis. Well----
Mr. Rehberg. I am just suggesting that the facts show that
there is no discernible improvement in education or employment
for a $38,000 cost per person.
Secretary Solis. Well, I know that is not accurate, and I
will be happy to give you information and our data. Because
many of the students that come in with no GED do complete a
GED. That is a major requirement. We also encourage them to
continue on and get into one of our certificate programs, and
many do get job offers while they are still at our Job Corps
program.
And I would tell you we have some remarkable programs that
work with big industry. I saw this, as an example, in New
Mexico, where we had a big corporation that was actually
helping to provide scholarships to incentivize those students
to continue on and to further their higher education and
actually promised them a job after they completed their
programs.
Mr. Rehberg. So you disagree then with the OMB and the
Department of Education study? Because I can come up with
examples in Butte, Montana, and Rock Springs, Wyoming. We can
always come up with the success stories. The problem is OMB and
the Department of Education do not agree with you.
Secretary Solis. Well, I would tell you that we do have
strong support from this administration for the Job Corps
program, and we have made many changes in the last 2 years----
Mr. Rehberg. I don't deny that you have support from the--
--
Secretary Solis [continuing]. Since I have been the Cabinet
member overseeing these programs. We have a new Administrator
there. We have done everything to do our checks and balances
and to make sure that we are expending our money in an
expeditious manner.
We are even beginning to service and allowing for Iraqi
vets who come back from overseas, who qualify in the age
bracket of 16 through 24. So we are doing everything we can to
address many of the issues that we are seeing.
We talked about veterans also having high unemployment.
This is a bridge for them, and I think that the program does
work.
[The information follows:]

FUNDING FOR PROGRAM EVALUATION

Mr. Rehberg. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, I'd like to just clear up a couple of
things. You have been asked a number of questions about
evaluating programs, seeing how they work. We want to make sure
we are getting the best bang for the buck and all of that
effort.
So it is important to note that H.R. 1 zeroes out funding
for evaluation. So if we are going to try to evaluate programs
and see whether or not they are effective or not, it would seem
to me that we would want to put some money in there to actually
do so.

COMMUNITY SERVICE EMPLOYMENT FOR OLDER AMERICANS

The other piece is on the Community Service Employment for
Older Americans, which is a good program. I wish Ms. Granger
were here now, but I will speak to her personally. It is a good
program which has been cut in half by H.R. 1--from $825,000,000
down to $400,000,000. So, again, the Republican budget looks to
cut in half programs that work.

JOB CORPS STATISTICS

A quick point on Job Corps. I have a different set of
statistics. Everybody has got their own set, I suppose. But Job
Corps successfully prepares 60,000 economically disadvantaged
youth for jobs, military, higher education, with an astounding
80 percent success rate. It is one of the most effective
Federal programs. Each high school dropout costs our economy
and the Government $469 thousand over the course of their
lifetime. So it is an enormous return on the investment.

YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT

Let me move to a different subject. I want to come back at
some point on youth unemployment. Because as I see, every
effort with regard to youth unemployment, whether it is
YouthBuild, Job Corps, the formula grants to States for youth
unemployment, that every opportunity is being eliminated
through H.R. 1, in effect. Is that accurate?
Secretary Solis. That is correct.
Ms. DeLauro. That is correct. So every opportunity is gone
as a result of H.R. 1.

BACKLOG OF MINE SAFETY CITATIONS

Mine safety, let me talk about that, if I can, for a
moment. You mentioned the explosion at the Upper Big Branch
mine last year, which was a tragic explosion. One of the
problems that came to light is a huge growing backlog of mine
safety citations on appeal to the Mine Safety and Health Review
Commission, and they are waiting adjudication.
The backlog grew from about 4,000 in 2007 to more than
19,000 this year. That happened after MSHA increased penalties
for mine safety violations, following a series of serious mine
accidents like the Sago mine disaster in 2006. In response,
mine operators began appealing a much higher percentage of the
citations that they receive.
As long as the citations remain pending on appeal, the
operator does not have to pay the penalty. The Government may
be prompted to reduce the amount to get the case settled.
Perhaps most important, citations that are on appeal do not
count toward determining a pattern of violation that triggers
enhanced enforcement authorities.
To bring down the backlog, we saw that the Congress
provided in the supplemental appropriations bill last year
additional judges, law clerks at the review commission, for
additional staff at the Labor Department in order to be able to
bring these cases to conclusion.
The funds are available for only 1 year. They expire at the
end of this July. What would happen to the effort to reduce the
mine safety citation backlog if the supplemental funds are
allowed to expire with no replacement? What does your fiscal
year 2012 budget propose in order to continue to bring the
backlog under control?
Secretary Solis. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Yes, you point out very clearly that the backlog was
something that needed to be addressed. And we have, from
October through the end of 2010, been able to close about 1,300
backlog cases involving almost 4,800 citations or violations.
We project that funding for addressing the backlog will
only be available through July of 2011, this year. You are
accurate in that. Our original estimate was that it would take
2.9 years to clear up the backlog of cases in the pipeline when
this project actually began a while ago.
We did get additional lawyers and judges, but also realized
that we have to do much more. And because of the result of us
being more vigorous and having many more of the operators now
dispute these citations, there is more backlog.
Ms. DeLauro. Backlog. Right.
Secretary Solis. Because we are doing our job. And I think
the Congress needs to be aware that we need to continue to keep
a handle on that.
If the money goes away, it will also impede our progress in
terms of the Upper Big Branch investigation because we didn't
have initial resources to begin focusing on this investigation,
which is so critical. It is the worst disaster we have had in
decades.
Ms. DeLauro. We lost 48 coalminers who were killed on that
job. Is that right?
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Alexander.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you.

FY 2012 OSHA REQUEST

Madam Secretary, OSHA is requesting almost $25,000,000 more
in comparison to the FY 2011 budget. The requests for safety
and health standards, Federal enforcement, whistleblower
program, State programs, compliance assistance, Federal
compliance assistance, State consolidations, and compliance
assistance training programs have all increased over previous
requests. And the remaining programs under OSHA are requesting
their funding remain the same.
The safety and health standards program alone is requesting
an additional $6,500,000 million. According to the Department
of Labor's budget justification, the increase includes
$4,000,000 to enhance the agency's contract support for
regulatory activities and $2,400,000 to provide resources to
continue the development of the agency's new Injury and Illness
Prevention Program, a standard which would significantly
enhance worker safety by adding yet another burden to the
employers by requiring them to develop and implement a
comprehensive safety and health plan to find and fix
recognizable hazards.
Given the agenda of both Congress and the administration to
target excess spending, why, of all things, would OSHA not be
satisfied with a standstill budget? Why would they ask for an
increase of $25,000,000?
Secretary Solis. Congressman Alexander, when I took over as
Cabinet member for the agency, we had not seen increases in
many agencies, one of which was OSHA. In the past 10 years, we
have seen a tremendous growth in businesses, and we requested
additional enforcement staff and investigators so that we could
begin to handle more appropriately these types of injuries and
cases.
But one of the things that I want to make clear also is
that we are taking seriously our job to undertake strategic
enforcement because, again, we can't police the entire business
community across this country. But we can do a better job in
helping to prepare our businesses.
And that is why we have continued our funding for the
Voluntary Protection Program, VPP, program, and that is a
program that many businesses in particular find very helpful in
terms of helping to set out their compliance. We have boots on
the ground, so to speak, where we have staff that will go out
and help businesses, in particular small businesses, that might
be having a difficult time in meeting our regulations.
So we do our very best that we can, and I think that is a
big change in what we have seen in the past few years because
our level of funding was not adequate. And I think that is what
our mission is, to try to make sure that we protect workers,
but that we also create a good incentive for those businesses
that do play by the rules so that they are not unevenly
disadvantaged by other people who tend not to abide by the
rules.
And I think we are doing everything we can to make sure
that small businesses are aware that we are also on their side.
We certainly don't want to be a burden by cutting off jobs.
Mr. Alexander. You don't find that somewhat puzzling that
we are requesting more money so we can help business understand
clearly the rules and regulations that we are imposing on them?
Secretary Solis. You would be surprised that many
businesses and many employees are not aware of what their roles
and responsibilities should be. I find that all the time when I
go out across the country and meet with workers and meet with
businesses that are not even aware that we have these tools
available for them.
So I think, because of the past few years and the funding
that was not provided, we barely, in the last 2 years, were
able to bring up our funding to about 2001 levels. So it really
has not kept up the pace in terms of what other agencies have
been able to do in this area.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

EFFECTIVENESS OF PROGRAMS

And I just want to say at the outset that we all believe in
the need for fiscal restraint and that the deficit is out of
control. And in fact, in the last month, I voted for two
continuing resolutions, and I wasn't happy with some of the
cuts. But overall, I felt we had to start and try and work in a
bipartisan way, and I do want to work together with my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
And I also agree we should be evaluating every program, but
we cannot expect to grow our economy by taking away the
services that our constituents use to get back to work. And I
couldn't help but thinking, Mr. Chairman, as I reviewed some
numbers, of Members who live in various States. And I go back
to Senator Moynihan's constant complaint.
In Connecticut, Connecticut gets back 69 cents for every $1
in taxes. In New York, we get back 79 cents for every $1 we pay
in taxes. Wyoming, they get back $1.11 for every $1 they pay in
taxes. Montana gets $1.47 back for every $1 paid in taxes, and
Louisiana gets $1.78 for every $1 that is given in taxes.
Ms. DeLauro. I only get 69 cents?
Mrs. Lowey. Yes. I only get 79 cents. So we should have
this discussion about some of the programs. But we can deal
with that another time.
I also want to say in response to the question about
businesses that need some instructions, I was looking at a
report that the GAO did, and investigators found recipients of
farm payments who resided outside of the United States in Hong
Kong, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom, for example.
And a former executive of a technology company received
approximately $20,000 each year for 4 years that were covered
by the income limits. This individual also received more than
$900,000 in farm program payments that were not subject to
those limitations.

CARRYOVER FUNDS OF WIA PROGRAMS

So I am sure many of my good friends and colleagues
wouldn't want to eliminate all the farm programs because some
of these executives made a mistake and took money that they
shouldn't have gotten. But let me get back to another point,
which I really want to discuss again, the Workforce Investment
Act, because I think it is so important.
And in Montana, as the gentleman, my friend said, 3,647
residents receive WIA intensive service or training last year.
Ninety-one percent of those dislocated workers gained
employment. And I could go on to our other States.
So one of the complaints--and again, I think we have to
review all these programs, making sure they are effective, and
I want to give you the opportunity to respond to the carryover
issue because I have heard that those who support the workforce
cuts in H.R. 1 argue that there were a large amount of unspent
carryover funds in DOL accounts, justifying the cuts.
So if you could explain why H.R. 1 does not simply
eliminate unnecessary funds, but instead essentially eliminates
workforce programs? I think it is important for us to
understand this because since these programs are in Montana,
Wyoming, other of our colleagues' States, we really need an
explanation as we evaluate these programs. How does the
carryover program work? Could you explain it?
Secretary Solis. Well, I think what, first of all, we have
to understand is how different programs have different
criteria. For instance, you have funding streams that, for
example, are formula driven, and disbursements that don't all
go by our Federal calendar either. So that is some of the
discrepancy here because you have got States disbursing the
money that they receive from us, using a different calendar
year.
Ours starts in October. Theirs starts in June. So you have
kind of this gap. But that has been going on for many years. So
it isn't something new that just got identified. It has been in
existence for a long time.
What tends to happen is that many of the funds that we do
put out--if it is a 3-year program, and typically, it is--we
find that the second year is when that money is actually
expended at a higher rate because that is typically when the
recipients start to get everything going. They also have to,
for lack of a better word, encumber some of the money because
they know they still have other contracts that they have to
fulfil from that appropriation so they put that money aside.
You don't pay up-front on a contract without the services
being delivered. So that is kind of the theory behind this.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you. I think the red light is working
again.
Mr. Rehberg. It is, indeed. It is, indeed.
Let me help my urban friend out to better understand the
money that is coming back to the State of Montana because we
would love to give you some of that back. The number that
always seems to escape the discussion is the fact that one-
third of my State, which is 49,000 square miles--and frankly,
Mrs. Lowey, I have pastures bigger than your district on my
ranch. [Laughter].
Forty-nine thousand square miles managed by the Bureau of
Land Management, the Forest Service, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, and the National Park Service. And guess what? All
that money coming in for the personnel to pay their salaries
and all their budget is considered money back to the State of
Montana. So we get more Government than we want in Montana.
And if you would want to sign legislation with me to
eliminate those employees, we would be a lot happier with a lot
more deeded land. We wouldn't have to deal with the wolves and
the grizzly bears and the Endangered Species Act and all of the
other things we have to.
Mrs. Lowey. Will the gentleman yield for a minute?
Mr. Rehberg. I would yield.
Mrs. Lowey. I am just curious because I have been looking
at these numbers. And according to these numbers, 44 percent of
Montana farmers received subsidies from '95 to '09. You want to
get rid of those?
Mr. Rehberg. No. Not necessarily. We are talking about
vouchers. We are talking about a lot of different kinds of
ideas of income support, and I might remind the ranking member
of her support for those very issues, the income support, on
the Ag Appropriations Committee.
Yes, we will talk. Let's talk about the 27,000 square miles
of missiles that we are carrying and all of the various
infrastructure to protect our force.

STATE PAID LEAVE FUND

But I am going to move on, and that is I note that you are
proposing a new $23,000,000 program called the State Paid Leave
Fund, which I find interesting. And since Mrs. Lummis isn't
here, and she usually asks the States rights issue, why in the
world is the Federal Government putting together pilot projects
for States at a time and, frankly, I have been saying this in
town hall meetings all over the State of Montana as I am
talking about House Resolution 1, which, unfortunately, seems
to be dead.
And that is, frankly, cities like Billings, counties like
Yellowstone County, the State of Montana are all in better
financial shape than the Federal Government. In fact, Montana
is still in the black because we are conservative, and we like
our natural resource development, something that other States
don't participate in.
And so, the question is if Montana is in better fiscal
condition and our counties and our cities, why is the Federal
Government that is running the third year of over trillion-
dollar deficits and building debt like crazy getting involved
in a State project like the State Paid Leave Fund?
Secretary Solis. Mr. Chairman, this particular fund really
addresses, a need that affects many families these days. It is
really addressing work-life balance, which is a priority of
this Administration. And the policies such as State Paid Leave
would help to provide grants for those States that want to
begin to address this issue.
Mr. Rehberg. But the question is, is that a Federal
responsibility?
Secretary Solis. It is actually----
Mr. Rehberg. At a time when we don't have the money, but we
are running a deficit.
Secretary Solis. Well, there are some benefits to the
program. Because many businesses find that if they are able to
create better flex work schedules for their employees, they
will stay longer. They will be more productive, and I think
everybody is happy.
You have got people now that have to take time off to take
care of their elders or their children----
Mr. Rehberg. I am happy. You are happy. But that doesn't
make us able to afford a State program. Clearly, a State
program. Why does the Federal Government need to be involved in
that?
Secretary Solis. This is a priority of the Administration
to address the issues of family life balance, and it is a big
issue because we know that there are many people that need to
take time off, as I said earlier, to take care of a loved one
or an injured family member or, say, a new adopted child or a
woman that perhaps just gave birth and needs to take time off.
And if she has had time working at that particular place
and she is a good staff person, I am sure that the employer
would want to work out a situation so that she could return and
take time off as needed. This is a big issue that has been
going on and discussed for many, many years. And it is an issue
for us because we believe that there should be a fair balance
in the workplace.
And of course, it is not mandating anything. It is
available to those States that want to apply.
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you.

RETURN ON JOB CORPS

I might point out really quickly because we can all do
math, and the reason we were flurrying back here is because
none of our calculators could work that quickly. But to carry
Ms. DeLauro's point a little bit further, 80 percent success in
the Job Corps. That makes it .032 percent. That is not a very
good return on investment when it comes to the $2,000,000,000
we are spending in Job Corps.
My time is up. Ms. DeLauro.

DEFICIT REDUCTION

Ms. DeLauro. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. But let me just
go back a second and just mention this to you. I think it is
very interesting to note, as you opened the door on this issue,
that Montana got $5,500,000,000 in subsidies, and we are
looking at wheat subsidies, Conservation Reserve Program,
disaster payments, barley subsidies, livestock subsidies,
Environmental Quality Incentive Program, corn subsidies, wool
subsidies, dried pea subsidies, dairy program subsidies.
Now you reference the fact that I was chair of the Ag
Appropriations Committee, and yes, I worked on these efforts.
But I am going to turn around and say we can do this, but we
can't provide the opportunity for young people to go to school?
Mr. Rehberg. Madam Chair? Ranking Member, would you yield?
Ms. DeLauro. Well, yes, only if I can get the time back.
Mr. Rehberg. Well, I yielded to you and Mrs. Lowey, and I
didn't take my time back.
Ms. DeLauro. Fine. Yes. I am happy to do that.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Well, the point is everything is on the
table, and Conservation Reserve Program, CRP, needs to be on
the table. Everything needs to be on the table.
If we are going to try and bring this country out of the
brink of disaster of debt and despair that seems to occur as a
result of the fact that our economy has not turned around, then
everything needs to be on the table, including the subsidies
you are talking about.
Ms. DeLauro. Well, I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that, in
fact, when H.R. 1 did what it did in terms of trying to cut
$60,000,000,000 or $61,000,000,000, as I said in my opening
statement, it did nothing about attacking the $40,000,000,000
we provide for a subsidy to a special interest, and that is
called the oil industry.
It did nothing about $8,000,000,000 in agricultural
subsidies. It did nothing about almost $8,000,000,000 to
multinational corporations that take jobs overseas, and there
probably are a couple of others. And you know what? When you
add that up, it comes to almost over $60,000,000,000, which we
could have found before we begin to attack programs that affect
families with children, the elderly, and people's education
opportunities.
Let's create a balance here. We do have to get out of this
hole, but it is not going to be just on the backs of 12 percent
of this budget and when other things are no longer on the
table. I didn't see agricultural subsidies come forward with
this, with what we are talking, $5,500,000,000 in subsidies to
one State, in addition to which 56 percent of the farmers in
Montana do not collect a subsidy, 10 percent collect a subsidy.
I venture to say is let's take a look at what the income
levels of those folks are. Nothing has been said from the other
side of the aisle about that. Folks who put this H.R. 1
together are the very same people who would say let us extend
the tax cuts to the richest 2 percent of the people in this
country.
The question of deficit reduction is where you start? And
it should not be on the backs of people trying to make a
living, who are going back to school to find out if they, in
fact, can increase their skill level to get a job, and families
with children who are just trying to make it.

EFFECT OF H.R. 1 ON WIA PROGRAMS

Madam Secretary, can you compare and contrast what your
fiscal year 2012 budget request would do for Workforce
Investment Act programs with the majority's proposal in H.R. 1?
Can you tell me how many job seekers accessed the array of WIA
programs this past program year?
If H.R. 1 is passed, which will eliminate WIA formula
programs to provide job training and employment-related
assistance, and that is for adults, dislocated workers, and
youth, where will these job seekers be able to turn for help in
an economy with 8.9 percent unemployment? What will be the
impact of these cuts on job seekers? How many will be left out
in the cold?
I truly do want to see the numbers, Madam Secretary,
because I think those numbers ought to see the light of day.
Secretary Solis. Thank you, Congresswoman DeLauro.
What I would say to you is that we typically service about
29 million people through our One-Stop centers. The impact
would be devastating to those services, which are not just job
placement, but also opportunities for other services that are
coupled around those One-Stop centers.
In fact, we wouldn't be helping those veterans that are
coming home that we made a commitment to, I believe in the
Congress to see that these people were found places of
employment. Those people that do go through our programs, it
has been said earlier that about 60 to 70 percent of those
individuals do find employment after they go through 6 months
of our training programs. And if they stay longer, the
percentage is higher.
But in this very bad situation right now, in the crisis, as
was stated earlier, you have got almost five people applying
for one job. And until we start to see the turnaround and
businesses expending money out so that they can bring on
individuals, then we are going to be in a very competitive
situation.
And I know that it is very difficult for people to
understand just how important it is that we have training
assistance available for youth, for dislocated workers, and in
particular, the folks that Congresswoman Lee talked about and
yourself, the 99ers, who in many cases are very well qualified.
It is a very competitive market. We still continue to see that
we are not recovering as quick as we want to, but I will say
that we did add 1.3 million private sector jobs this last year,
and that was a turnaround from 2 years ago.

DUPLICATIVE JOB TRAINING PROGRAMS

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Rehberg. Mr. Alexander.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I represent a congressional district that the USDA tells us
just on a rural crop basis, the variety of crops, that we have
the largest agricultural district in the entire Nation. And I
believe in being fair, but last year during the markup of our
ag bill, I offered an amendment that would take $1,000,000,000
from the conservation program, and my chairman wouldn't accept
it. So I believe in going after all programs that we think are
a waste, including some that might hurt me politically.
The reports tell us that there are about 40 different
programs under your jurisdiction that offer job training. Are
we doing anything to try to make sure that there are not
duplicative programs that are wasting money?
I mean, I understand that there is a need to work with
employers out there and make sure that they have qualified
employees to work for them. But are we spending money
unnecessarily in places that it might be wiser if we take
another look at it?
Secretary Solis. Congressman Alexander, I think it is
important to note that many of the programs that have been
established that work through the Department of Labor, through
WIA, the Workforce Investment Act in particular, have been
established over time to address the issues for including some
different population. So we have youth. We have efforts for
dislocated workers. We have programs for veterans and things of
that nature. So the funding streams are very different.
What we try to do, though, is make sure that we are
coupling and not duplicating. That we centralize and that we
are really looking at being more efficient. Since I have been
Secretary at the Department of Labor, I have insisted that we
do audits of our program and that I get a report to tell me
exactly what our performance is and where we are falling short
and where we need to do better.
I am not happy that many of our participants may not have
the ability to go on after getting a GED, for example, in the
Job Corps program. Many have to find a job right away, and they
will get a certificate, say, in a trade, and they will go right
off to work. My hope would be that they continue to get more
education because the better opportunities are available to
those that have higher education and who have an ability to
compete more.

PROGRAM EVALUATION

We are looking at evaluating ourselves. That is why we are
hiring and we have hired and brought on an evaluator to look at
all of our programs so that we can project in a period of time
how well we are doing and to try to make sure that we
streamline. That is why we put forward this innovation program
that takes money from the top to see how we could look inside
of ourselves and hopefully better direct how our programs are
working.

WIA REAUTHORIZATION

And I think that goes to the point of trying to get WIA
reauthorized because there are a lot of complaints about the
system of WIA that has been around for more than a decade. It
has to be worked on and I know that on the Senate side, there
is bipartisan support to move a bill. I would hope that on this
side, we could do the same because people are suffering. We
need to be more agile and better equipped to get those
resources to the right people.
And because of some formula fundings, in many cases, it is
not that easy to do. And States then also factor in what their
decisions are, where they would like to see initiatives. That
doesn't always come together smoothly in the way that we would
like to, and some States do a better job than others.
Mr. Alexander. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
Since we are probably coming to a close in this hearing, I
would like to acknowledge the hard work you are doing. And
these programs, Mr. Chairman, I understand, are not on the
chopping block, and I want them to stay off the chopping block.

STATE PAID LEAVE FUND

We know how tough it is for workers in this economy, and it
is really shocking that more than 50 percent of American
workers do not have one paid day if they are sick. Restaurants,
I mean, you don't want people serving you if they are coughing,
but they don't have a paid sick day.
So either people go to work to get paid, to support the
family, or they stay home to take care of themselves. And we
have paid sick days. Staff has paid sick days. We should be
doing more in this area, and I just wanted to commend you for
your initiative. This is really a problematic issue, and I want
to thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. Would the gentlelady yield for one second?
Mrs. Lowey. I would be delighted to yield.
Ms. DeLauro. I just would add to that because it is a very,
very relevant point. Most of those 50 million people are
employed in private sectors jobs, unlike us. We have the
opportunity to take days off. These folks can't. And
oftentimes, they lose their jobs if they do or----
Mrs. Lowey. I want to thank you, and it is really
problematic. So I am sure we all agree.

COMMUNITY COLLEGES AND CAREER TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM

Secondly, I want to congratulate you on requesting
$500,000,000 for the Community College and Career Training
Grant Program. I have two community colleges in my district
that have outstanding career training programs for dislocated
workers to find jobs in high-wage, high-skill occupations, and
this is really important.
And I want to emphasize again, because I visit those
community colleges, so many of the kids struggle, which goes
back to our discussion about Pell grant. And if they lose $845
dollars--many of them are first generation--they can't go to
mom or pop and say, ``Can you help me?'' They really will lose
out.
So if you can just tell us in the little time we have
remaining how you envision this program helping dislocated
workers, and I really appreciate your creativity for putting
this program together.
Secretary Solis. Thank you, Congresswoman Lowey.
This is a partnership between the Department of Education
and the Department of Labor. The first round of grant
solicitations went out about 3 weeks ago, and the first amount
is about $500 million.
Each State can apply, and they can receive, at a minimum,
$2.5 million. And what we are asking for here is really a
collaboration. The partnership has to be a community college
and industry, and it can include other service groups, too. It
can also help to identify populations that are really
struggling.
And it would hopefully build into capacity building at
community colleges as well because, as was alluded earlier, it
is tough to get into these nursing programs. I saw it myself,
visiting the Sacramento Community College program that had a
waiting list of 4 or 5 years. And yet it is a high-impact area
where we need to have more nurses, as opposed to bringing in
folks from abroad.
So, yes, it makes sense. It also makes sense to help create
more opportunities for technicians, for people in the light
technology area that don't necessarily have to have an advanced
bachelor of science, but could get a community college degree
and, say, become very capable of working on these new programs
that require computer skills, for architectural design and
engineering.
These are very highly paid positions and jobs that are
available, and we have a shortage. That is the first thing I
hear from employers. ``I don't necessarily need an engineer,
Secretary. But I need someone who can come in agilely and be
able to have a good certificate that tells me they are
qualified and be able to take on these new responsibilities.''
And that goes to the whole notion of creating green,
renewable energy jobs, looking at that sector and trying to
conserve and come up with biofuels and other types of
incentives so we can create solar panels here, wind turbines,
and things that are already being done now. And many of them
are taking place at community colleges.
So it is a way of expanding it through this particular
funding source.
Mrs. Lowey. I really want to thank you for that, and we are
on yellow. And I just have to give you a specific example that
I was talking to people just this week. The wife works as a
beautician, does nails. The husband is an architect, a trained
architect. He is working in the pizza parlor across the street
because he cannot find a job.
And I just had this discussion with him, but he said, ``How
can I go to community college? How can I afford to even go
there?'' And their salaries are a fraction of what a 4-year
college costs today. So I was trying to give him advice, but I
didn't have much good advice because on pizza parlor salary and
a beautician, it is pretty hard to even go to the Westchester
Community College.
Secretary Solis. Tell him to go to our online toolkit that
we have, myskillsmyfuture.org. And that will be helpful for
that person, and we will be happy to work with him.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you. I will do that.

2008 EVALUATION OF THE ADULT AND DISLOCATED WORKER PROGRAMS

Mr. Rehberg. Madam Secretary, your justification material
makes repeated references to the 2008 evaluation of the Adult
and Dislocated Worker Programs. Referring to the adult program,
it says, ``Regardless of services received, there is a several
hundred dollar increase in quarterly earnings.''
It is a good sound bite, but that is not an accurate read
of the study. When it comes to the training component, not the
core or intensive services, this study actually found that
adult program participants who obtained training services have
lower initial earnings than those who don't receive training
services, but they catch up in 10 quarters. I suppose it is
good news that they catch up 2\1/2\ years later.
Let us talk about the dislocated worker program for a
minute. Again, your justification seems to cherry-pick data
points from the impact study, saying there was a statistically
significant impact on employment and earnings. One only need
read a bit further to find the more critical conclusion.
``Estimates''--and this is their quote. ``Estimates imply
that program participants' earnings do not reach the level of
earnings of comparable nonparticipants until more than 2 years
after participation. Estimates of effects on earnings and
employment 3 to 4 years after program entry show little
evidence that training produces substantial benefits.''
And finally, they said, ``Overall, it appears possible that
the ultimate gains from participation are small or
nonexistent.''
So, Madam Secretary, I am at a loss for what to believe. As
this budget requests another $3,000,000,000 for these programs,
are we left with a rather scathing review of the near and long-
term effectiveness of the program. So I have to ask what are
your thoughts on spending another $3,000,000,000 on programs
that, one, still sitting on $1,000,000,000 in unspent stimulus
funds; two, you are sitting on an additional $1,900,000,000 in
carryover funds; and, at least by this study, shows little
evidence that training produces substantial benefits?
Secretary Solis. Mr. Chairman, what report are you
referring to?
Mr. Rehberg. It was the----
Secretary Solis. Because I am not aware.
Mr. Rehberg. Yes. It was called the----
Secretary Solis. And what year was it done?
Mr. Rehberg. 2008.
Secretary Solis. Okay. All right. I guess we can talk about
that.
Mr. Rehberg. It was IMPAQ International Workforce
Investment Act Non-experimental Net Impact Evaluation--Final
Report.''
Secretary Solis. Okay. I am not familiar with that report.
But I will tell you that for the latest data available from my
agency, for June 2008 and June 2009, 85 percent of workers
exiting Workforce Investment Act, WIA, dislocated worker
training and 82 percent of workers exiting the WIA adult worker
training found a job within 1 year.
And I think that is commendable because given the fact that
you still have five people to one job, it is still very, very
important to be able to have these programs available. Those
people that go through our programs are more likely to get the
job than the person who has never even entered into our system.
And that is a fact.
Mr. Rehberg. Madam Secretary, are you suggesting you
haven't seen the study? Because it is the only known study that
has been done, and it actually is sitting in the Department of
Labor, this study.
Secretary Solis. I am sorry. Who did the study?
Mr. Rehberg. The Department of Labor.
Secretary Solis. I don't have--no.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. Well, I might suggest that----
Secretary Solis. What year?
Mr. Rehberg. December 2008.
Secretary Solis. 2008. I started in 2009.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay.
Secretary Solis. Okay, that was the previous
administration. So I gave you the latest data I have for my
programs.
Mr. Rehberg. But the facts don't change from the report.
Secretary Solis. Yes, they do. I just told you. So if you
would like, I can also make sure that my Assistant Secretary
comes and relays the most recent information and data that we
do have.
[The information follows:]

INITIAL GRANTS FOR GREEN JOBS

Mr. REHBERG. In my time remaining, if I might, I want to go
back to the initial grant in the green jobs--well, I have lost
my page, but in the green jobs section, if I heard you
correctly in the first question I asked, you suggested that you
are giving grants out that do not have to have a labor
component?
Secretary Solis. That is not a mandate, right. I mean,
anybody can apply. That is how we view these competitive
grants.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. I guess I am confused because I am
actually looking at the language that says by law there has to
be a labor component.
Secretary Solis. It has to include a business or an
employer. I mean, that is a part of----
Mr. Rehberg. Well, a business or an employer is the same
thing. So does it have to require a labor component in the
grant?
Secretary Solis. It is acceptable, yes.
Mr. Rehberg. Is it a requirement? Is it a law?
Secretary Solis. I don't know that it is a law. It is a
business labor partnership. That is what we call it.
Mr. Rehberg. Okay. All right. I am going to, for the
record, then ask a question so I can get an answer as to
whether grants have been given out that do not have a labor
component affiliated to that grant. And I will just do that by
question.
[The information follows:]

Green Jobs Training Partnership

The Employment Training Administration funded Green Jobs-focused
grants using Recovery Act funding through five specific Solicitations
for Grant Applications (SGA): Green Capacity Building, Energy Training
Partnership (ETP), State Energy Sector Partnership (SESP), Pathways out
of Poverty (PATH), and State Labor Market Information Improvement
(LMII). The partnership requirements applied to the three grants that
focused on green industry training and extended to both employers and
labor organizations, but not specifically to unions. For the ETP SGA,
national labor-management organizations with local networks were one of
the eligible applicant types, and labor organizations were a required
partner. For the SESP SGA, labor organizations (including labor-
management training programs) were a required partner. For the PATH
SGA, labor organizations (including but not limited to labor-management
organizations) were a required partner. The State LMII and Green
Capacity Building SGAs did not require that applicants include labor
organizations as partners.

Thank you.
Mrs. Lowey? I am sorry, Ms. DeLauro? And then we will go to
Mr. Flake will be the last. We are closing now. We have had
many different rounds.
And just for the audience's benefit, quite a few of my
Members on this subcommittee are subcommittee chairmen in other
subcommittees, and it is not for a lack of interest in the
topic at hand. It has nothing to do with you personally. They
have just been very busy chairing other meetings.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

WORKER MISCLASSIFICATION--WAGE AND HOUR DIVISION

Madam Secretary, you mentioned in your testimony that the
department has an initiative related to worker
misclassification. Meaning, I believe, that people who an
employer tries to claim are independent contractors, but who
are really employees. I understand that the budget increase for
the Wage and Hour Division in particular is targeted to that
initiative.
Can you tell us why you believe worker misclassification is
a serious problem that merits priority attention? For the
workers, we are talking about consequences like the loss of
unemployment and workers compensation coverage, loss of rights
to overtime pay and minimum wages, and loss of employer
contributions to Social Security. Isn't that what can happen?
Secretary Solis. Yes, absolutely. Yes.
What we are attempting to do here is try to go after those
individuals that inappropriately misclassify their employees as
independent contractors. We are not saying that being an
independent contractor is wrong or anything, but there have
been many abuses where actually the worker is doing similar
work that other employees are doing, and yet they are being
robbed, actually, of, say, any benefits.
When they do become unemployed, they are not able to draw
that down. We lose out on the tax revenue as well. So local
government is also affected. And we feel that it is a serious
concern, and it has been talked about for many years. And it is
a way for us to begin to look at this issue because we have
gotten a lot of complaints.
And we were criticized very heavily by the Government
Accountbility Office, GAO, years back because we were not
following up on complaints like this and others where there
have been wage theft and other injuries, say, to workers in the
workplace.
Ms. DeLauro. And my understanding as well is that a number
of States are interested in cooperating with what you are
doing----
Secretary Solis. Yes. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. [continuing]. To protect the unemployment
insurance and those compensation funds. Is that right?
Secretary Solis. Absolutely. And it is an initiative
because, again, the State revenue doesn't come in if employees
are not appropriately classified. Or if they are put out as
independent contractors. So that is a problem that exists,
especially, I would say, in some of the lower-wage areas and
sometimes even in the telemarketing area.
Ms. DeLauro. Great. Thank you.

2008 FARM BILL

I want to just correct something for the record. My
colleague Mr. Alexander isn't here, but I did want to follow up
on his comment about the conservation program. In terms of
recollection, just to make sure that the cuts were being made
to the right programs and that we were concerned with the
amendment and what programs it was cutting.
Plus, in addition to which the amendment addressed problems
that existed prior to the 2008 farm bill, problems that were
reformed in the 2008 farm bill. So, quite frankly, the issue
had been addressed and corrected, and it didn't make sense to
cut before the reform had a chance to be implemented.
And those folks who are very interested in the farm bill
were not willing to reopen that again.

MINE SAFETY

I talked earlier about the mine safety issue, which has
always been a real interest to me. You talked about the problem
with the backlog. But let me just ask you in terms of your
budget, in terms of improving mine safety and health, what is
the 2012 budget doing to implement measures and what might
those measures be in terms of assisting with mine safety here?
Secretary Solis. Well, what we are looking at also,
Congresswoman DeLauro, is helping to provide a better stream of
regulations so that miners and operators will be fully aware of
the kind of changes that have to take place so we won't see
another Upper Big Branch explosion, and also try to mitigate
those backlogs. Because we found that many operators are able
to kind of game the system and block whenever there is a
citation that is brought before them, which tends to create a
long backlog and makes it incredibly hard to resolve these
issues.
That is why we need help from our budget to do just that.
But there are other things that we want to do as well. We want
to try to consolidate some of our operations and decentralize
when needed.
So, for example, the small business mines--I mean the small
mines that we have to oversee, we had an exclusive division
just set aside for that. What we are going to do now is put
that in all of our regional offices because it is kind of the
boots on the ground theory that they can go out and do a better
job of evaluating those programs and making sure that they are
addressed.
Mr. Rehberg. We have about 6 minutes left.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Rehberg. If I could ask Mr. Flake to keep it at about 3
and Mr. Lewis to keep it about 3, we will finish on time.
So, Mr. Flake.

STAPLE ACT

Mr. Flake. Madam Secretary, good to see you.
Secretary Solis. Good to see you.
Mr. Flake. Just a question. The President talked in his
State of the Union address about the problem we have where we
educate so many foreign-born students, and then we turn them
away, too few visa slots to keep them here. That has been a
concern of mine for quite a while.
If you look at those receiving Ph.D.s in the STEM fields in
our U.S. universities, about 60, 65 percent are foreign born.
And yet then we say to far too many of them, we have educated
you, now we are going to send you to compete against us. And
when you look at Silicon Valley, about 50 to 60 percent of the
startup firms there were started by foreigners.
In my view, we ought to roll out the red carpet for anybody
with a Ph.D. in those fields to stay here and work, and I have
introduced the STAPLE Act, which basically means you staple a
green card to a diploma of anybody receiving a diploma in those
fields. That seems to be what the President is talking about. I
have had discussions with the White House on this. Senator
Schumer has similar legislation in the Senate.
How does your agency view that kind of legislation? What
can we do to make sure that those who would help create jobs
here in the U.S. are allowed to stay here?
Secretary Solis. Well, this is a priority for the
administration. So we would look forward to working with you
and providing any assistance you might need from our staff as
well to look into it.
I know that this is something that is a high priority for
the President himself, serving with other members of the
Cabinet on the Export Council where this has come up quite a
bit. So I am well aware of it. I agree that it is something
that we need to work on, and I think this may be an appropriate
environment now to see something like that move.
Mr. Flake. Thank you.
Just for the record, I know before I came in something was
brought up about Republicans resisting cutting farm subsidies.
Some Republicans are willing to cut any subsidy, any farm
subsidy that is brought up and have moved to do so.
Ms. DeLauro. You have been consistent, Mr. Flake.
Mr. Flake. Thank you. [Laughter.]
Mr. Rehberg. Thank you, Mr. Flake.
Just for the record, Madam Secretary, to help you out, even
though this study pre-dates you and your staff seems to be
confused to where it is within the department, I have got your
budget justification, and you refer to this very study in your
budget justification.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Flake and I may end up being partners on this issue as
he goes to another body and where I feel very strongly about
exactly the same thing.
Welcome, Madam Secretary. I am sorry that I had a
conflicting meeting, and the Secretary of the Army insisted I
stay a while.

WORKFORCE INVESTMENT ACT

But in the meantime, the entire area of the Workforce
Investment Act and where it works and where it doesn't seem to
be working is of concern to me. In my own region, there are
people who have put together this effort that seems to work
very effectively, where there is job training and linkage to
employers who can use their skills, et cetera. It is kind of
what the design was all about.
And yet, in California, and I guess across the country, we
have had considerably different experience. That article
recently in California regarding what has been going on or what
has been a circumstance in and around Fresno, California, where
there are very high levels of unemployment, ranging from like
15 percent of my own region. But up there, as much as 40
percent. And yet jobs available, and there is not a linkage.
I am concerned that within the implementation of the
Investment Act across the country, very, very sizable
percentage of locations, there is this disconnect. Some job
training potentially available, but not a mechanism whereby we
can link to the employer who can use those skills.
And it is not very hard to develop the computer software to
achieve much better results. Could you comment on that?
Secretary Solis. I agree with you. I have heard that
concern in my travels around the country, and I know that this
might be an appropriate time for us to look at reauthorizing
the Workforce Investment Act, WIA, because I do believe that it
does work in certain places more efficiently than it does in
others. And I think the key is having good partners with the
business community and coupling that with community colleges in
many instances and also other programs where you can make sure
that there is a seamless pipeline that once you get training,
you can get access to that job.
And hopefully, the individuals--in some cases, the employer
that is seeking the kind of employee they need--will have more
participation in the actual setup of the program and
curriculum. And that is something that we are seeing and that
we are pushing for right now, even with the funds that we have.

TAA COMMUNITY COLLEGES

There is a new grant that is becoming available, the Trade
Adjustment Assistance, TAA, community college. The focus is the
community colleges, and I know that would greatly benefit
sectors like yours and in Fresno. Because I also had a
conversation with the Mayor of Fresno, who tells me also that
they need to have better job training, that there aren't any
jobs, number one. So, therefore, we have to look at what jobs
are going to be growing.
Healthcare is one of them. IT, computers, renewable energy,
things of that nature, I think, are appropriate. And right now,
many of our community colleges, as you know, are under
tremendous budget constraints. So this additional resource
would be very helpful for them.
Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rehberg. And thank you, Madam Secretary.
Meeting adjourned.


