- DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas               DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas         LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey NITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                    JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, Cornell Teague, and Hilary May,
Staff Assistants
________

PART 5

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS)--July 26,
2012..............................................................    1
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS)--September
20, 2012..........................................................   59

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

77-757                     WASHINGTON : 2013

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\         NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\           MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia               PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia                NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey   JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                      ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama           JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri              JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                    ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho             DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas           MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida               LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana                SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                 JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana           CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California               STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                    SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio            BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                    ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                   MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida            BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------
\1\ Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------

Thursday, July 26, 2012.

CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS (CFATS)

WITNESSES

STEVE CALDWELL, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND JUSTICE ISSUES,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
SUZANNE SPAULDING, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL PROTECTION AND
PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
DAVID WULF, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, DHS

Opening Statement: Chairman Robert Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The hearing will come to order. The hearing
today is on the Department of Homeland Security's Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards Program, better known as
CFATS. To better understand the difficulties that this program
has experienced we welcome the NPPD Deputy Under Secretary
Suzanne Spaulding, and Steven Caldwell from the Government
Accountability Office. I think the microphone is working now.
Today, as we are all unfortunately aware, the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards, which as I mentioned is
commonly known as CFATS, has struggled. This was highlighted in
a very disturbing internal report that was leaked to the media
this past December concerning the management of the CFATS
program.
Since the program was created in fiscal year 2007, industry
stakeholders have made many improvements at their sites and
spent hundreds of millions of dollars complying with the CFATS
policy. However, after five years it is clear that the
Department of Homeland Security has absolutely failed to fully
develop an efficient and effective program.
The internal memo specifically notes that the lack of a
well developed direction and plan led to, and I quote this,
``the hiring of inappropriate people; the expenditure of
significant funds for what has since been determined to be
unnecessary expenses and several false starts in the direction
of the program.'' The memo further concludes that these and
other gaps, ``now pose a risk to the program.''
The Department of Homeland Security must address each of
the issues that were brought to light in the memo and provide
industry with the direction they need to move forward and the
taxpayers with a viable program. Today we want to hear from the
GAO on the difficulties that are hindering the program, how
they are addressing these issues, and how the program is being
restructured.
In short we want to know what we would gain from nearly
half a billion dollars appropriated for the CFATS program and
how we are going to fix this broken program, a program that was
intended to fill the vital mission of preventing hazardous
chemicals from falling into the wrong hands.
Let me make it clear up front to those with the Department
of Homeland Security in attendance today: this subcommittee
cannot tolerate waste, fraud, and abuse. Especially when we are
dealing with vital security programs and our vital budget is
hemorrhaging red ink.
Lastly I want to express my concern with the lack of
outreach that the NPPD has had toward this subcommittee. Last
Friday the CFATS program withdrew the personal surety programs
information collection requests from review at OMB. Even though
this committee, and other congressional committees of
jurisdiction, has been very outspoken on this issue, the
department failed to notify the committee or formally explain
the reasons for the withdrawal. This lack of information
sharing is unfortunate and counterproductive to effective
oversight. Secretary Spaulding, could you commit today that
this behavior will not continue? That you personally will
ensure that the NPPD will work with Congress so we can move
forward in a positive manner, working together towards a common
goal, toward fiscal responsibility and an effective program?
Given the breadth of these topics, we will clearly have an
interesting discussion today. We are unsure exactly what the
vote schedule is going to be this morning but we are going to
proceed under normal order. So Under Secretary Spaulding and
Mr. Caldwell, if you could summarize your testimony for a few
minutes, and then you can submit any kind of statement that you
want for the record. That will also give us time for answers
and questions.
But before we begin I would like to recognize the ranking
member of this subcommittee, Mr. Price, for his opening
remarks.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Opening Statement: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to add my
welcome to Deputy Under Secretary Suzanne Spaulding from the
National Protection and Programs Directorate; and Assistant
Director Steven Caldwell from the GAO. Thank you for being
here. You are here to discuss the status of the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Security Standards, commonly referred
to as CFATS.
The Department of Homeland Security is required to identify
and assess high risk chemical facilities and to ensure their
security. The department has required chemical facilities to
complete a so-called top screen for potential dangerous
materials to identify vulnerabilities and to develop a site
security plan. To date more than 40,000 top screens have been
submitted by chemical facilities. From this pool over 7,000
facilities were initially designated as high risk and were
required to submit security vulnerability assessments to NPPD,
although this number has decreased somewhat over time. Earlier
this year CFATS covered just under 4,500 high risk facilities
nationwide, which are further stratified into four risk tiers.
We all acknowledge that a lot of work has taken place to
date to identify and classify the high risk chemical
facilities. But NPPD has still a long way to go. Numerous
concerns have been raised about the speed at which the security
vulnerability assessments have been reviewed and the site
security plans approved. For example, less than one year ago
NPPD had only conducted one security vulnerability assessments.
While that figure has now grown to 63, it may be years before
all of the security assessments are finalized. And, as of
today, no site security plan has been approved, almost five
years after Congress implemented this statutory requirement.
According to recent GAO data it may date up to ten years before
all site security plans are approved. That is simply not an
acceptable time frame.
Although NPPD is years away from completing its work,
unfortunately this subcommittee recommended a cut of over $29
million to infrastructure security compliance's fiscal year
2013 request because of a lack of progress in the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program. Now it is true, this
program has accumulated high unobligated balances from prior
years. But while I share the chairman's concern over the high
unobligated balances, I believe this subcommittee's cuts go too
far and in fact are quite counterproductive. They will affect
NPPD's ability to do the very things we are asking you to do,
being able to move ahead on CFATS and on the management
concerns identified by the agency's internal review and follow
on action plans.
Ms. Spaulding, it was imperative to develop and implement
an action plan to correct these management problems. Six months
after your plan was completed only about half of the 94 action
items have been closed, the rest have outstanding actions. Mr.
Caldwell, since the chairman and I requested GAO to look into
these issues further, I look forward to your update on where
NPPD stands on these corrective actions and what further
recommendations you have planned to address these concerns.
Finally, we have also heard numerous concerns about the
vetting of chemical security personnel, which the House
Appropriations bill does address as you know. Just this week
this committee learned that NPPD was dropping the personnel
surety component. Putting the merits of this decision aside, I
am concerned that the committee did not know about this, and
was not notified of this change by the department.
Unfortunately this lack of notification is not the first time.
There is a disturbing trend of leaving appropriators in the
dark and this hinders our ability to provide adequate funding
to carry out key missions. So Ms. Spaulding I am going to want
you to explain the recent decision and lay out the path forward
on personal surety.
Deputy Under Secretary Spaulding, Assistant Director
Caldwell, we look forward to your testimony. I think we would
all agree that this nation needs a robust chemical security
program and we are hopeful you can shed light on the challenges
that currently face this effort.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Price. Let me
begin, Mr. Caldwell, if you would give your opening statement
we would appreciate it.

Opening Statement: Director Steve Caldwell

Mr. Caldwell. Thank you. I will be very brief. I know that
we have votes coming up for the members here. So Chairman
Aderholt, and Mr. Price. I thank you for holding this hearing.
I would like to submit my document, my statement for the
record. We have worked very closely with NPPD to try to better
understand what the challenges are that it faces and what plans
they have for resolving those, and we will continue to work
with them and the committee on this issue. Thank you sir. I am
ready for questions, if there is time later.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Opening Statement: Deputy Under Secretary Spaulding

Mr. Aderholt. Secretary Spaulding.
Ms. Spaulding. I very much appreciate the opportunity to
appear here today to discuss the Department of Homeland
Security's efforts to regulate the security of high risk
chemical facilities under the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards, or CFATS. I would also like to thank GAO for its
efforts in reviewing the progress that we have made in
implementing the action plan developed by our CFATS leadership
to address the challenges that GAO identified last fall.
The department concurs with the single recommendation made
by GAO, that we develop performance measures where appropriate
and practical and that can help us assess the impact of the
action plan on the overall implementation of the CFATS program.
We included the GAO's recommendation as the 95th item on our
action plan. I understand that GAO is now beginning a broader
audit of the CFATS program and we stand ready to support that
effort.
Let me state at the outset that CFATS has made America
safer. Since the inception of CFATS more than 1,800 facilities
completely removed their chemicals of interest, and more than
900 other facilities have reduced their holdings of chemicals
of interest below the high risk threshold. In addition, for the
first time we now have information about chemical holdings of
more than 41,000 facilities across the nation. Seven thousand
eight hundred facilities determined to be potentially high risk
have now assessed their vulnerabilities to terrorist attack and
more than 3,500 have developed and submitted for DHS review
detailed security plans based on performance-based standards
that were developed under this program enacted by Congress.
This amounts to real progress toward a safer America.
My testimony today addresses the current status of the
program, with a particular focus on the implementation of the
action plan. Although the numbers alone do not tell the story
of our progress, I am pleased to inform you that the department
has completed 59 of the 95 action items included in the action
plan. This is significantly higher than the number reported by
the GAO in its testimony because, of course, the department has
continued to work on completing the action items following the
conclusion of the GAO audit last month.
For accountability, planning, and tracking purposes the
CFATS leadership team has established milestones for the
completion of each action item and timelines for each task
within that item. Some of the original completion dates for a
few of the items have been modified as we have moved through
implementation. I can say with confidence that substantial
progress has been made on each and every action item.
As of July 20, CFATS covers 4,425 high risk facilities,
nearly 3,700 of which have received final high risk tier
determinations. And I want to note here that, although we use
the term final, it is important to remember that tiering is a
dynamic process. DHS will continue to issue final tier
notifications and where appropriate revise those tier
determinations as facilities make changes to their operations
that affect their risk levels and as DHS continues to refine
and improve its risk assessment methodology.
I would like to share with the subcommittee some of the
highlights and successes that are a direct result of the
implementation of the action plan and other recent initiatives
by the division that manages CFATS, the Infrastructure Security
Compliance Division or ISCD. We have improved the security plan
review process, which has significantly increased the pace of
those reviews. We have refined the inspector tools and training
and last week we restarted authorization inspections. We also
continue to work with industry on industry's development of
alternative security programs and it is my understanding that
the American Chemistry Association will soon be sharing its
template with its members. In addition, ISCD has nearly
completed its internal review of tiering methodology and we are
about to kick off the external peer review.
The CFATS leadership has made tremendous progress also in
improving internal communications and organizational culture.
We continue to work with industry and our federal, state, and
local partners to meet our challenges, implement this program,
and help prevent terrorists from exploiting our nation's
chemical assets in order to harm our citizens and our country.
We recognize and are grateful for the significant work of this
subcommittee to reauthorize the CFATS program and we urge
Congress to establish a permanent authority for the CFATS
program in federal law.
Mr. Chairman, as we have previously discussed, David Wulf,
who has served as ISCD Deputy Director, permanently assumed the
role of ISCD Director on July 23. Director Wulf has worked
closely with our former Director Penny Anderson during her
tenure and he will provide valuable continuity in leadership.
His experience, expertise, and judgment have been instrumental
in the program's progress to date, and Director Wulf has my
full confidence in moving CFATS forward.
Before I close I want to apologize to the committee for not
getting the notification up to you before withdrawing our ICR
on personnel surety. It was certainly our intention to notify
you in a timely way. We wanted to move quickly in order to have
this done before the hearing so that we could discuss it. We
look forward to moving forward quickly on refiling our personal
surety information collection request (ICR) after having the
kind of candid and granular discussions with both the Hill and
with our stakeholders across the board that the previous
process did not really permit it to do. Withdrawal is, in our
view, the most expeditious way to get to a personnel surety
program, which we all can support.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I want to emphasize that ISCD,
NPPD, and the department are moving forward quickly and
strategically to address the challenges before us. We firmly
believe that CFATS is making the nation safer and we are
dedicated to its success. As we implement CFATS we will
continue to work with stakeholders to get the job done, meet
the challenges, and execute a program to help prevent
terrorists from exploiting chemicals or chemical facilities.
Thank you for holding this important hearing and I look
forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Opening Statement: Director Wulf

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Secretary Spaulding. As you may
know, as I mentioned, votes were we thought were going to be
called. And since open testimony has began we have been called
for about 20 votes on the floor. But before we adjourn here,
what I would like to do is to recognize Mr. Dave Wulf. If you
could just take maybe two minutes to briefly overview some of
your comments so that we can do that before we adjourn for the
time being?
Mr. Wulf. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like to
thank the members of the committee for the opportunity to be
here today. As Deputy Under Secretary Spaulding noted, we have
made significant progress in the months since the development
of our action plan.
You know, working closely with the Office of Infrastructure
Protection and NPPD and through a great deal of hard work on
the part of the talented men and women of ISCD, we have
completed work on 59 of the 95 items outlined in our action
plan. Among other things, we have developed improved policies,
procedures and training to conduct inspections in a consistent
and effective fashion, and last week we did recommence the
conduct of authorization inspections. We have developed and
have begun implementing a sustainable and efficient SSP [site
security plan] review process that will streamline our ability
to authorize and approve site security plans. We are moving to
stabilize our leadership cadre by hiring permanent supervisors.
And we continue to foster transparency and open communication
throughout our organization.
We really are at a critical juncture in the implementation
of CFATS. With the development of our SSP review process,
completion of the work of our inspector tools working group,
the conduct of our ongoing inspector training, and the
recommencement of authorization inspections, we are poised to
make great progress in the coming months. Along with the rest
of the team at ISCD, I am excited and very optimistic about the
future of the CFATS program.
We continue to engage our industry stakeholders in
meaningful dialogue. And I very much appreciate industry's
continued support for the CFATS program. We do look forward to
a full and productive dialogue on the issue of personnel surety
as we all strive to prevent terrorists from gaining access to
our nation's highest risk chemical infrastructure while
ensuring the chemical facilities are able to continue
conducting business without the imposition of unnecessary
burdens
I am also grateful to the American Federation of Government
Employees [AFGE], which represents the bargaining unit
employees of our field force. In partnership with ISCD, AFGE
has done much to help us expedite our adoption of improved
procedures as we have moved aggressively to develop our
inspection processes and to recommence inspections. As Deputy
Under Secretary Spaulding noted, we also appreciate the work
done by the Government Accountability Office and we will move
forward to adopt the recommendation GAO has made for additional
performance measures, tying our action plan to the progress we
anticipate making across the CFATS program.
I am honored to have been asked to serve as the Director of
ISCD and I look forward to continuing to lead the talented men
and women of the division. The level of experience and
professionalism that is present across our division is truly
humbling. Our team has brought to ISCD a wealth of experience
from careers in industry, law enforcement, military service,
and a host of other disciplines. And I believe we have made
much progress in coming together as a regulatory compliance
organization that is committed 100 percent to the critical
mission of securing our nation's highest risk chemical
infrastructure.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here today, and I
welcome any questions you may have.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Wulf. And as I mentioned, the
votes have been called, and from the looks of it, we are going
to be on the floor for approximately two hours. We are going to
suspend the hearing as a result of the votes. But I do thank
the witnesses for their attendance and look forward as we
continue to have this hearing at a later date. Thank you very
much.
Thursday, September 20, 2012.

CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS

WITNESSES

STEVE CALDWELL, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY & JUSTICE ISSUES,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
SUZANNE SPAULDING, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL PROTECTION AND
PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
DAVID WULF, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, DHS

Opening Statement: Chairman Robert Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. Good morning. The hearing is called to order.
Today we reconvene from our hearing back in July that was
interrupted shortly after we began the hearing.
And of course, we will be discussing the Department of
Homeland Security's Chemical Security Anti-Terrorism Standards
program, which is known as CFATS. We welcome back NPPD Under
Secretary Suzanne Spaulding; Director David Wulf; and Mr.
Stephen Caldwell from the GAO.
Your statements, of course, have been previously given, so
we can proceed into the questioning portion of the hearing. So,
before we begin, I would like to recognize the ranking member
of the subcommittee, Mr. Price, for any comments that he would
like to make.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I do not have an opening statement and am very happy to
proceed with the questions.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Mr. Caldwell, you note in your remarks earlier in your
written statement the fact that there is a need for performance
measures. My question to you would be whether GAO has worked
with NPPD on the issue? And has NPPD been receptive to the idea
of performance metrics.
[Opening statement of Stephen Caldwell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Caldwell. Certainly when we did that earlier work, we
started talking about performance measures. We did talk to the
NPPD folks and they were receptive to that. I think we didn't
want to be to prescriptive as to what those measures would be
since it is their program and they know it better. So I think
the phraseology we used for that recommendation was more
practical. Some of the things in the action plan I don't think
they needed, a performance metric for every single one of those
things, some of them are just compliance issues, such as fleet
management or overtime, things they need to manage better. But
particularly were items related to the core mission of actually
doing inspections in the plan and then when you start to
develop a backlog, how you manage your backlog, those are the
things they will want performance measures on.
Mr. Aderholt. But I guess you would agree that it is
difficult to measure, unless you do have some type of metrics,
and of course, any action plan needs some type of metrics to
make sure that progress is being made. I would assume you would
agree with that.
Mr. Caldwell. Yes. The simplest, obviously, some of the
items are open and may be relatively easy to close, and then
they are marked as closed. But again, the challenge for them in
the longer term is going to be the performance measures related
to, are they improving security? I mean, it is one thing to
know how many plans do you have and how many inspections have
you done and those kinds of things, and so sometimes in
security programs like this, those have to serve as a bit of a
proxy to, how is the program moving along and things like that,
as opposed to actually measuring the risk at any individual
facility or something like that. But I certainly agree with
your basic point; they need to monitor this.

SITE SECURITY PLANS: APPROVALS/AUTHORIZATIONS

Mr. Aderholt. Secretary Spaulding, one of the issues raised
in the report is the lack of approved site security plans. In
January, not one plan has been approved. And only 49 of the 114
tier 1 plans had been authorized. I understand that as of this
week, NPPD has authorized 71 plans and only 23 more than in
January, even though NPPD has stated in January that it would
have all 114 plans authorized or denied by the spring of this
year. Could you speak to a little bit about that?
[Opening statement of Suzanne Spaulding follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SITE SECURITY PLANS: APPROVALS/AUTHORIZATIONS

Ms. Spaulding. Yes, I can, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
question. We actually have now authorized 84 of the site
security plans, and that includes 12 tier 2s. We have completed
our review of all the tier 1 plans. And those that we have not
been able to authorize, we are going back to the facilities to
work with them to get those plans into shape so that we can
move forward with those authorizations and the authorization
inspections. But in the meantime, we have gone on to tier 2s,
and we have reviewed about 40 percent of the tier 2 site
security plans. And as I say, we have authorized 12 of those.
The next step, as you know, is authorization inspections,
and we have conducted 22 authorization inspections. And two of
those have been able to move all the way through to approval.
So we have two site security plans that have gone through the
entire process to be approved. And so that is an increase of
about 21 authorizations just since our July hearing.
Mr. Aderholt. When I was talking to Mr. Caldwell earlier,
we talked about the use of performance metrics. Authorizing and
approving a site security plan is a perfect example of a metric
that shows you are moving forward. Why has there been a delay
in the authorizing plans, and when will NPPD actually approve a
site security plan?
Ms. Spaulding. So we have approved two site security plans,
and we are certainly hopeful that we have turned the corner on
this. We now have trained our inspectors in our refined
authorization inspection process. We have trained all of our
inspectors this summer, and they are now going through all of
those plans that we have authorized, 84 of them, to conduct the
appropriate inspection to make sure that the plan that is on
paper is really something that the facility is in a position to
implement, get the ground truth there. And as I say, they have
done 22 of those inspections so far, and we have got a number
of them scheduled, and David can give us the details on what is
in the near term. But we are moving through to get those
inspections done, which have to happen before we can then
approve the plan.
Mr. Aderholt. When do you estimate that all 114 of the
security plans will be not only authorized but approved and
inspected?
Ms. Spaulding. So approval of a plan or authorization of a
plan, the timing of that it is not entirely within our control.
As I say, we have reviewed all the tier 1 site security plans,
but some of them need some work. And so it really is dependent
on the company, the facility, to work with us to make sure that
the information that is needed is there and that it is clearly
presented. And so we are hopeful that we are--as I say, we are
reaching out to those facilities now. We are hopeful that we
will resolve those issues and be able to move them into the
authorized column, and we are moving forward on inspections.
David, I know we are really loathe to set any rigid
timelines, again, given that much of this depends on
interaction between us and the facilities, but if you would
like to address it.
Mr. Wulf. I could take a crack at it.
We are working very closely with those facilities that
remain to be authorized. And our goal, clearly, is to work to
get those facilities to approval. So we are anticipating a
significantly heightened pace of authorizations and facility
inspections, and we hope approvals as well within the next
year. We certainly anticipate, if everything falls into place
with the facilities having been inspected and, if everything
lines up, approving all of the tier 1 facilities and quite a
number of tier 2s as well.
Mr. Aderholt. Do you have a ball park guess as far as when
all 114 will be authorized, approved and inspected?
Mr. Wulf. Certainly our goal is to have that done before
this time next year, but probably significantly before. We have
a goal of doing just under 300 approvals in fiscal year 2013,
so that would include, if everything lines up, all of the tier
1s and a good chunk, close to half, of the tier 2 facilities.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Caldwell, I know GAO says it may be 2020
before all sites are authorized, approved and inspected. Do you
stand by that?
Mr. Caldwell. This is an estimate we came up talking with
the staff at NPPD and the directors, Director Wulf, so this is
something they are going to have a little more expertise on
until we get a little more into it on our phase 2 of our review
of this. I think the key thing will be getting some of these
under your belt, finding out how long they take, perhaps
finding ways to streamline those. And then there is just
obviously going to be a backlog. And until they start to figure
out how long it is going to take them to start clearing the
backlog of other ones, it is going to be hard to come up with a
hard estimate for that.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Price.

SITE SECURITY PLANS: APPROVAL PROCESS LESSONS LEARNED

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are, of course, pleased to get the update on your
progress, the completion of the tier 1 approvals and now
getting into the tier 2 category. I wonder if you could, in
light of the chairman's line of questioning, just step back a
minute and reflect on lessons learned. Obviously, we have had
here a very complex and protracted rulemaking process. Then the
inspections and the extra work in the field is also often
complicated and time consuming. At the same time, your efforts
have taken much longer to complete than some other agencies,
like the Coast Guard, that have been mandated to complete
equally complex rulemaking.
So, Ms. Spaulding, I wonder if, in retrospect, there are
specific things you think should have been done differently to
make the process more streamlined and more efficient from the
start? And of course, I am interested in any implications those
reflections have for the process going forward. We, of course,
don't have 7 to 10 years to complete these inspections. And so
that is a question that isn't just retrospective but also has
present day implications.
And then, Mr. Caldwell, maybe you can chime in what, from
your point of view, would be the key factors that have
contributed to the difficulties here and implications for the
program going forward?
Ms. Spaulding. Thank you.
Hindsight is a wonderful thing, and it is relatively easy
at this stage to look back and to see where decision points
were, where you wished that we had gone in a different
direction or moved in a different way. I do think it is
important to remember that it was, in many respects, an
unprecedented regulatory regime that we were asked, the
department was asked to undertake. It was, you know, in an
industry where we did not have in the department established
contacts the way the Coast Guard has many, many, many years of
experience of interaction with the facilities at the ports. And
so we had to start by developing a regulatory regime around
performance-based standards, which is much more complicated
than one where you tell everybody they have to have a 12-foot
fence, for example, to come up with standards that are, and I
think Congress imposed on us, the requirement to be
performance-based, and I think that is the right decision, but
it makes it more challenging for both the facilities and for
the department.
We then had to find the chemical facilities, the wide
variety of facilities that are covered by CFATS that includes
universities and hospital and warehouse distributors in
addition to chemical manufacturing plants, so a significantly
wider variety of facilities; identify those, get the word out
about this requirement; build the tools, the IT tools to allow
us to get the data, then to take in 41,000 top screens, 41,000
facilities about whom we now have data with regard to their
holdings of dangerous chemicals. And we had to develop that
list. There was no set list out there of what were those
chemicals. So we developed that list. We now have data that we
did not have before on 41,000 facilities all across the
country.
We had to develop what a vulnerability assessment for a
chemical facility would look like, again, in a wide variety of
facilities and develop the tools to allow those facilities to
provide that information to us and 8,000, nearly 8,000
facilities went through that important process of analyzing
their vulnerabilities.
We then had to develop a template or guidance on the site
security plan and the tools to get that in. And we have
received more than 4,500--4,500--site security plans, where
facilities went through the careful process of developing that
detailed, performance-based security plan. So we really did
accomplish a great deal, but it was very complex. And until we
got into it, it was hard to know exactly what the role, for
example, of chemical inspectors would be. And initially there
was a thought that they might have a response role, a first
responder kind of role. As we got into it and talked with
industry, and were able to look at the compliance and talk to
other compliance and regulatory agencies, the determination was
made that that was actually not going to be part of their role,
but all of these things have taken time.
An important lesson I think that I certainly have taken
away from looking back at what has happened is the need to
continue frequent, constant interaction with the industry. I
think in the early stages, there was good interaction. We went
through a phase where I think we were kind of hunkered down
trying to figure out our regulatory regime and maybe the
contact wasn't quite as good it as should be. And I think
Director Wulf and Director Anderson, when she was here, have
done an outstanding job, and I have worked hard at trying to do
better outreach with the industry. And that is vitally
important. They have expertise that we cannot replicate in the
government. And so hearing from them and understanding the
challenges that they face is critically important.
Mr. Price. Mr. Caldwell.
Mr. Caldwell. As you said, there are some similarities
between this and the Coast Guard regime, CBP, TSA and some of
the other elements at DHS. I think those were put into place
relatively quickly, but as you know, and I think, as we all
know, the Coast Guard, and CBP, and to a lesser extent TSA,
they had established authorities. They had established
organizational structure. And then maybe one of the most
important things here is they actually had a field structure,
which included a cadre of inspectors that you actually had. So
they had people called inspectors that did that; they were
inspecting for safety. You could train them, and you had these
people already to train them for security.
Again, in some ways, at least the Coast Guard regime under
MTSA is performance-based; it is not a specific standard
generally. I think one of the approaches the Coast Guard took,
and that is some of the work I am most familiar with, is kind
of an implement and amend approach. It is like let's get this
out there, and we are not going to make it perfect. And I think
maybe because the newness of NPPD and the CFATS regime, there
has been a little more deliberation. I think they got off to a
fast start. I mean the rule was in place and the appendix by
the end of 2007, and that is where I think they started to
struggle with the other issues about how are we going to
organize this, and what are these people going to look like,
these inspectors and things like that.
I think the biggest challenges moving forward is twofold:
One, kind of they are making progress on this regulatory
regime, but they are also having to deal with the memo and the
management problems that go with that. I also think that this
backlog will soon become another issue; once they get those
things in place, the backlog will become a bigger issue. And
the, of course, you are faced with the do you surge staff that
you are not going to need for the long run in terms of
inspectors or you just get a strategy to kind of work that
down. In some ways, it is very similar to the C-TPAT program
that CBP had when they first set up, because you had a large
backlog that they eventually threw 150 people at and got
through it that way.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

PERSONNEL SECURITY CREDENTIALING PROGRAM

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, thank you for being here. This is an important
issue.
Back in 1969, I was a young lawyer who chaired or actually
staffed a Houston ship channel study committee on safety. I
heard some testimony from the Coast Guard at that time that at
least once a day and sometimes as many times as five times a
day, two chemical-carrying ships passed each other within 8
feet of each other; and should there be a collision of those
ships, an explosion would result, and the prevailing winds and
plume of poisonous gas that would come from that explosion
would kill every man, woman and child on the Texas Gulf Coast
from Houston to Corpus Christi. That was about as serious a
thing as I had ever heard of in my life. And so I think you
have one of the most serious duties that we have under this
particular agency.
And I want to ask you about something that has been brought
to my attention. We are fighting a war against people who
individually blow things up. So personnel safety is a key
factor in any facility, big or small, wherever it is; are
people entering this facility that are safe? This key component
that these chemical companies have sophisticated background
check programs. Verifications against the terrorist screening
database is inherently a governmental function. We see that DHS
has pulled back its proposal from the OMB. What has DHS learned
from the companies, from comments from industries on your
initial proposals? Will the DHS include better leveraging of
TWIC and other existing vetting programs to ease the burden on
the regulated community while ensuring that workers are
properly vetted? What is the time timetable for the revisal of
the proposal so that industry can begin to submit information
on those not yet vetted? How will the proposed personnel safety
program improve security since its focus is on reacting to an
instant instead of preventing one? And finally, given the
apparent push by DHS to create a whole new personnel security
credentialing program as opposed to leveraging the existing
credentialing program, would such a policy decision create an
onerous and unnecessary financial burden on CFATS regulated
community? Would such a duplicative effort run counter to the
President's call for the reduction and elimination of
duplicative and burdensome regulations for our Nation's
business? In other words, I want to know how we are going to
get serious about vetting these people, and those are questions
that need to be answered.
Ms. Spaulding. Thank you, Congressman. They are very
important questions. This is an absolutely essential issue.
We withdrew our information collection request from OMB
because we had learned from industry, and we thought it was
really the fastest way to move forward to get a program
actually implemented, because, as you know, the process really
limits our ability to have really granular conversations with
industry and with Congress, and we wanted to have both.
Some of the things that we have learned, we have already
had a number of meetings. I have participated in one already
since we pulled the information collection request and have
another one scheduled for tomorrow, and the director has done a
number of them, as have others. We have been really trying to
work with industry to address some industry concerns. And some
of those issues that I think we can address that go to the
burden but that still meet our national security imperative are
things like allowing companies to file the information about
their employees on a companywide basis as opposed to facility
by facility, so that if you have folks who are traveling from
one facility to another, you don't have as high a burden there.
The ability for contractors to file, I think, was in our
original proposal but was not well understood, that facilities
and companies could make it part of their contractual
relationship with their contractors that the contracting
company would file the information with regard to their
employees, rather than having the chemical company have to do
that for them. And then finally we have heard a lot about the
need to find better ways to leverage TWIC, and we have worked
hard to find a way to do that that again meets our national
security imperative. And I think we actually can do that. I
think we have had some very productive conversations with
industry about ways in which we can, with electronically
verified TWIC [Transportation Worker Identification Credential]
cards, find a way to have that meet the criteria for personnel
surety under CFATS.
And we have been talking and are mindful about the
different position that small facilities are in versus large
companies that have multiple facilities. And we, again, have
thought hard about ways and have some, I think, constructive
suggestions for ways in which we can mitigate the burden even
for small facilities. So I am very optimistic, and I think our
hope and expectation is that certainly maybe by the end of
fall, within the next couple of months, we will be ready to
resubmit and move I hope quickly through that process to have a
program in place.
David.
Mr. Wulf. I don't think I would add anything to that.
Mr. Carter. I appreciate that answer. What would be the
turn around time if this information is submitted, because the
company, if I understand what you said, you are setting up a
program where the companies can submit their personnel and then
you will process them through to see whether or not they are a
danger to our country and to that facility; is that what you
are saying?
Mr. Wulf. That is the essence of the program.
Mr. Carter. Because I don't know how long you have been in
existence in this project, but I assume about as long as DHS
has been in existence, and we still have got a lot of
questions. So my question on this particular one would be, what
would be the turnaround time when they submit it to you? When
will you be able to say, your people are okay? Will it be days,
weeks, months, years?
Mr. Wulf. And--yeah, we will not necessarily be in a
position to tell a facility ``go'' or ``no go.'' The
requirement would only be, as sort of conceived--and we are
having, I think, productive discussions on this and will
continue to have productive discussions because we do want to
get this right--but as initially conceived the idea was that
facilities or their contractors, third parties, would submit
information either for direct vetting against the terrorist
screening database or to leverage existing vetting about 48
hours, up to 48 hours before the planned access to the high-
risk facility. So that is sort of about the turnaround time we
would have.
Mr. Carter. Okay, that answers my question.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Latham.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, everyone here.
Mr. Caldwell, it has been said that part of the problem
with the CFATS program is that it started too quickly without a
lot of thought as to its direction and that many of those
involved in the program do not have the expertise to carry out
the mission of the program. Would you agree with that theory?
And if so, why or why not?
Mr. Caldwell. I think one of the things that NPPD's own
memo or ISCD's own internal memo pointed out was that those
people were brought on very quickly when it was a little
unclear what skills they actual have. And some of them had
skills that were more toward law enforcement than regulatory
inspections. I think with the training they have had this
summer of their folks, that a lot of that problem hopefully
will go away.
There are some areas that will probably still be
problematic in terms of expertise. The cybersecurity area, for
example, they have people who review the plans specialize in
that area. And that is kind of a high demand area right now for
I think reasons we all know because of that threat.
Mr. Latham. Are there any internal department barriers to
really prevent the hiring of properly qualified people to carry
out the program, and what kind of barriers would they be?
Mr. Caldwell. I think one of the larger barriers to that
was resolved a few years ago when the authority to hire was
delegated from the department down to NPPD, and we did find
some--the memo talks about some disconnects between NPPD and
ISCD, but in our recent work over the last several months, we
found a relatively close working relationship, and we meet on a
very regular basis to try to get through that. Now if they end
up having some people that, you know, aren't qualified and
can't be qualified for some reason, that is another issue that
I am not sure quite how they will deal with.
Mr. Latham. Are there issues as far as training capability
to get people up to being qualified? What do you find in that
regard as far as training capabilities?
Mr. Caldwell. We are just starting our phase 2 looking more
at kind of the mission and the actual inspections and things
like that of the program. But obviously training is one thing;
it is actually getting people out there and having them inspect
facilities and get several facilities under their belt will
make the biggest difference in the department. And NPPD will
start dealing with getting a lot of these inspections done and
getting the backlog taken care of.

HIRING QUALIFICATIONS

Mr. Latham. Okay.
Ms. Spaulding, kind of on the same line of questioning, I
think you are aware that there have been problems getting
qualified people on board to carry out the mission. To what do
you attribute the difficulty in getting qualified people?
Ms. Spaulding. I think a clarification--and I will let
David, who was one of the co-authors of that memo, speak to
it--but what they have done is to look at folks' qualifications
and make sure that they are in the right job, a job that suits
those qualifications. And so some of that has been an issue of
realigning folks and making sure that they are in a position
that, as I say, suits their skills and their training.
There has been stepped up training and, particularly, I
would emphasize, on leadership. We have stepped up NPPD-wide
our focus on making sure that our supervisors have appropriate
leadership training so that they are better suited to step into
those leadership positions, and that has been very important.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Wulf.
Mr. Wulf. I would only add to that that the Deputy Under
Secretary is absolutely right. We have done some good training
on leadership that will provide people with--our folks with the
tools to step into management roles. We this summer did some
great training on inspections to ready ourselves to recommence
authorization inspections, which we were able to do in July.
With regard to the skills of the, the talent of the folks
within our division, I don't think I can overstate the level of
passion and talent that our people bring to the job. And they
have certainly come in from a variety of backgrounds, law
enforcement, military, industry backgrounds. And I think all
have brought valuable skills to the table. In some cases, we
have had to do some tweaking through realignment to get better
person-position fits, but I think, through the training we have
done, we have taken--through the policies we have put in place,
we have made great strides in coming together as a cohesive
regulatory compliance organization. So I am very pleased with
the progress we have made and again can't say enough about the
talent of the folks we have on the team.
Mr. Latham. What you just said, does that go along with
Rand Beers' report, that as far as capabilities and expertise,
the internal----
Mr. Wulf. If we are talking about the report, the
challenges memo that Director Anderson and I sent up to Under
Secretary Beers, yeah, it addresses what we discussed in the
report. The context for those statements was that we needed to
do a better job of ensuring a proper fit between the people
with the skill sets that we brought on board and the actual
alignment to the mission at hand. So I think we have made
significant strides moving forward in that regard over the past
year.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.

SITE SECURITY PLANS: NUMBER OF COMPLETED REVIEWS

Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. Just a few things I want to follow up on
Judge Carter's question, but before I do, just with respect to
the site security plans and that whole review process on page 5
of the testimony, you said, I think, Ms. Spaulding, you said
you completed all initial reviews of the tier 1 site security
plans. How many is that, all of them?
Ms. Spaulding. One hundred and fourteen.
Mr. Dent. One hundred and fourteen. And 73 have been
authorized or conditionally authorized.
Ms. Spaulding. We are up to 84 total authorizations, but
that includes 12 that are tier 2s.
Mr. Dent. Okay. And then I guess two site security plans
have been approved or completed then.
Ms. Spaulding. Correct.

SITE SECURITY PLANS: TIME FRAME FOR REVIEWS

Mr. Dent. What is the timing of that? You may have already
stated it, but what would be the timing then to get from those
conditional authorizations or authorizations to an approval?
Ms. Spaulding. So the next step after their conditional
authorization is to schedule an authorization inspection and
get the inspectors in there to inspect the facilities. The
length of time that that inspection takes depends, of course,
on the complexity and size of the facility. And then depending
on what they find when they go in will dictate how quickly we
can move to approval.
The two that have been approved, do we have an estimate of
how long or the 22 inspections that have been undertaken,
David, maybe you can suggest an average time that that has
taken?
Mr. Wulf. I would anticipate a time frame of 2 to 3 months,
not that there is a cookie cutter, but as the Deputy Under
Secretary mentioned, there is a period of time for the drafting
of the inspection report, for the review of the inspection
report. Occasionally, there is a period during which the site
security plan tool is reopened for the facility to make
adjustments to the site security plan on the basis of the
findings of the inspection.
So all that would hopefully get us to a position where we
are able to approve a plan within 2 to 3 months after the
inspection.
Mr. Dent. And you can do all these simultaneously? All
the--2 minus 110 to go. In other words, you have to do--about
108 sites have to get completed. Just curious, how long do you
think you will be able to finish the whole queue?
Mr. Wulf. Of tier 1s?
Mr. Dent. Yes, tier 1s.
Mr. Wulf. I am pretty confident we will be able to get
through these in the next 6 to 8 months.

PERSONNEL SURETY PROGRAM

Mr. Dent. Okay. On the issue of the Personnel Surety
Program, which, Ms. Spaulding, you began, you started to
address with Judge Carter's question, First, I think
withdrawing that controversial information collection request,
the ICR from OMB, is a good step forward for CFATS leadership
in terms of recognizing the industry and stakeholder input into
this whole process.
I know the level of engagement with industry is still an
issue of some concern. I am interested in how you plan to work
with the interested parties to develop a rewrite of the ICR.
How many meetings have you had thus far or are planning to have
with industry since withdrawing the previous proposal?
Maybe that should be a question of Mr. Wulf.
Mr. Wulf. We have had two at this point. I think tomorrow
will be a third. We were anticipating a fourth next week. That
is being rescheduled, in view of a couple of conflicts, for the
second week of October. So we are probably anticipating two to
three additional meetings before we look to resubmit.
Mr. Dent. And you think you will be able to take into
account their concerns as you put together this new proposal?
Mr. Wulf. That is absolutely the goal.
Mr. Dent. Okay, good. When do you think we are going to see
a new proposal? Do you have any idea on timing?
Mr. Wulf. We are aiming for this fall, so the October,
November, early December time frame. We would like to get it up
there as soon as we possibly can.

TRANSPORTATION WORKER IDENTIFICATION CREDENTIAL: INCORPORATION INTO
PROCESS

Mr. Dent. How are you going to plan to incorporate TWIC
into the credentialing framework?
Mr. Wulf. As the Deputy Under Secretary mentioned, that is
one of the things, one the areas in which our thinking has
evolved significantly as a result of the input we received from
industry. So we believe that we will be able to leverage to the
fullest extent possible vetting already done through TWICs to
allow for the electronic verification of TWIC at a facility
site or elsewhere, perhaps. So we are looking at how we can
most fully take advantage.
Mr. Dent. Are you looking at other credentials, FAST as
well as TWIC, as part of that credentialing process.
Mr. Wulf. We will be looking at everything down the road.
And to the extent we can do that this time around, we will, but
we are focusing on TWIC.
Mr. Dent. Okay, good. What will the reporting requirement
back at DHS for a facility for individuals using a TWIC?
Mr. Wulf. You mean upon verification?
Mr. Dent. Yes.
Mr. Wulf. That is one of the things we need to work
through. I don't know that there will be a requirement for
facilities to report back, but we would like to explore ways
that we can verify that electronic verification has occurred
without imposing unnecessary burdens on industry.
Mr. Dent. And what do you anticipate facilities' obligation
for reporting would be for those without a TWIC?
Mr. Wulf. Well, for those without a TWIC, for whom we are
not leveraging other sorts of vetting, I think what we would be
looking at is the reporting of the--or the submission of
personal identifying information, you know, prior to 48 hours
before the planned access, and that can happen on a companywide
basis. It could happen directly, through third parties. So we
would like to provide as many options as we possibly can to
industry on this.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
I yield back.

INTERNAL REVIEW MEMO

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Let me just talk a little bit about the internal review
memo. I know that, or I understand that, NPPD decided to limit
the distribution of the memo to the extent that only senior
leaders would receive the full version of that internal review
memo. I would direct this to Mr. Caldwell. Do you believe the
limited distribution of the memo hindered the execution of the
action plan?
Mr. Caldwell. Ultimately, I don't think it did. I think in
some ways, that is a judgment call that management has to make.
We are going to come clean; these are all the problems we have,
but did you believe that some of the information in there was
sensitive about the program, so the more that you distribute
among your personnel, the more of chance that information could
get out.
We did find--initially we were concerned because people
that were responsible for some of the actions in the action
plan did not have access to the memo, but on further
discussions with them, they had had detailed discussions with
Ms. Anderson and I assume Mr. Wulf about what they saw as the
nature of the problem and what needed to be fixed there.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Secretary Spaulding, why was the internal memo so closely
guarded? What was the thinking there, especially when members
and officials representing the industry hadn't seen this
assessment?
Ms. Spaulding. We had not provided it to folks in the
industry, and we are frankly disappointed that the memo got as
widely distributed as it did. I think this was clearly a very
candid, internal memorandum that was written by our new
leadership then at CFATS for the Under Secretary. And I think
it is absolutely vital that that kind of confidential
communication be allowed to take place, really no holds barred,
warts and all, and frankly, not written as carefully or as
thoughtfully as you would if you were writing it for a broader
audience, written with the understanding that this was a
prelude to a conversation to sit down and talk through the
issues with the Under Secretary. And so I think to keep faith
with the authors of the report and, frankly, with the
workforce, I think it was the right decision to hold that close
and try to avoid having that memo have broad distribution. It
was not written with that in mind. It would have been written
in a different way had that been the intended outcome.
And frankly, I think it is not helpful for the workforce to
be focused on the word choice within that kind of an internal
memo rather than on moving forward with the mission. And the
action plan was made widely available to the folks at ISCD and,
again, the opportunity to talk through the challenges and
problems that led to the creation of that action plan.

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS: OUTREACH TO INDUSTRY

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
We have heard from industry, and I know in your comments
earlier, you mention about hearing from industry, but we have
heard from industry that the Department of Homeland Security
has not fully developed or utilized the public-private
partnerships and in fact has stepped back from previous
partnerships. These partnerships are crucial in the
implementation of this program, particularly in the current
fiscally constrained environment. Industry, like government,
does not want harmful chemicals in the hands of terrorists, and
that is clear. Has the Department of Homeland Security stopped
promoting or building partnerships between DHS and facilities
it regulates?
Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely not. And I can speak personally,
since I came on board last fall, I have participated in
numerous meetings with industry. I have gone on a number of
occasions to the Chemical Sector Coordinating Council meetings,
the recent Chemical Security Summit, which is put on by
industry. We had the Under Secretary. I spoke. Director Wulf
spoke. We had a number of folks from ISCD who participated in
numerous panels. I have sat down, I have also gone to the
American Chemistry Council annual meeting, to the oil and
natural gas gathering. We have sat down with industry on
personnel surety and a number of other issues. I think, as I
said, I think there was a period of time when there was a focus
on doing the work, and the outreach to the industry was not
what it might have been, but I think, within the last--over the
last year with the new leadership at CFATS, I would be
surprised if industry does not feel as though we have been
reaching out to it.
Mr. Aderholt. But in the past, you feel like there was some
discouragement?
Ms. Spaulding. I don't think there was any discouraging of
outreach to industry; I am not aware of that. As I say, I think
there was a period of time when there was a real focus on
trying to get the program implemented properly, where they had
done a good deal of outreach to industry and now they were
trying to focus internally and get the program implemented. And
the lesson learned, as I said earlier, is that that outreach
has to continue on a very constant and regular basis.
Mr. Aderholt. So building and forming those partnerships
with the regulated CFATS community is vitally important?
Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely essential.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Price.

FUNDING: PROPOSED CUTS' IMPACT

Mr. Price. I think it might be useful at this point in the
hearing to turn the tables a bit. We have been talking about
your responsibility, your plans. Let's talk about our own and
about the work of this subcommittee and the way it will most
surely affect your ability to carry out the plans that you have
projected. We, after all, have some responsibilities, too.
The fiscal 2013 request for the Infrastructure Security
Compliance Division was $74 million. The House-passed bill
provides $45.4 million, nearly 40 percent less than the
request. Yet this division has been tasked with the resolving
94 action items identified in the internal management review of
ISCD. And the subcommittee has asked you to do a lot of other
things, to identify gaps, to streamline the inspection process,
better train personnel and to conduct robust stakeholder
outreach.
Mr. Wulf, you, last week, during a hearing of the
Environment and Economy Subcommittee of House Energy and
Commerce, you said ``this funding level would hurt DHS's
ability to make good on its promise to clean up the CFATS
program.'' You further indicated that NPPD has turned an
important corner and ``a cut could force--would force some
very, very difficult choices; it would essentially cut the legs
out from under us.''
Perhaps I should first ask if you want to elaborate on
those comments. I think they are pretty straightforward and
pretty clear. And I do want to ask Ms. Spaulding to expand on
the comments.
Given the funding level in the House-passed bill for fiscal
2013, it is $29.1 million below your requested level. How could
you possibly complete all these tasks and continue other
critical functions, such as the work on ammonium nitrate, in a
timely manner? And if this cut were ultimately adopted, what
difficult choices would you need to make? I am sure you have
thought about that. Would you delay making all the necessary
corrections identified in your action plan, for example, to
fully address the management issues identified in the November
2011 memo, or are there other items you are considering?
Ms. Spaulding. Thank you, Congressman.
I would echo what Director Wulf said; it would be
absolutely devastating to the program. We would of course focus
all of our energies on the absolutely essential and core
activities, imperatives of the program, and that would be
conducting those authorization inspections and trying to
approve site security plans. But that process would be slowed,
and our ability to do a variety of things that will make this
program--able to implement this program and continue the
progress that we have made so far, would be seriously hampered.
For example, one of those things is our interaction with
industry. We just were talking about how important that is and
learning from industry in this iterative process, we have
learned lessons about how to make our tools more effective and
easier for the industry to use and providing both more useful
information for us and for industry. That work would grind to a
halt, any improvement--in fact, the ability to simply maintain
our current IT systems would be threatened by such a
devastating cut, and I could go on.
Let me say that I understand that that mark was a
reflection of the deep level of concern on the committee, on
the subcommittee, with regard to the implementation of this
program. And my hope is that, given the substantial progress we
have made, is that you will understand that we have turned a
corner. There is a lot more to be done. We have an incredibly
dedicated and committed and capable workforce determined to
continue that progress. And we certainly hope that we will
justify a renewed sense of faith in our ability to get that
done. But suffice it to say that if that mark remains where it
is, it would have a devastating impact on our ability to
implement these programs.

FUNDING: CONTINUING RESOLUTION'S IMPACT

Mr. Price. Where does the CR leave you for now for the next
6 months?
Ms. Spaulding. The continuing resolution puts us at the
fiscal year 2012 spending level. And I should say, I want to
thank this committee for its efforts to ensure that the CFATS
extension was explicitly included in the continuing resolution.
It is vitally important. And I will just take this moment to
make a plug for a permanent authorization of CFATS. I think we
have talked about--we talked in our July testimony about the
ways in which CFATS has made America safer already and about
the 2,700 facilities that have either eliminated or reduced
their chemicals of interest or have made other modifications to
bring them out of that high-risk category and made America
safer. And I think more companies would move in that direction
if they saw that CFATS was permanent, was going to be
permanently in place, and I think that is vitally important.
But I am very grateful for the work that was done to extend
the authorization. And one of the challenges we will have with
the CR, of course, is determining the spend rate during that
period of time, not knowing what the 2013 number will be.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, let me just mention and point out that
when the budget was fully developed last fall, the internal
memo had not been leaked. The action plan was not completed and
GAO had not commenced its review. As we sit here this morning
in the hearing, the action plan is still being worked on. There
are many items that are not close to answered, including
reviewing staffing requirements, and so it would be premature
to dedicate scarce resources today when there are still so many
actions, so many questions that are unanswered. I understand,
of course, there will be a carryover of $20 million from this
year that cannot spend. So I just wanted to add that.
Mr. Carter.

FUNDING: JUSTIFICATION

Mr. Carter. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So your responsibility as an agency is about 5 years old,
right?
Ms. Spaulding. Our responsibility, CFATS was enacted, I
believe, in 2006, and we got the regulation in place in 2007.
Mr. Carter. So it is 5 years. Okay. Well, first off, how
does the threat of a terrorist attack on one of these
facilities rank as a security risk as we look at the overall
program of security risks in America?
Ms. Spaulding. Congressman, I am not sure I can place it in
the pantheon of risks that we face, but it is certainly a risk
that we take very seriously.
Mr. Carter. Well, I guess I am wondering, has it increased
or decreased as a result of the work that you have done?
Ms. Spaulding. Well, I think the threat has probably not
significantly changed as a result of the work that we have
done. I think the risk has been reduced as a result of the work
that the men and women in ISCD have undertaken. As I said, I
think America is safer today. They are at a lower risk from
harm from one of these chemical facilities than they were
before Congress enacted this important legislation.
Mr. Carter. Well, you are complaining about the reduction
in the proposed funds that have come into this agency. If I
understand the chairman correctly, it will be $20 million from
last cycle that you are not going to be utilizing. I don't
claim to be an expert in this field. I am learning and
listening as we sit here, but 2 out of 120 is not a real great
track record of what we have been discussing on these plans.
And, you know, we should spend our money on things that
actually accomplish their mission, and quite honestly, I think
that--and this is my personal opinion, and that is why I asked
the ranking member--I don't know, there may be other things
more important. But to me, they are not more important, because
I heard back when I was a brand new lawyer, that we could kill
most of the population of Texas with one bump between two
ships. And with that kind of testimony, two or three chemical
plants on the Houston ship channel, and there are plenty of
them down there, could wipe out the whole State, and maybe the
Western part of the United States. I don't know. That seems
pretty damn serious to me. And I would say your track record is
relatively poor.
Now, do you want to tell me how you can defend the track
record and increase this amount of money? I would like to hear
it.
Ms. Spaulding. Okay, thank you. I appreciate the
opportunity. Let me state first, on the basis of discussions
with our budget staff in the last few days, it appears at this
point as though our carryover will be around $4 million; that
in fact we will have over a 99.5-percent obligation of our 1-
year funds and that our carryover will be an historical low of
about $4 million.
In terms of, you know, how do we justify spending this
money, again, I believe that we have turned the corner on this
program, and that it is absolutely vital. And to suggest that
we should perhaps pull the plug on a program that has already
made America safer and that is making substantial progress
toward an absolutely vital objective that I know you share with
us of making chemical facilities pose less of a risk of
terrorist sabotage, theft or release--it is--you know, we have
learned a lot, as we have discussed in the last 5 years. We
have made substantial progress. Our progress, again, just since
July I hope demonstrates the degree to which we are now on a
positive track.
With regard to the action plan, we have completed now 70 of
95 items, and there are 95 items because we have been adding
items. This is a living dynamic document. And when GAO made its
recommendation, we embraced that recommendation and added it as
the 95th action plan item. But we have been moving forward on
those. That is 17 more items since the July hearing.
So I do think that your concern is justified with respect
to how long it has taken us to get here, but I do believe this
program has turned a corner, and it is absolutely vital to the
safety and security of Americans, and to pull the plug now
would be a huge mistake.

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS: INTERACTION WITH INDUSTRY

Mr. Carter. I believe you testified--and if I misunderstood
you, you can correct it now--that during the regulatory process
where you were writing regulations, there wasn't a lot of
interaction with industry, but now you are much more involved
in interacting with industry. Is that what your testimony was?
Ms. Spaulding. I am not sure during the writing of the
regulation. I think that was the early stages and my
understanding--I wasn't on board then--is that there was good--
what industry tells me is its sense is there was good
interaction early on. Then there was a period of time when it
was much more spotty. But I think there is a consensus that
over the last year, certainly there has been a great deal more.
Mr. Carter. As you re-analyze your duties and your agencies
and your 95 items that you have got to deal with and you have,
at least within this last year, started to include industry,
could you tell us what the mindset of the people who work in
this industry, in your department, was that they didn't talk to
industry? Because one of the concerns that we have in this
country today is regulations are being passed without really
paying any attention to what those regulations do to people,
and I would like to know what that gap, what caused that gap.
Ms. Spaulding. All right. And it is hard for me to say. I
do think--I am not suggesting there was no interaction with
industry. I think there has been ongoing, and there has always
been that interaction through the Chem Security Coordinating
Council, for example.
But I suspect part of it was the process--I think some of
the--a lot of the concern arose in the personnel surety
context, where, frankly, the process simply hamstrings our
ability to continue to have conversations. We had--I think we
certainly received a lot of comments from industry, but our
ability to sit down across the table and kind of work through
issues, once you have initiated that process at OMB, is
extremely limited. And so my suspicion is that that was a
period of time in which there was some frustration on both
sides.

TRANSPORTATION WORKER IDENTIFICATION CREDENTIAL: CLARIFYING PROGRAM
MISSION

Mr. Carter. Well, a 5-year period of time is a long time.
And I realize I may be running over time, Mr. Chairman. One
more question.
You were discussing earlier about the TWIC program. I
understand that that exists on several facilities, especially
in port areas, and that now you are analyzing that to see if
that--you were proposing a duplicative process originally. If I
understand your testimony, you are now saying you are taking a
look at being able to utilize the information that you gained
from TWIC to possibly make these CFATS sites more secure.
One of the things that at least I have been told by some is
that you are insisting on setting up a new program so that you
are able to track people. And I guess my question is, isn't
that a law enforcement, or do you have a law enforcement
portion of your duties, or isn't that a law enforcement duty,
to track people? Because there are those who think that is the
reason TWIC has not been utilized.
Ms. Spaulding. Right. And there have been a number of
misunderstandings about this program, and that is one of them.
I very much appreciate the opportunity to correct the record on
that.
This is absolutely not--there is not an objective, a goal
to track people, but the way that we are now looking at
implementing this really would not allow us to track people. So
it really has nothing to do with the location of individuals.
Again, for example, the ability for a company to file
company-wide rather than facility by facility, there is no way
for us to know what facility an employee is at on any given
day. Even as we look at electronic verification of the TWIC
cards, one of the things we are trying to explore is could it
be, particularly for smaller facilities, at a central location,
and a number of them could use the same reader, for example?
That would not allow us to know who is going into which
facility.
All of these things present, you know, a trade-off,
frankly, from a security perspective, and one of the things we
have had to think very carefully about is, we have to be true
to our national security imperative. So it has required us to
talk with other regulatory agencies and other elements of
government, frankly, to see ways in which we can mitigate the
national security risk that comes from trying to ease the
burden on industry, and that is the balance we are trying to
find and I think we going to be able to do that.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Price, do you have anything else?
Mr. Price. No, thank you, Mr. Chairman. No further
questions.

DELISTING FACILITIES

Mr. Aderholt. Let me just close with one question I wanted
to ask about the delisting of facilities. In your opinion, how
many companies have been removed from the chemical of interest
listing from their sites? I think the concern here is the
validation with removal. I just was wondering how many
companies that you would estimate have been removed as
chemicals of interest?
Ms. Spaulding. Sir, I would start with around 2,700
facilities that were preliminarily tiered as potentially high
risk, that, as I said, eliminated, reduced--or reduced their
chemicals of interest or otherwise made modifications to bring
them below the threshold for regulation.
David, are there additional numbers there?
Mr. Wulf. That is it right now, 2,700.
Mr. Aderholt. What is the policy for redetermination that
you go through?
Ms. Spaulding. So companies can, under the regulation,
request a redetermination. They are required to notify us if
they make a material modification to their holdings, and they
can request that we review their tier level and make changes.
And I would point out that that is one of the ways in which
tiering can change. So we have a process where we assign
preliminary tiers and then what we call final tiering. But one
of the things that we have learned--we need to emphasize when
we talk with industry is that tiering is a dynamic process, and
there are a number of reasons in which people's tiers can
change, things that the industry does, but also things that we
learn about how to do our tiering methodology better.
Mr. Aderholt. How do you verify that these chemicals have
been removed?
Ms. Spaulding. Do you want to talk to that?
Mr. Wulf. In some cases, we will verify through phone calls
or visits to a facility by the chemical security inspectors,
but it will vary on a case-to-case basis.
Mr. Aderholt. We understand from the GAO, we have heard
some companies have been moving the chemicals of interest to
other sites or just placing them on rail cars or in containers
offsite to avoid regulation. Has this occurred, and what
assurances could you give us here at the subcommittee that it
has not occurred?
Mr. Wulf. I think on a case-to-case basis, it is probably
difficult for us to say or to assure you that it hasn't
occurred in any case, but we strongly, strongly believe, and
are talking extensively with our industry stakeholders and
regulated and unregulated facilities, that these 2,700
facilities have in the aggregate reduced their risk by lowering
or eliminating chemicals of interest at their facilities. So
that is our overall sense of it.
Mr. Aderholt. But there could be the possibility they just
move it offsite, is that correct?
Mr. Wulf. They could go to different processes that may
result in chemicals being off site or in transit, in the
transportation process, and perhaps being delivered to the
facility just in time for use and not stored there for a long
period of time. And that sort of scenario, I don't know that
that increases the amount of time that the chemicals are on the
roads or on the rails, but it is a process that does reduce the
risk at that facility.
Mr. Aderholt. But that would certainly be something you
would be concerned about, if they just put it on a rail car
just for the purpose of it being offsite.
Mr. Wulf. The notion of just transferring the risk, moving
the risk around, is something that would concern us,
absolutely.
Mr. Aderholt. What would you do if you found out that this
was occurring?
Mr. Wulf. I think that is something we would have to
address with our interagency partners, because our jurisdiction
is to regulate security at high-risk chemical facilities. There
are many other agencies that come into the mix on the rails, on
the roads, et cetera.
Mr. Aderholt. But certainly if you found the company was
doing this, trying to hide the fact that they had these
chemicals, you certainly would take quick and swift actions on
that?
Mr. Wulf. We would absolutely have discussions with our
partners.

FUNDING: CARRYOVER

Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Well, I just want to touch base on a
couple of things I think we want to clarify. I mentioned
earlier the $20 million from this year that could be spent. I
think we need to clarify some terms. You said there is around
$4 million. But let me clarify this to make sure I understand
that there is about $20 million of funds that have been
classified as 2-year funds that could be used in fiscal year
2013, is that correct?
Ms. Spaulding. Mr. Chairman, I am going to have to get back
to you with the exact numbers. They have been changing on an
almost daily basis, as you might expect, as we approach the end
of the fiscal year and are closing contracts, et cetera. My
understanding is that we had anticipated a significantly
greater carryover than we have wound up with at the end of the
year, that we have in fact been successful in obligating those
funds and moving, and I think, again, it is a reflection of the
substantial progress that we have made in implementing this
program and moving things forward.
Mr. Aderholt. But there possibly could be--I understand
there is $20 million that is in that, so you can----
Ms. Spaulding. Sir, my staff tells me that there is $20
million of 2-year money, but that $16 million of that is on
contract for fiscal year 2012, leaving $4 million.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. All right, well thank you for your
testimony here, and all of you being here today.
Let's remember that it has been 5 years and hundreds of
millions of dollars since the program was created. Today there
has been a lot of statements about what you plan to accomplish
this year. Certainly, I think this subcommittee will hold you
to that and monitor this closely as we move forward in your
progress.
So, again, we appreciate your being here, and especially
after our last hearing, when you were only here for a few
minutes. We got through the entire hearing today without a
series of votes, so that is good news for the hearing. So,
again, we thank you for being here, and the hearing is
adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I N D E X

----------
Page

Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) Program.......     1
Opening Statements:
Chairman Robert Aderholt.................................     1
Ranking Member David Price...............................     4
Caldwell, Stephen (Director, Homeland Security and
Justice, GAO)..........................................     9
Spaulding, Suzanne (Deputy Under Secretary, NPPD)........    46
Wulf, David (Director, IP)...............................    56

Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) Program.......    59
Opening Statements:
Chairman Robert Aderholt.................................    59
Caldwell, Stephen (Director, Homeland Security and
Justice, GAO)..........................................    62
Delisting Facilities.........................................   103
Funding:
Carryover................................................   104
Continuing Resoloution's Impact..........................    99
Justification............................................   100
Proposed Cuts' Impact....................................    98
Hiring Qualifications........................................    93
Internal Review Memo.........................................    96
Opening Statements:
Spaulding, Suzanne (Deputy Under Secretary, NPPD)........    77
Wulf, David (Director, IP)...............................    77
Personnel Security Credentialing Program.....................    90
Personnel Surety Program.....................................    95
Public-Private Partnerships:
Interaction with Industry................................   101
Outreach to Industry.....................................    97
Site Security Plans:
Approvals/Authorizations.................................    77
Approval Process Lessons Learned.........................    88
Number of Completed Reviews..............................    94
Time Frame for Reviews...................................    94
Transportation Worker Identification Credential:
Clarifying Program Mission...............................   102
Incorporation into Process...............................    96


