- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          ED PASTOR, Arizona
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Rob Blair, Joseph Levin, Angie Giancarlo,
Loraine Heckenberg, and Perry Yates,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 6
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Page
Environmental Management, Legacy Management, FY 2013 Budget......    1
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Fossil Energy,
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, FY 2013 Budget.......  113
Science..........................................................  359
Loan Guarantee Program and ARPA-E, FY 2013 Budget................  535

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 6--ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013
?

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          ED PASTOR, Arizona
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Rob Blair, Joseph Levin, Angie Giancarlo,
Loraine Heckenberg, and Perry Yates,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 6
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Page
Environmental Management, Legacy Management, FY 2013 Budget......    1
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Fossil Energy,
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, FY 2013 Budget.......  113
Science..........................................................  359
Loan Guarantee Program and ARPA-E, FY 2013 Budget................  535

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
80-791                     WASHINGTON : 2013

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY--ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT & HEALTH, SAFETY, AND
SECURITY FY 2013 BUDGET

WITNESSES

DAVE HUIZENGA, SENIOR ADVISOR FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT (ACTING),
OFFICE OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
GLENN PODONSKY, CHIEF HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SECURITY OFFICER, OFFICE OF
HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The hearing will come to order. Good
morning, everybody. Thank you for being here. We have before us
this morning David Huizenga, senior advisor for Environmental
Management to the Secretary of Energy. We also have Glenn
Podonsky, the department's Chief Health Safety and Security
officer. We welcome you both to the subcommittee and we look
forward to your testimony.
Before we begin I would like to note that a colleague of
yours, Brad Peterson, died last week in New Mexico due to
injuries from a car accident. He was most recently with the
Office of Secure Transportation. And I think I speak for
everybody on the panel here on the subcommittee on extending
our condolences to his family, his colleagues at the office,
and to the department.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. He was a great guy.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are pleased to note his work and we
regret his passing.
The Environmental Management budget request for Fiscal Year
2013 is 5.009 billion for defense cleanup activities, a $14
million reduction from last year's inactive level. While it is
clear that many tough decisions have been made in putting
together this request, you have even tougher decisions ahead.
Many of your current cleanup agreements relied upon continued
large increases in funding, increases that are unrealistic even
with the strong support we have for these activities within the
committee. It is the responsibility of the department to
explain where those timelines are in jeopardy and to work
constructively with its stakeholders to establish affordable
milestones which would meet our legal commitments and our
financial restraints.
Mr. Podonsky, your budget request is $246 million, a
reduction of 2 percent from last year's level. At the same
time, you are undertaking a review of the department's safety
and security model. I hope you will be able to show us this
morning that this budget request will fully support that
important work.
Gentlemen, you are appearing together before the committee
for the first time in order to better explain some of the
challenges and, yes, some of the opportunities the EM Program
and other nuclear operations that the department are facing.
This subcommittee is taking a note of some very serious issues
facing the department. Reports of poor project management
leading to out-of-control cost growth and an apparent weakness
in nuclear safety culture to name two of the most worrisome.
The EM Program is at the middle of these concerns and the
Health Safety and Security Office is mandated to evaluate and
help resolve them. Over the past few years, the Department has
taken some positive steps to address these issues such as
updating its project review procedures. More recently, EM has
been re-evaluating its bureaucracy to see if it should be
realigned. We will be watching closely to make sure that safety
in project management is adequately resolved and that
management reforms are actually effective.
Gentlemen, reports have identified major problems at the
waste treatment and immobilization plant in Hanford. It appears
that the Department of Energy has not yet been able to resolve
significant design problems and changes may be on the horizon
which will undoubtedly impact that project's cost and schedule,
and could put the milestones of the Tri-Party Agreement in
jeopardy. There are reports that as these troubles have
festered, the safety culture of the site has deteriorated to
such an extent that some find them to be a major risk to the
project itself. The reforms you put in place must address these
issues both at Hanford and anywhere else they threaten to come
up.
Mr. Podonsky, your group has done some good work looking
into the sources of the safety culture problems, and we are
looking forward to hearing your findings. Ensuring that these
facilities will operate safely is one of our greatest
responsibilities, and the subcommittee cannot support any plan
that would place the safety of your employees and the public in
any jeopardy. Please ensure that the hearing record, responses
to the questions for the record, and any supporting information
requested by the subcommittee are delivered in final form to us
no later than four weeks from the time you receive them. And I
also ask that if members have additional questions they would
like to submit to the committee for the record, they please do
so by 5:00 p.m. tomorrow.
With these opening comments, I would like to yield to our
ranking member, Mr. Visclosky, for any opening comments he may
care to make.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.003

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you very much. Mr. Huizenga and Mr.
Podonsky, thank you very much for being with us today.
Mr. Huizenga, this will be your first time before the
subcommittee as the leader of the Office of Environmental
Management and I do have faith that you are up to the challenge
ahead of you. The appearance of both of you will give the
subcommittee a perspective on the individual programs and,
also, the opportunity to understand how they interact and work
together to ensure DOE projects are meeting the mission while
also maintaining a safe work environment.
The Manhattan Project and resulting nuclear weapons complex
was an unparalleled scientific achievement. Today, we must
obviously address the environmental impacts of this monumental
undertaking, ensuring the health and safety of those
communities affected. The Federal Government's obligation to
remediate these sites is without question. However, given the
constrained physical environment it will be paramount that all
resources are used to their fullest potential. I understand
that the department is undergoing a review of the implications
of flat funding to the cleanup effort, and I would be
interested today in hearing if you have any initial feedback
for the subcommittee.
Mr. Huizenga, I will make a point to you that I made to
both Secretary Chu and NNSA Administrator D'Agostino. Issues of
project management, corporate governance, and workplace safety
are not the most electrifying issues to tackle, but I attach
special importance to them and I do believe they are vital to
the success of the department's mission. A strong leadership
and fundamental management reform are not forthcoming at the
Department of Energy after all of these many years. It will
significantly inhibit the execution of your mission as well as
the department's credibility. I hope that you will take some
time today to update us on your specific actions in this
regard, in particular any progress that you have made in
getting EM off the GAO's high-risk list.
Mr. Podonsky, in my opinion, worker health and safety is
one of the most important elements in meeting the department's
mission. In particular, given the materials and facilities
under EM's charge, the potential human and financial losses
that have come from having an unsafe worksite are mindboggling.
I appreciate that you have taken seriously your charge to
ensure the safety of the department's projects and look forward
to discussing in detail your office's progress on this front.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for the time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.005

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Huizenga,
can you speak to what the Environmental--excuse me, I
apologize. Your statements.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
Chairman Frelinghuysen, Representative Visclosky, and
Representative Simpson. I am honored to be here today to
discuss the positive things that we are doing for the Nation
through our ongoing efforts in the Environmental Management
Program and, of course, to address your questions regarding our
fiscal 2013 budget request.
Our request of 5.65 billion enables the Office of
Environmental Management to continue the safe cleanup of the
environmental legacy brought about from five decades of nuclear
weapons development and government-sponsored nuclear energy
research. Our cleanup priorities are based on risk and our
continuing efforts to meet our regulatory compliance
commitments. Completing cleanup promotes the economic vitality
of the communities surrounding our sites and enables other
crucial DOE missions to continue. By reducing the cleanup
footprint, we are lowering the cost of security and other
overhead activities that would otherwise continue for years to
come.
In August 2011, the Office of Environmental Management was
aligned under the Office of the Under-Secretary for Nuclear
Security. This realignment promotes the natural synergies that
exist between EM and NNSA. For example, at Oak Ridge
Laboratory, we are working closely with NNSA now to accelerate
the transfer of certain components of the Uranium-233
inventory.
This inventory is valuable for National Security
applications and supports NNSA missions. Removing this material
and transferring it to NNSA for their use will result in cost
savings for our program and enable us to move forward with
cleanup at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Over the years, the Office of Environmental Management has
made significant progress in accelerating environmental cleanup
across the complex. For example, last December, at the Defense
Waste Processing Facility at our Savannah River Site in South
Carolina, we solidified a record 37 canisters of highly
radioactive waste. These are more canisters than we have filled
in one month in the facility's 15-year history. Out west at our
Moab site in Utah, we celebrated the removal of five million
tons of uranium tailings from the site to a safe location away
from the Colorado River. Through 2011, we safely conducted over
10,000 shipments of transuranic waste to the Waste Isolation
Pilot Plant in New Mexico, the world's largest operating deep
geologic repository. As you can see from some of these
accomplishments the EM has made great progress and will
continue to do so with your help.
We could not have achieved such notable accomplishments
without an outstanding Federal and contractor workforce. The
safety of our workers is a core value and is incorporated into
every aspect of our program. I am sure we are going to be
talking about that and I welcome the opportunity to talk more
about it with Mr. Podonsky and you today. We maintain a strong
safety record and continually strive for accident and incident-
free workplaces. We seek to continue improvements in the area
of safety by instituting corrective actions and aggressively
promoting lessons learned across our sites. In collaboration
with Mr. Podonsky's office and our field sites, we are working
to achieve a stronger safety culture within our Program and
ultimately improve safe construction and operation of our
facilities.
We will continue to identify opportunities to reduce the
life-cycle costs of our program, including the development of
new technologies and other strategic investments. For example,
in fiscal year 2013, we will continue our efforts to develop
technologies that allow for the segregation and stabilization
of mercury-contaminated debris and improve groundwater
monitoring.
Finally, we continue to work with the Government
Accountability Office as we institutionalize the improvements
in contracting and project management which I know are
important to you. We have established project sponsor positions
at Headquarters for all of our capital asset projects and
conduct regular peer reviews of our most complex projects. We
are including the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers personnel in
some of these teams because of their project and contract
management expertise. We are committed to becoming a best-in-
class performer in the area of project management.
Chairman Frelinghuysen, Representative Visclosky, and
Representative Simpson, we continue to apply innovative cleanup
technologies so that we can complete our quality work safely,
on schedule, and within costs thereby demonstrating value to
the American taxpayers. Thank you and I would be pleased to
answer your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.017

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for your testimony. Mr.
Podonsky, good morning.
Mr. Podonsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member
Visclosky and members of the Subcommittee for inviting me here
today to testify on the 2013 budget of the Health Safety and
Security Office. With your permission, I would like to submit
my written testimony for the record.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Consider it done. Thank you.
Mr. Podonsky. I would like to take a moment just to
describe the role that the HSS plays within the DOE. And also
address an issue that has received a lot of attention lately,
and that is the safety culture within DOE and its role in
ensuring the DOE's ability to accomplish its mission. First and
foremost, I want to tell the committee, subcommittee that the
secretary and the deputy secretary are extremely committed to
maintaining a safe and secure work environment for employees
and to ensure that its operations are not adversely affecting
the health, safety, or security of the surrounding communities
or of the Nation.
My organization, HSS, is charged with helping DOE fulfill
that commitment. We are very proactive advocates for the
protection of DOE's workers as well as the protection of the
DOE's assets. We are passionate about our mission. We have
pursued every day with a sense of urgency and with a personal
commitment. We strive to use and influence this commitment
throughout the rest of the DOE.
Our program consists of a wide variety of activities that
are described in details in our budget's proposal but the
essential elements are responsible for internal policies that
govern health, safety, and security of the department,
providing technical assistance to help align, implement those
policies, and, maybe most importantly of all, to provide
independent oversight of the DOE's performance as well as
providing an enforcement of health safety and security
requirements when necessary. The execution of our mission is
accomplished through a variety of outreach efforts that include
current and former workers, national labor union leadership,
the Defense Nuclear Facility Safety Board, contractors,
community leaders, and the Congress.
We support the secretary and deputy secretary's commitment
to a strong safety culture where all employees are encouraged
to bring up safety concerns without fear of reprisal. The goal
of safety in executing this mission is not just show or a
bumper sticker. It has to be believed by the leaders and
carried out through their actions.
A robust safety culture is needed, especially for a large
costly construction project, from designing and planning
through construction operation to decommissioning, in order to
reduce potential of escalating costs and to ensure DOE meets
its commitments. HSS has been assessing the safety culture up
at the Hanford Waste Treatment Immobilization Plant, which, as
you know, is the DOE's largest ongoing project with an
estimated cost of over $12 billion and over 3,000 Federal and
contract workers.
We found in our recent inspection that most people working
on the project believe that safety was a high priority, but,
alarmingly, there was a significant number that expressed
reluctance to raise safety issues or concerns. We have provided
recommendations to the department and to the Federal and
contracted management at the site. And the recommendations have
been accepted by the department, by the secretary, by the
deputy secretary, by the under secretary for NNSA, and by my
colleague Dave Huizenga. And we will be working with them to
make sure that full implementation of those recommendations
take place.
As a result of this review, the secretary and the deputy
secretary directed HSS to then do a center review condition of
safety culture at all large projects within the department. We
have started that. I would be happy to talk to you more about
that.
These are the projects that are over $1 billion in costs.
The review will determine if those projects are being managed
in the way that could pressure contractors or DOE managers to
disregard nuclear safety in order to demonstrate acceptable
project performance. We look forward to actually coming back
and brief you, the subcommittee, the results which will be
complete that end of the project in the fall.
I would like to thank this committee and the staff for the
interest you continue to show in HSS and our role in providing
independent, unbiased, unfiltered information to the DOE of
management, the leadership of the department, the secretary,
and the deputy secretary on how well or how poorly the
department is performing. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.029

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Podonsky. There
are good reasons that the both of you are sitting together
here. And each of you have a mission and to a certain degree
you somewhat have to be independent. But in reality, where I
think the bipartisan concern is support for both of what you
are both doing.
Mr. Huizenga, can you speak to what the Environmental
Management organization is doing to evaluate the implications
of the reduced budget, or the other term is constrained fiscal
environment, and what it means to the department's cost and
schedule projections for meeting the many constant milestones?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, I can, sir. First of all, let me just
point out that 2013 request will enable us to fully meet our
compliance agreements and our milestones in Fiscal Year 2013.
It is a request that takes into account all of these issues.
That being said, I do not want to underestimate the difficulty
I believe we are going to have in the out years. In prior
years, we have signed up for a number of milestones at many of
our sites and we did this in a sense when we thought we might
have slightly higher budget projections when things were
different a few years ago. And we are in the process now of
working complex-wide to understand if we were stay at
relatively flat budgets for the next few years what that would
mean for our compliance agreements.
We started this discussion with our stakeholders in a
meeting last November in New Orleans. We were being upfront
with people that we are going to have to have open and
transparent dialogue. If indeed we are going to need to make
some adjustments, we want to give people a chance to understand
our thinking and our rationale. We will be looking at the
highest risk activities across the complex to make sure we are
continuing to focus on them on those. Of course, this is a
complex issue. It will take us another month or two to get our
arms around completely the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, you are working on a new strategic
plan having touched base as I assume you do on a regular basis
with all your stakeholders, the municipalities, and localities?
Mr. Huizenga. Exactly.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so, we are going to be getting a new
strategic plan?
Mr. Huizenga. We are going to have to assess what we think
we can do assuming a flat budget. Last time we did this we
thought about $6 billion range. We are looking now closer to
$5.5 or $5.65 billion consistent with our budget request.
Obviously, if we base-lined our program and signed agreements
at $6 billion there is going to be things that are going to
have to be moved out if we are coming in----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, we are going to be apprised of what
those might be?
Mr. Huizenga. We will be in consultation with our
stakeholders and with you, of course, to explain what we think
this ultimately----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, you are going to lay out a pathway
here?
Mr. Huizenga. That is our----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Based on flat budget?
Mr. Huizenga. In our fiscal year 14 budget build, we are
trying to take this into account complex-wide.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, this and a lot of what you are
dealing with is incredibly complex? All these sites have a
degree of complexity and some are involved with consent
decrees. And you are taking all of that into consideration?
Mr. Huizenga. Correct. We are currently----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Not only do you have expectations, but
states and localities and I assume the courts have some
expectation that certain things are going to be done within a
timetable. So, are you taking a look at that timetable?
Mr. Huizenga. Absolutely. We recognize our commitments to
the local people in these areas that have made sacrifices over
the years for the country. And we want to move ahead with the
cleanup activities as expeditiously as possible. With that
being said, we recognize that there are fiscal constraints that
need to be addressed and we need to try to take those into
account.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Huizenga, in
the fiscal year 2012 Appropriations Act there is a requirement
that the secretary notify the committee not later than 30 days
before any uranium transfer takes place. Twice, as recently--
most recently, I should say, as Wednesday, the department has
violated the provisions of this statute as far as congressional
notification. What is the problem?
Mr. Huizenga. We had two administrative errors, and we will
not have another one.
Mr. Visclosky. That is the proper answer. Another question
is the issue of benefits for workers who transfer from USEC to
the D&D contract. And Portsmouth has been an issue recently,
and on March 9th, United Steelworker President Leo Girard wrote
a letter that, among other things, said that we ask that DOE
and its contractors at the site restore their benefits,
including pensions and retiree health care, their seniority,
any vacation time they have lost, any seniority credits to
which they are due, and any other wages and benefits that have
been scrimped as a result of the flawed 2011 service contract
transition. What, from your perspective, is the problem at
Portsmouth, and what action is the department taking or not
taking?
Mr. Huizenga. This is a complex issue and we met with the
USW representatives several times. I met with him personally. I
know that they have been in discussions with the Secretary's
staff, as well. We fundamentally have a different view of the
nature of when the employees change from USEC to working for
Fluor-B&W Portsmouth LLC, the new contractor, our view is that
they, the contractor, Fluor-B&W Portsmouth LLC, it is their
responsibility to negotiate the benefits package. It really is
not the Department of Energy's position. We set broad
guidelines to make sure that they are doing this lawfully. They
have to have some curbstones of which they need to stay in
between. But it is up to Fluor-B&W Portsmouth LLC to work this
out with the Steelworkers.
Mr. Visclosky. Could I ask, assuming the worst and it is
not worked out and the steelworkers file suit, there will be
legal expenses and court costs involved. Are those reimbursable
to the contract by the Department of Energy?
Mr. Huizenga. In general, my understanding is that we pay
the court costs for these type of issues.
Mr. Visclosky. Will the steelworkers' legal expenses and
court costs be reimbursed by the Department of Energy?
Mr. Huizenga. That I do not know. I would have to get back
to you on that, sir.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Huizenga. The Department of Energy (DOE) does not have a
contract with the Steelworkers Union. DOE's prime contractors negotiate
collective bargaining agreements between themselves and individual
unions. If a union sues a DOE contractor operating under a cost-type
contract, the contracts generally provide that most legal costs
incurred by the contractor, including settlements, are allowable. There
are a number of exceptions, however, and those would have to be
reviewed in the context of a particular matter. The larger question is
whether a judgement against the contractor would include the legal
expenses and court costs of the union; that is generally not the case
in American litigation. However, to the extent a judgment against the
contractor includes legal expenses incurred by the opposing party, they
would likely be allowable to the same extent as other costs incurred by
the contractor.

Mr. Visclosky. I must express a concern that you provide--
not you personally, but the Department, an unlevel playing
field. If some party, whether it is in this case, the United
Steelworkers, or another party, feels themselves aggrieved and
they have to pay their own legal expenses and court costs and
the contractor working for DOE gets reimbursed by the
taxpayers, and somebody has deeper pockets than another party
and they just outlast people, I think it is a very unfair
proposition. So, I would ask that, while the department may not
have the ultimate liability for the contract, that special
attention should be paid because I think, in this case, the
aggrieved party, at least that is the allegation, is in a very
unfair situation legally.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And thank both of you for being
here today. We appreciate it very much. We mentioned fiscal
constraint that we are under and probably will be under even
greater after the budget resolution passes today which--never
mind, I will not go there.
Let me ask you. I think we have to find uses that maybe
beyond what the original use was for some of the facilities.
Currently INTEC at Idaho maintains a wet storage capability.
The Navy is looking to refurbish their facility for wet storage
for Navy fuel. Is it possible to keep the wet storage facility
at INTEC at play and have a shared facility, potentially with
the Navy, rather than doing the refurbishing of the Navy's wet
storage facility?
Mr. Huizenga. To continue to use the existing one?
Mr. Simpson. At INTEC.
Mr. Huizenga. I am not--to be honest with you, the Navy is
moving out in their direction and----
Mr. Simpson. I know. I am looking to try to save money here
somewhere.
Mr. Huizenga. I understand that. I had not tried to
interfere with that. I could talk to the NNSA folks and see if
there is some synergy there.
Mr. Simpson. I am certain that the Navy would like to have
their own facility. The question is, is that fiscally the
responsible thing to do if we have a wet storage facility at
INTEC that could serve the same purposes? We share the use of
the Advanced Test Reactor with the Navy and so forth.
Mr. Huizenga. Absolutely.
Mr. Simpson. I would hope that you would explore the
possibility, even though I would suspect that the Navy would
like their own facility and not have to share. That is kind of
the way the Navy is. I understand that. But it would seem to me
like it might save some money in the long run.
Mr. Huizenga. I would certainly agree.
Mr. Simpson. Without having to put the other money into
refurbishing their facility, which I cannot remember how much
it is, but it is a substantial sum that they have requested, is
it not? Yes. So, I am just suggesting----
Mr. Huizenga. I will look into that.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. In this limited fiscal
environment that we need to look at other things along the way.
Along that same line, the Advancement Mixed Waste Treatment
Plan will finish its Idaho mission within the next couple
years. This is a facility that has done a fantastic job, I
think. It would seem to be a shame to shut it down. Are there
other missions that that facility could facilitate?
Mr. Huizenga. I believe they are already making a
contribution in that regard. Of course, they are doing a great
job in Idaho with retrieval and packaging of the transuranic
waste in Idaho. And as I understand it, they have also been
successful in taking some waste from Hanford to Idaho,
packaging it up and sending it down to WIPP so, you know, we
certainly could explore----
Mr. Simpson. So we may see a continued operation in that
facility beyond the time when they finish their actual drop?
Mr. Huizenga. I think that your point is well taken and at
these times of fiscal constraints, we need to look at all
options. And if we have got a facility that is up and running
and doing a good job, then it can provide a more complex-wide
benefit, I would be happy to look into that.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. After the publication of the
recommendation of the Blue Ribbon Commission, we have heard a
lot of talk about consent-based process to identify a site to
store spent nuclear fuel. Under the Idaho Settlement Agreement,
the State of Idaho consented to temporarily store Navy and DOE
spent fuel in exchange for DOE's commitment that the Idaho
National Lab shall direct the research, development, and
testing of treatment, shipment, and disposal technologies for
all DOE fuel. That program did this work under the National
Spent Fuel Nuclear Fuel Program. It is not funded in the 2013
budget. Do you plan to fund this activity at the INL? And if
not, how can you get states to consent to store spent nuclear
fuel when commitments made to those already storing spent
nuclear fuel were not kept or will not be kept?
Mr. Huizenga. I talked to the folks on the National Spent
Fuel Program about this a couple times, and we do intend to
continue to fund them.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. I have got some other questions, but I
will----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Simpson. Mr. Huizenga and
the ranking member raised Portsmouth as a focus. The GAO, and
you mentioned the GAO, I think, in one of your opening
statements, has ruled that the Department's past use of uranium
transfer to fund the cleanup work at Portsmouth is illegal,
violating the Miscellaneous Receipts Statute. Is the $178
million you have requested for Portsmouth the total amount of
the cleanup work that you plan on funding in the fiscal year
2013 budget or do you plan on using the TAILS transfer
authority again in contravention of the law?
Mr. Huizenga. Well, we respectfully disagree with the GAO's
view on that, Mr. Chairman. We believe that we, under the
Atomic Energy Act, have the authority to barter the uranium,
and we hope to continue to do so because, indeed, we want to
continue to accelerate our cleanup work at Portsmouth. And we
have an asset, and we believe we can continue to barter this if
we send some of the natural uranium to the contractor in return
for the work that they will do for us.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Why not Paducah?
Mr. Huizenga. That is a good question.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, that is why I asked you.
Mr. Huizenga. Sir, I will have to look into it. I know we
are focused right now. I mean----
[The information follows:]

Although the Department's current Secretarial Determination on
uranium transfer was approved to support the acceleration of cleanup
activities at Portsmouth, it is possible that future transfers, if any,
could be considered for use to fund Paducah activities. However,
currently planned cleanup activities of Paducah are supported by
appropriated funds. Decontamination and decommissioning of the actual
Gaseous Diffusion Plant (GDP) is not within EM's current baseline scope
because the United States Enrichment Corporation currently leases and
operates these facilities.

Mr. Frelinghuysen. I hear a lot about Paducah.
Mr. Huizenga. We are doing different work at Paducah,
obviously, because at the moment they are still operating and
we have got a solid budget request for Paducah, so we think we
are okay there.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The fiscal year 2012 conference
agreement directed you to, and I quote, ``provide the full
details of any proposed barter, transfer, or sale of uranium''
in your budget request. How much additional funding do you
expect to generate for cleanup activities through these
transfers, and why were you not able to provide this
information in your budget request as we so clearly directed?
Mr. Huizenga. These numbers depend, in part, on the uranium
market, and I think that what we tried to do is provide a sense
of our intention in this regard. And then, as we continue to
want to do these on a quarterly basis, then we intend to get
the signature authority correct and then we will send the
letters up to you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Please do. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Podonsky, in the past, and I talk about
the past, the Department has tended to not give adequate
attention to the issue of safety and safety culture, and
particularly at Hanford, but not necessarily limited to
Hanford. I appreciate the fact that you had the Defense Nuclear
Facility Safety Board study, contractor had a study, and the
department has self-initiated two studies. If you could, for
just a minute or two, bring the subcommittee up to speed as to
what you and Mr. Huizenga are doing relative to making sure
that there is transparency, there is an openness of culture,
and that safety is going to be at the forefront here.
Mr. Huizenga. I attach a lot of importance to it.
Mr. Podonsky. As we do, too. And I want to thank you for
asking me that question. I was enjoying the hearing up to now.
First of all, if you will indulge me, we are responsible
for independently assessing the performance of the department
in terms of environment, safety, health, safeguard cyber.
Nuclear safety culture is something that is not new to the
department. The recognition of its importance is what is slowly
becoming more apparent. When we look at what transpired, first
with the Defense Board, Defense Nuclear Safety Board, about a
year and half ago, looking into a whistleblower issue out at
the Hanford site, the former assistant secretary on Ines Triay
contacted my office and asked us to take a look at what was
going on at the same time. And that was the genesis of the
first report that we produced.
And to understand that first report, we did identify
issues, but we used our nuclear safety engineers. We used our
technical capabilities, but what we did not have a recognition
of, and that is the need for experts in safety culture. So, we
reached out to the NRC and, following their years of
experience, we actually brought on an external expert in
nuclear safety culture, in behavioral sciences, and so that was
the basis for our next review that we have done.
And I have to do this in order to answer your question
because it is complex. BNI, to their credit, as I would expect
any good contractor to do a self-assessment, and that is what
they did. They brought in some experts that they hired to do a
self-assessment on their operation.
So, you have four reports: our two and the two you just
mentioned. What they all have in common is that they all
identify that there are concerns. The varying degrees are the
Defense Board, I would characterize it as having a chilled
atmosphere is what they refer to out at the Hanford location.
BNI identified it as isolated incidents. And then our report
said it was much more pervasive than that in the second go
around.
What this has done, especially the most recent report that
we did, and not meant to be a self-serving statement, but we
used some rather rigorous focus groups, very structured
interviews, as well as proven surveys of the staff out there as
to what they were really feeling so we could reach into what
the workers felt and could get to the folks that really had not
already spoken before or maybe they did not feel safe in saying
anything. And we actually penetrated that barrier through our
processes using our experts.
So, that brings us to where we are now. The Department, the
contractor out there, the management out there, my colleague
Dave Huizenga, the Secretary of Energy, all of us now recognize
the extent of the problem which we did not understand before.
None of us really understood how pervasive the issues are. Not
the fear of raising issues, but as we said in our report, the
concern that nobody is really interested in hearing about these
issues, that the project costs and schedule were trumping
safety. That was the biggest difference. And what the
Department is doing now is I believe, with the embracing of the
recommendations, both in our report, the Defense Board's Board
Recommendation 2011-1, some of the findings that the BNI folks
identified for themselves, I have every confidence that Dave
Huizenga and his leadership, with the support of Tom D'Agostino
and the Secretary of Energy, are going to start addressing
these issues in a very systematic way. The proof will be in the
pudding. The workers have to believe this. The workers have to
believe that they can raise issues without concern of reprisal
without fear of retaliation, and that is a tall order for this
department.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Podonsky. Absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Have conditions improved?
Mr. Podonsky. Since our first report, Chairman, yes, there
have been improved conditions. Since our current report, I
would tell you Mr. Huizenga in his capacity as managing the EM
organization for the Secretary of Energy, whatever title you
give him, he has taken more interest than any other person that
I have seen at that level. He has been out to Hanford almost as
many times as my team has been out there and maybe more. That
hands-on personal involvement of Department leadership makes
all the difference in the world because then the contractors
know that we are serious. The Federal staff begin to believe
us. And I believe what Mr. Huizenga--and it is not because he
is sitting next to me, I am telling you I have seen the
actions, that I believe that EM is going to move out in the
direction that it has not previously done.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If the gentleman will continue. You
know, allegations come up and they have to be considered
seriously. Some of them may be old, but I assume you take a
look at whether they are fresh allegations. But the general
question, are conditions better than they were? Has the safety
culture improved?
Mr. Podonsky. We have seen----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for yielding.
Mr. Podonsky. Sure. We have seen some evidence of
improvement but I will tell you, just I am concerned that we
must make sure that all Federal managers and contract managers
understand the seriousness of safety culture. Just today in the
Weapons Complex Monitor there was an article that talked about
one of the whistleblowers registering a concern because during
the course of our enforcement activities, that it appeared that
an Environmental and Nuclear Safety manager at URS was not
being allowed to be involved in interviews that we were
conducting. And I will just tell you, to me, as the independent
overseer of the Department, that is a clear indication that
there still needs a whole lot of work to be done within the
framework of both the Federal management and contract
management to understand that even if you have best interests
in mind for your corporation, you still cannot allow people to
feel intimidated, even if you just have an attendance in a
meeting.
Mr. Visclosky. Or people having the opinion that no one is
listening, forgetting the issue of whistleblowers. I
congratulate you because I am not an apologist, as you know,
for the Department on a regular basis. I have been disappointed
in the past on the issue of the safety culture. That too often,
well, it is a disgruntled employee. Sometimes whistleblowers
are wrong or incorrect, sometimes they are very right, but it
has tended to be passed off as discrete individual
circumstances. I also appreciate that the culture is very hard
to change, and people do have to understand, no, we are in this
for the long haul.
So again, anything we can do to be of assistance, I would
ask you to do it. I also appreciate that you are taking this,
if you would, approach to other projects within the department.
And I congratulate you for that, but would also remind you we
will be attentively following your progress on this, but wish
you well on it. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are going to Mr. Simpson. So, was
this--I happened to see this article as well. Was this
something that occurred last year?
Mr. Podonsky. No, no, no, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What is the timetable?
Mr. Podonsky. This was just in the last few weeks.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just a couple weeks. All right.
Mr. Podonsky. If the subcommittee is interested, I can give
you more articulation on this. But I do know that we expressed
our concern to Mr. Huizenga and Mr. Huizenga has already taken
action.
Mr. Huizenga. Mr. Chairman, if I may? I have been talking
to Glenn about this and we are making it very clear, providing
guidance to the Office of River Protection out at Hanford and
the contractor that no one will interfere with the HSS reviews;
that they will have unfettered access to the documents and to
the people that they need to to conduct their investigation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for your response. Mr.
Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Along that same line, you said that making
safety a high priority and making sure that the contractors
understand that it is a high priority to the Department. That
is an initial step. Are there process changes that need to be
made in order to more than just say it is a high priority?
Mr. Podonsky. Mr. Huizenga I am sure will follow, but if
you will allow me, there is something called a safety-conscious
work environment, SCWE, which is an environment where the
workers feel that they can raise issues without fear of
retaliation. And I realize this is a budget hearing. And we can
put all sorts of money on these projects and on these programs,
but at the end, it is the leadership. It is the core values
that the managers feel. And do they believe in the safety and
do the workers believe in them as well? And if the workers do
not believe the leaders and the managers, no matter how much
money we put on these projects, they are not necessarily always
encouraged to get out there and do the job because they do not
always know that they are going to be able to do it as safely
or raise issues, especially if they have issues that might
improve the process.
So the Department is looking at all sorts of experiences
that were gained today in our other like similar hazardous
work, and so there is a lot that we can do. But the most
important thing that has to happen is that the leaders, like my
colleague Dave Huizenga, like the Secretary of Energy, like the
deputy secretary, need to continuously talk about the
importance of safety and prove it through their actions. So at
the end of the day, Congressman, whether it is a project of a
nuclear construction or a nuclear operation, it does not
matter. What is important is whether the values are expressed
by actions, indeed by the managers that are out there, both Fed
and contractor. And that is what has to change.
And when the whistleblowers--we talked about the
whistleblowers a moment ago from the ranking member--
whistleblowers, there are some that have good points and some
that do not have good points at all. But they all need to be
heard and need to be--felt that they are listened to and what
happens to their issues that they raise. All of that comes
together into a safety culture. It does not happen overnight
but it has to be continuous and it has to be from one
administration after another regardless of Republican or
Democratic. It does not matter. Because at the end of the day,
these are our workers and they have to feel they are being
protected.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Mr. Huizenga, tell me about DOE's
efforts to respond to the recommendation of the Blue Ribbon
Commission. What is EM doing in this effort and when should we
expect to see a plan from the administration of whether they
accept the Blue Ribbon Commission's recommendations, also, that
is going to require onsite storage? And what about spent
nuclear fuel apparently onsite? What is EM doing to make sure
that the spent fuel is stored and safe and its facilities are
adequate for a longer than expected period of time?
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you. Well, we have been working, of
course, for years to stabilize our spent nuclear fuel. You know
that in Idaho, we have moved a lot of the fuel out of the old
wet storage pools into dry storage, and it can be stored safely
there for many years to come.
Similarly, we have stored Hanford production reactor fuel
in a dry storage building. So we are in the process--and also,
of course, we are going to be starting up a facility at Idaho
to stabilize the remaining liquid high-level waste. And
hopefully, later in April and by the end of the year, we will
have that material in a stable form.
So our goal is, given the uncertainties that we do have
with the ultimate desire to find a repository for the Nation,
we want to make sure that this material can be stored for
several decades safely. And in that regard, we want to
ultimately work to find a solution.
So we are working closely with the Office of Nuclear Energy
within the department. The Secretary of Energy has set up a
task force and my staff members are working with Assistant
Secretary Lyons' staff members to respond to the Blue Ribbon
Commission's recommendations. I think it is in a six-month
timeframe and we need to consult with the members of Congress
and try to find the next step and path forward.
Mr. Simpson. So we should see a recommendation or a plan
within the next six months?
Mr. Huizenga. Our intention is to come back up here within
that timeframe and consult with you and put something on the
table.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. As I understand it, your EM program is
responsible for the disposition of excessive plutonium at
Hanford. Pete Lyons and the Office of Nuclear Energy owns the
plutonium at Idaho and the NNSA's. Nonproliferation program is
handling the MOX plant and the excess plutonium at Savannah
River. It seems to me that we have excess plutonium and we have
got three different entities in charge of it. Does this make
sense?
Mr. Huizenga. I think it does. It actually might be a
little bit hard to explain. But in a sense, the
nonproliferation mission that is being supported with the MOX
plant in South Carolina, they have got a clear understanding
and vision of what they are going to do. Ultimately, they will
make MOX fuel out of several tons of excess plutonium, 34 tons
of excess weapons pits. And our excess plutonium basically is
not usable, so we are packaging up the excess plutonium and
sending it to WIPP.
To be honest with you, I do not know exactly what any
people--I think that they are doing some separations technology
and working at the Idaho facility now to try to explore backend
of the fuel cycle. So we each are working in our lane. We are
working together. We know what each other is doing. And indeed
at South Carolina, at the Savannah River site, we are using our
H-Canyon Facility to generate feed for the MOX plant to take
some of that plutonium and clean it up and send it off to MOX.
And we are using the H-Canyon to package some material and send
it to WIPP.
I think we each have the plutonium that is best suited for
our particular mission and we are taking care of it.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Has there been any unexpected challenges
in moving EM to under NNSA?
Mr. Huizenga. Other than the fact that we might have done a
little bit better job rolling it out, I think that--honestly,
all kidding aside, I really think that there was a wisdom and a
vision there.
The mission of the other Under Secretaries is to focus on
science and focus on research and bring home other important
activities within the department's mission. But, of course, the
defense programs actually generated most of this waste years
and years ago, so they actually know where it came from and how
to deal with it.
And so the synergies that we found by coming under Mr.
D'Agostino, the Under Secretary of Nuclear Security and the
Administrator of NNSA, it has really made some things much
easier for us bureaucratically inside the building. We can go
to him and talk to him about issues. He has a complete
understanding of the technical nature of the issues. He has a
relationship with the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board,
so if we have Defense Board issues--and he is working through
Defense Board issues with NNSA. We are working through some
with EM. There is a common understanding of the terms and the
issues. So we are looking for opportunities all the time to
benefit from the fact that we are under the Under Secretary of
Nuclear Security, and indeed we found some.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Simpson. Mr. Huizenga, I
would like to have a greater degree of comfort relative to the
safety culture. Did the Department pay the contractor to do its
own assessment of some of the problems at the Waste Treatment
Plant?
Mr. Huizenga. We did pay for the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is that a common practice?
Mr. Huizenga. It is in the contract fundamentally that if
there are issues that need to be addressed, we will pay for
things like this Independent Review.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And last November that was done, and
then they reached a conclusion which seems to be somewhat
different than Mr. Podonsky's.
Mr. Huizenga. I think it is different. I think that Mr.
Podonsky, as he pointed out, there was kind of a gradation
between the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board's findings,
the chilled atmosphere, the independent review by the
contractor who, I guess, did not find as chilled an atmosphere,
but also found that there was a common issue----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am not impugning anybody--I just
wanted to hear how independent it could be if----
Mr. Huizenga. Well, they selected people with a reputation
for knowing their business and working in the field for many,
many years, and we met with them.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So would your conclusion be different
than Mr. Podonsky's?
Mr. Huizenga. No. I think, basically, what I am trying to
say is that, in the end, although each of the reports had
slightly different views on things, they all pointed out that
there are issues that need to be addressed, that there are
safety culture issues at hand that indeed we have to
acknowledge and work to try to improve, and that is indeed what
we are doing.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, I am sure you are doing it. What
is your take on this, Mr. Podonsky?
Mr. Podonsky. Well, I do not refer to the BNI review as
independent because I do not see it as independent because it
was done for the contractor by the contractor, regardless of
where the funds came from. And I am not here to impugn their
efforts. I am well aware of all the people that served on that
panel. They are very distinguished qualified people. But again,
at the risk of sounding self-indulging, we used a process that
was very structured.
And we learned from our first inspection to bring in
external expertise in the area of safety culture so that we
could actually get to understand what the workers were really
feeling. Because, again, if I might, when we first went out and
we conducted our interviews, there was some artificialities in
those interviews that were unintentional. But when you put a
lot of people in a room together, they are not always going to
open up. The venue does not allow for it. But the focus groups
that we did in the second group, or second inspection, we had
peers talking to one another, and we did 37 of these and they
were anywhere from 5 to 10 employees each. We had over 250
people we talked to.
And the point I am trying to make, in our review that we
ended up with, is we ended up with understanding exactly what
the workers were saying and not our interpretation of what the
workers were saying. So I think, in the end now, EM and the
department I think get the picture of how pervasive the problem
is.
Mr. Huizenga. If I may, Mr. Chairman, just for a
clarification point. I mean, I think the bottom line is, I went
out with Glenn to Hanford when he briefed out the results of
his most recent study.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And may we commend you because Mr.
Podonsky said that you have been out there an extraordinary
number of times.
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah. I am going there again later today. But
the point really, and I think this is important----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If we ever let you out of here.
Mr. Huizenga [continuing]. The contractor who--you know,
you can debate who should pay for the independent review, but
the contractor, and Glenn can substantiate this, said that
Glenn's report trumps all the reports. I mean, they are paying
attention to the findings in Glenn's report to the extent that
their report might not have been as critical as Glenn's. They
have embraced, and so have we, the fact that Glenn had some
findings that need to be addressed.
So they are not minimizing Glenn's report in favor of their
own. We have got to move past that, frankly.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The companies that are involved in these
activities are well-known and well-respected. And the issues
they deal with are extremely complex, to say the least. But we
are dealing with these consent reviews, which I think are
important.
Savannah River has been invoked. Mr. Huizenga, the fiscal
year 2013 budget proposes that the Savannah River site H-Canyon
facility transition to, what is called a modified operations
mode. What are some of the activities that you have planned and
do these include reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, they do. We are going to take some fuel
that we believe is at risk and reprocess it through H-Canyon.
There is some fuel that is being stored at Savannah River site
that cannot be stored for a long time. And we are going to
process that fuel over the next year or year and a half through
the H-Canyon and basically send it to the waste tanks so it
will not be a vulnerability in the future. We are also
partnering in one of the synergies that I mentioned with NNSA.
So our base funding is on the order of about $150 million a
year to keep the H-Canyon in warm standby but not actually
doing much.
If you make an investment of about $20 million you can run
one of the dissolvers. So the NNSA people are pitching in $20
million to run one of the two dissolvers to generate MOX feed.
We are going to use the other dissolver to dissolve this fuel.
We will continue to actually do some repacking of waste to go
to WIPP and the HB line, which is on top of the H-Canyon. We
are going to be continuing to do some R&D to try to purify
plutonium that might also serve as additional feed for the MOX.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So the bottom line is that you are
working with other programs, right----
Mr. Huizenga. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. Offices to identify how to
use the facility as the committee pretty much has directed
throughout the----
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, indeed. And we are working with the
Office of Nuclear Energy as well to look at backend of the fuel
cycle research and development opportunities that they might be
able to use the canyon for.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are glad to hear that. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Huizenga, I
would like to discuss the issue of project management and
design while under construction. The Department has said that
it will no longer begin construction on projects before the
design is complete as part of its efforts to get off the GAO
high-risk list. Yet, this past August, a contractor was allowed
to weld shut the vessel heads where the Department continued
construction and despite existing unresolved design issues. Why
was that decision made and what were the circumstances? Is this
the exception to the new rule or have we gone back to
construction while design is underway?
Mr. Huizenga. Well, we made a decision, for better or
worse, a long time ago on the WTP project to have it be a
design-build project. And of course, the desire is always to
have your design running far enough ahead of your construction
that you do not have such a narrow gap that you run into
issues. This vessel welding is probably one of those areas
where we are narrowing. And the fact of the matter is it was a
management decision to keep moving, making progress. The
vessels were in the shop and the next step was to weld the
heads on. Time will tell whether, in the end, that was a good
management decision because we will be able to place those
vessels on schedule or whether we are going to have to actually
take the tops off the vessels and make some adjustments to the
mixing devices that are inside.
You know, we have got an aggressive testing program that
will go on for the next year or more to test the performance of
those vessels to mix the complicated waste that will come out
of the tanks and be processed in the pretreatment facility. But
at this point, it is a function of the fact that we are moving
along in a design-build mode, and we try ever as we may to not
have these situations where we are creeping up on a decision
before we have all the testing done. But in this instance, and
with the complicated issues of mixing, we are running pretty
close.
Mr. Visclosky. When will we know whether it was the correct
decision or not? When will that determination be made?
Mr. Huizenga. We probably now are not realistically going
to know for about a year.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay.
Mr. Huizenga. But suffice it to say that, you know, this
comes back to one of the safety culture issues. Some people are
concerned that we are going to install those vessels and we
will not know really whether they are actually going to
function safely, and we have got a hold on that.
The vessels are in the shop and they are being stored. They
will not ultimately be installed, because if we are going to
have to actually make some adjustments as a result of our
increased knowledge through the testing program, we are not
going to be able to do it once they are installed, and we
recognize that. So we are going to hold off, complete our
testing, and then be able to install them.
Mr. Visclosky. I appreciate knowing that. Are there any
other circumstances right now where we are close as far as
continuing construction relative to where we are in design, or
because of just the inertia involved whatever may be
structurally, will some of these circumstances still exist
despite the Department's decision to make sure they have
extended design out far enough to avoid this in the future? Are
there others we should be cognizant of?
Mr. Huizenga. There are other issues associated with piping
and other vessel issues. And as a matter of fact, we,
recognizing that this is an important area and we need to get
it right, we have just recently issued direction to the
contractor to demonstrate to us that some of these things that
are questionable are actually completely consistent with our
design margins. So we are actively engaged in this discussion
with the contractor.
Mr. Visclosky. If you could, for the record, provide a list
of the major circumstances where this exists? Because again, I
am concerned that, given past culture, we are going to design
before we construct. But that is what we have been saying for
20 years out here, to again make sure that the contractor
understands. This is a different day.
Mr. Huizenga. We certainly----
Mr. Visclosky. I have been on this subcommittee through
three administrations. And from my perspective, it has been a
bipartisan failure with the Department that we continue to be
on this high-risk list. And we are in the third year of the
administration and I would hope people, if we are serious about
it, know the culture is changing on that aspect, too.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. We can provide some stuff for the
record. I would just point out, one of the issues is well-known
to the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board. There are some
questions on potential erosion and corrosion in these vessels.
If the waste itself is particles that are abrasive when you are
shooting them through at high velocity through the pipes and
into the tanks, it can erode some of the stainless steel. So we
are looking at that very aggressively.
[The information follows:]

The two largest line item projects within Environmental
Management's portfolio, the Waste Treatment Plant and Salt Waste
Processing Facility, are both being constructed under design build
contracts. The design maturity of the Salt Waste Processing Facility
has reached a state where there are no instances where the project is
in construction with significant design risks still in existence.
At the Waste Treatment Plant, the project is currently moving from
a design and construction focus, to construction, start-up and
commissioning focus.

Mr. Huizenga. I guess, if you do not mind, if I can just
take a second to address maybe some of the issues that Glenn
was raising. I mean, I am on my way to Hanford for the fourth
time since coming back to EM. I take this very seriously. I
have had two all-hands meetings talking with the people out
there about the importance of safety.
But back to one of the questions that was raised, you know,
is this just rhetoric? And I want to try to explain what we are
doing to institutionalize the fact that safety is important.
And ultimately we are not going to--you know, nobody wants to
run this facility if it cannot be run safely.
So the people that have been raising the issues about
erosion and corrosion for some time now, I have sat down with
them the last time I was out there for two hours and went
through their complex and technical list of questions. And I
think what we are doing, as we are trying to do as Glenn
suggested, to demonstrate that we actually are interested in
understanding the problem.
And again, we might not all ultimately come to the same
conclusion, but we are going to have a transparent discussion
of the issues and communicate back to people, okay, this is how
you feel and why you believe this is--we either agree with
you--as a matter of fact, sometimes we have agreed with people
and have actually gotten back to them and told them that we
agreed with them. So we need to do a better job of tracking the
issues and getting back to people. And that is basically I
think what we are doing to institutionalize the fact that it is
a different day.
Mr. Visclosky. And I would encourage you to continue those
efforts. And, again, just so we can have that list of legacy,
if nothing else. I understand you may have some legacies where
you are close, and there may be extenuating circumstances, but
there ought to be a limited universe, and nobody added to it.
Mr. Huizenga. We do not need to keep doing that, I think is
your point.
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, one other question. On the
Separations Process Research Unit in Schenectady, DOE was
criticized by EPA for a number of failures such as not properly
evaluating whether there was a risk of releasing contamination
into the environment. Do you agree with EPA's criticism or take
exception to it, is the truth somewhere in the middle?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. I mean, it was, again, kind of an
administrative issue that needed to be worked through with EPA
relative to the NESHAP's permit requirements. We have done that
now, we are in agreement now and understand our path forward.
It stemmed, of course, from the initial problems in the fall of
2010, when one of the tanks was pulled out inappropriately and
started to be cut up, and some contamination was released on
the site. So what we are doing now to address that and work
closely with the EPA is we are putting in closures over the two
main structures, the two main cleanup buildings. And we will
have a ventilation system so we will not have a possibility of
having a repeat of the problem we had before.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So why do you need the ventilation
system? Is the contamination such that you----
Mr. Huizenga. There were low--there were relatively low
levels of contamination. But, indeed, there is some
contamination on the pad in these buildings, in one of the
buildings in particular.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is this required by the EPA?
Mr. Huizenga. Ultimately, this was basically thought to be
the best approach.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Mr. Simpson, thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I do not have anything else. I just
was going to ask you how you handle differing professional
opinions, and how you handle whistleblower complaints and that
kind of stuff. Because I handle them as a big deal, and whether
people believe that safety is a big issue and that you are
concerned about their concerns. Understanding that sometimes
people that have different professional opinions or have
concerns about whistleblowers are going to hold to their
opinion no matter what you do sometimes. And being able to at
least say you have addressed them is a big issue, so I
appreciate your previous answer.
Mr. Huizenga. Relative to the differing professional
opinion, this example of erosion/corrosion, that is a
particular area that a gentleman has been concerned about for
some time, and he has been respectfully working through the
system. Ultimately, he filed a DPO. But I think that he
finally--now, he actually forwarded me the letter that he
worked on to forward to the contractor to tell them to address
this issue. So he is seen, he is engaged in seeing action, he
is actually part of resolving the issues that he has raised.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good. I appreciate it, thank you. The
Paducah plant is facing some difficult choices, including a
real possibility of closing down. It is in Richmond. What
happens, do we end up taking it back, or what does that mean?
Mr. Huizenga. Ultimately, I am sure, of course, the Paducah
facilities will come back, just like Portsmouth did and the
facilities at Oak Ridge. The timing is important to us. We hope
that the USEC Corporation can continue to operate the facility
for another year or more as they are also trying to bring the
ACP facility on in Ohio. It is a little unclear right now as to
whether there is a business case for that. And we have been
working actively with them to try to look for ways to continue
to have USEC operate Paducah.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is there any funding in question in the
budget relative to this?
Mr. Huizenga. Not for USEC itself, obviously. We are
working with them on various ways to look for opportunities
to----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But taking the facility back.
Mr. Huizenga. Oh, I am sorry, I misunderstood. No, that is
a pretty clear answer, there is no--we have no money in our
budget to actually take over for USEC in 2013. If they are
unable to continue their operations, we will have to be back up
here talking with you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You invoked in your opening statement
Oak Ridge. The Department has recently proposed an alternative
approach for removing Uranium-233 from Oak Ridge, which would
save a significant amount of funding from the previous plan of
record, which required expensive building modifications to down
blend the materials. You expect savings from the original plan?
And, if so, how much?
Mr. Huizenga. I cannot quantify it, I have to take that for
the record. But I can tell you that, again, this is an area,
when faced with the fact that we have some real financial
constraints, we looked for better solutions, working smarter
not harder. So about half of the material that was at risk in
this building is going to be--some of it will be reused and
shipped to the Nevada site for NNSA to use the material.
[The information follows:]

As a result of the Phase 1 alternatives analysis, documented in
January 2011, the Department decided to pursue direct disposition
(involving either the transfer of valuable U-233 components to other
DOE Programs for additional mission use, or the direct disposal of
eligible components without processing) of approximately half of the U-
233 inventory. For the remaining inventory, decisions are yet to be
finalized regarding the location and detailed plans for required
processing, but will likely remain onsite. The final Draft Phase I
Alternatives Analysis Report screened all of the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL) hot cell facilities for availability and suitability
as potential alternatives to the use of Building 3019 for dissolving
and down blending the remaining inventory to meet waste acceptance,
security, and safety requirements. Buildings 2026 and 3047 were
identified as the two most suitable facilities at ORNL, and both of
these facilities are being further examined in the Phase II analysis.
The Phase I report also suggested that the baseline plan involving
construction of a new annex for drying and packaging the down blended
material could be avoided by co-processing with a larger, existing
waste stream at ORNL that needs to undergo treatment in any case.
While a review draft of the Phase II analysis has not yet been
completed, and no decision has been made, preliminary indications are
that Building 2026 (which is located directly across the road from
Building 3019) is the more attractive alternative due to cost and
safety considerations and also because it has the least potential for
competing programmatic demands. Building 2026 is not currently in use;
the cost of any necessary modifications to Building 2026, as well as
subsequent canister-by-canister processing, is expected to be far less
than the original approach that involved retrofitting of Building 3019
and U-233 processing operations in a high security, high hazard
environment. The Phase II report is also likely to endorse the Phase I
conclusion that after waste is moved from Building 2026, co-processing
down blended material with existing sludges at the Oak Ridge
Transuranic Waste Processing Center (TWPC) is the most cost-effective
and least risky approach for final preparation of an acceptable waste
form to ship offsite.
The final cost savings are expected to be substantial when compared
to the baseline estimate to process all of the remaining U-233
inventory in Building 3019 and a newly constructed an adjacent annex
for drying and packaging.

Mr. Frelinghuysen. This has been going on for years, has it
not?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, it has. But we found there was material
there that actually had a use, I guess is the point I am trying
to make. So, instead of trying to build a facility, a
complicated, expensive facility, to turn something that had a
use into trash and dump it, we are actually going to use it
working with NNSA, or NNSA will use it. So we are transferring
title to NNSA.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So there is a solution in the offing----
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, that----
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. And a timetable of some
sort?
Mr. Huizenga. We have already started shipping some of this
material to the NNSA facility, so we are making steady
progress.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Department has
asked for a large increase for the tank farm activities to
prepare tank waste for reprocessing once WTP is operational,
but we do not have an update from the Department on project
execution for WTP, nor any details on preparations for the tank
farm's needs to be completed. Why should the subcommittee
support financially ramping up the tank farm when there may be
imminent changes to the WTP program?
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah, that is a good question. But I think
what has happened in the past is we had ramped up funding for
WTP, and, frankly, we just recognized now that, ultimately, we
need to have feed for the tank farms come at the right time for
WTP. And we needed to actually beef up the funding and increase
the funding for tank farms to help them, basically, be able to
provide feed when WTP is ready.
Mr. Visclosky. So you are looking for the waste stream for
the stock to catch up to the WTP?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, sir. They are continuing to add
infrastructure and improvements that need to be taken care of.
Those tanks are, of course, many, many years old. They have
characterization activities that are necessary to understand
the nature of the feed that will be fed into WTP. They also
have their own Consent Decree milestones relative to continuing
to empty out the tanks. So they have a number of drivers and
are trying to be responsive to those needs.
Mr. Visclosky. And I did not know as I asked the question,
I guess that is why I am asking the question. I am assuming the
Subcommittee has information as to the time frames for both WTP
and the tank farms, then----
Mr. Huizenga. As to----
Mr. Visclosky [continuing]. So that they will be
coincidental as far as the waste stream?
Mr. Huizenga  [continuing]. Linking those up? If you do
not, I am sure that we would be happy to provide it.
[The information follows:]

The baseline for the Tank Farms Project continues to be aligned
with the baseline for the WTP Project in terms of when waste feed,
secondary waste treatment, and immobilized waste storage will need to
be available. Recently, the project has also initiated a One System
approach that is focused on preparing for the startup and operations of
the WTP under a single manager with staff from both the Tank Farms and
WTP contractors. This approach represents a significant evolution in
focus from design and construction of the WTP to preparations for
commissioning, startup and eventual operations of this facility. This
One System approach will integrate Tank Farms and WTP Project
contractual, schedule, technical and other elements in preparations for
the start of and sustained tank waste treatment operations at Hanford.

Mr. Visclosky. Okay. One other question, if I could, on
baselining of major construction projects. EM has a number of
ongoing construction projects that either are trending behind
schedule or over budget. WTP and the Salt Waste Processing
Facility in Savannah River now require restructuring of their
project execution plans to make up for the delays. What is the
end process for re-baselining these programs and staying in
touch with Congress so that as there is a re-baselining, there
is going to be congressional support for the financing?
Mr. Huizenga. We are going to have to have repeated
dialogue with the WTP over the course of this year. Our
intention is to--the contractor is now developing a proposed
new baseline for our consideration, it will be prepared
sometime in August time frame. And then we will take a look
with our internal review, do an independent cost estimate of
their proposal, and sometime by the end of the year or early
next year, we would hope to have the new baseline in the
contract renegotiated and in place.
On salt waste processing, we ran into some difficulties
with 10 of the vessels, similar to the vessels you mentioned
that we welded the heads on at WTP. They are similar vessels
that will be used in the Salt Waste Processing Facility, and
they are being manufactured more slowly, frankly, than we had
hoped. So we are having to do some pretty significant
workarounds. We are having to keep part of the roof open so we
can lower these vessels in as soon as they are delivered, which
we hope is going to be within the next few weeks. But after the
vessels get in, we are going to have to take a look at the
remaining baseline, and we will have to come back up and
consult with Congress on that, as well.
Mr. Visclosky. May I encourage your efforts on the re-
baselining and getting some resolution, because--and, again,
you and I have not had this conversation, but I have had this
conversation with witnesses over several administrations, and
it would be a relief not to have this conversation again. So I
just encourage you, and whatever we can do, we are at the end
of our rope here and we are serious about this.
The first conversation I had with the Secretary when he was
nominated is, and I am not being facetious here, I do not care
what your energy policy is, but if you cannot manage some of
these major projects and have the taxpayers' money controlled
by Federal employees who are charged with running these, you
are never going to be able to implement your policies. So I
just really encourage, and I have a lot of faith in both of
you, but just anything we can do, because, man, I am tired of
having this conversation.
Mr. Huizenga. I do not blame you, and I would love to not
have this conversation with you, again, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. That may be one reason why you are leaving
town.
Mr. Huizenga. The good news is, at Idaho, we are making the
final preparations to start up the Sodium Bearing Waste
Treatment Facility, one of our major construction projects. And
if things come together as we hope they do, we will start it up
and finish the job by the end of the year as the consent
agreement requires us.
Mr. Visclosky. Work hard and good luck.
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah. I have spent some time with Gene Aloise
shortly after coming to this position to try to understand
GAO's issues and what they have been, what their concerns have
been. So I think that we have--they are institutionalizing the
project reviews, working closely and getting out in the site,
understanding their issues, not letting them fester or be able
to build up and be surprises later on. I think we are making
some steady progress.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Huizenga, you have worn many hats.
Mr. Huizenga. I have.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Did you start with EM and then move over
to NNSA?
Mr. Huizenga. I started at Hanford in 1985 and came to
Washington in 1987 on a three-month detail. But then we worked
together on nonproliferation issues for about a decade when I
was in the former Soviet Union locking up materials.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We hope they are locked up.
Mr. Huizenga. Glenn actually helped us on a couple of
those, as well, sharing lessons learned from his security
experts with our Russian colleagues.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. From those closed nuclear cities, right?
Mr. Huizenga. Uh-huh.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, you said such kind and positive
things about Idaho, I guess that means I have to yield to Mr.
Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. That is all right, I am done.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are done? I do have a question
related to your reductions for protective forces. I know there
is always a balancing act here. Can you talk a little bit about
what that means?
Mr. Huizenga. That, actually, is a good news story, thank
goodness.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And before you leave here, at Defense
hearings, I often pose the question, is there any question that
we did not ask you which you thought we ought to know about? So
when you respond to this, if either of you would like to make
any comments about things that perhaps we have overlooked that
are important that you would like to highlight, we would
welcome that.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, sir. Relative to the security budget and
the safeguard budget, the Department undertook an effort to
harmonize, I think is the word they were using, the approach
between the Defense Department, DOE and NNSA on securing
materials. And we found some areas that we may--Glenn may know
more about this than I do, because he might have been more
directly involved. But the fact of the matter is, we might have
been overprotecting material, which is good, but if you do not
need to, you do not have to spend the money on it. So we found
ways to actually adequately protect material for less cost. So,
in some areas, we reduced the cost, not because we are setting
ourselves up for failure, but because we actually believe we
can do this in a more cost-effective way.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, Mr. Podonsky, you are implementing a
new safety and security reform plan, you are moving in that
direction. How do you view----
Mr. Podonsky. Well, Mr. Chairman, we are looking at how we
can spend limited resources more wisely and more effectively.
And in a post 9-11 environment, when none of us really
understood what was going on 10 years ago, we even had tanks on
top of Hoover Dam, but we did not know what we were dealing
with. And, as Mr. Huizenga has said, we are looking at how do
we save cost but still provide effective security?
And what him and other elements of the Department are doing
in following guidance that is coming out of my organization is
we are looking at what the threat is at our sites, and how we
are protecting it with our physical protection, and can we use
other strategies, can we use technologies? The traditional
guards, gates and guns is not necessarily always the most
effective when we look at the world events today. So the
department, in partnership with DOD, as well as NRC, are
examining what the threats are and how best to protect, and
there are cost savings to be made. I would, if I might----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah, jump in.
Mr. Podonsky. There is one thing that in your opening
statement, Mr. Chairman, you asked how can we do--how can HSS
do our expanded responsibilities with the budget going down?
And I would tell you that we will continue to do our mission
and we are prioritizing our costs so that we can, indeed,
increase our nuclear safety and nuclear security oversight for
the department. Where we are cutting our own budget that the
President gave us and the Congress approved last year and the
one that we are coming into now is we are cutting out programs
that are not adding any value. We are cutting out programs that
are redundant in others areas that we have covered. It is
called being fiscally responsible.
We are not in this business to always ask for more. We are
going to do more with less, because that is what we have to do.
We have a responsibility that came out of language from last
year's Appropriations Bill to have us look at safety
construction in the projects, and we are going to be able to do
that with the plus-up in our oversight, and taking away from
areas like some of our headquarters' security posture that we
have. We are also responsible for headquarters security. We do
not need all the funds that we currently have, and that is why
our budget reflects a $5 million decrease.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We appreciate that effort, that degree
of conscientiousness. Mr. Huizenga, anything further for the
record?
Mr. Huizenga. Well, I looked over my list of questions I
thought you might ask, and you did a pretty good job, so I am
not going to suggest. But if I may, I would just point out, we
submitted a request that was lower than we have for the last
couple years. And we recognize that you have constraints, but
we are right down to the bone now relative to meeting our
compliance agreements, and we are hoping that you are going to
be able to do what you can do support the request. Because I
think we are demonstrating that we are making a difference at
these sites and making a difference for the taxpayers, and we
would like to continue to do that work.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, I thank you both. Before you get
out of Dodge here, I have one question. Mr. Huizenga, this is
the fourth year in a row that the department has attempted to
reauthorize Federal industry contributions into the uranium
enrichment D&D fund as part of its budget request. Why should
this subcommittee go forward now and instruct the domestic
nuclear industry to take on additional obligations?
And, secondly, when do you predict that the fund will be
exhausted, and what work have you done to understand the full
cost of the cleanup efforts? I know that is a rather all-
encompassing way to finish out the hearing here, but we want
to----
Mr. Huizenga. We know, Mr. Chairman, that ultimately this
money, of course, is for the D&D of Portsmouth and Paducah
facilities and the facilities at Oak Ridge that the fund is
short. So that is why we actually are hoping to actually make a
contribution to it again this year. We would request, I think,
20 million more than we are actually hoping to pull out so that
that money can stay in there and earn some interest, and
ultimately benefit us. Relative to the industry's view on this,
I am sure they will have a view and we will have to take that,
you will have to take that into account. But we know we are
going to need more money than is in the fund at this point, so
sooner or later, we would like to try to build it back up.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. All right. Mr. Visclosky, anything
further?
Mr. Visclosky. Nothing, Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you both, and all the people who
worked with you, we appreciate your work. Meeting stands
adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.083

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY--ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY & FOSSIL
ENERGY & OFFICE OF ELECTRICITY DELIVERY AND ENERGY RELIABILITY--
ASSISTANT SECRETARY

WITNESSES

HENRY KELLY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE
ENERGY (ACTING)
PATRICIA HOFFMAN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF ELECTRICITY DELIVERY
AND ENERGY RELIABILITY
CHARLES McCONNELL, ASSISTANT SECRETARY (ACTING), FOSSIL ENERGY
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good morning.
Ms. Hoffman. Morning.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I would like to call this hearing to
order; the Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development meets
this morning to hear testimony on the fiscal year 2013 budget
request for the Department of Energy's research and development
programs for Energy Efficiency, Renewable Energy, Fossil
Energy, and the Electricity Delivery System.
We would like to welcome Henry Kelly, the Acting Assistant
Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Patricia
Hoffman, the Assistant Secretary for Electricity Delivery and
Energy Reliability, and Charles McConnell, Acting Assistant
Secretary for Fossil Energy.
Dr. Kelly. Morning.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good morning. Our country continues to
face the prospect of even higher gasoline prices. While the
public might think that the Department of Energy, and
specifically the programs represented here today might be
responsible for setting this country's energy supplies on a
more secure footing, I suspect they should not expect much
change from a year ago.
We still import nearly two thirds of the oil we use and 96
percent of our trucks, cars, and planes still depend on oil,
while demand is skyrocketing in countries like China and India
for the same energy sources we rely upon, and with much of the
world's oil supply in the hands of those who do not like us, we
must focus on our own backyard and take a look at what should
be made more accessible.
The President makes a strong call in the State of the Union
Speech for the ``all of the above'' energy strategy and I would
like to take him at his word. Unfortunately, his budget request
appears to be more ideologically driven than driven by
practicality. It cuts the very account, fossil energy, which
could have the most immediate impact on the prices at the pump
and electricity.
Nuclear energy, which we considered before this
Subcommittee a few weeks ago, is the other major source for
today's electricity. That same request would cut its budget by
more than 10 percent. At the same time, the request would
increase energy efficiency and renewable energy by 28 percent.
Even the rosiest scenarios for renewable energy predict
only a marginal contribution to job creation coming from this
sector. In other words, the President's budget request would
accept higher prices for gasoline and electricity today in
order to dump hundreds of millions of dollars into energy
sources, which will only provide a marginal amount of power for
years to come. These priorities are raising questions among
members of Congress, and across the country, and many people at
home are rightly upset.
In the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy account, the
Administration is asking for hundreds of millions of dollars to
improve electric vehicles, solar, wind, and energy efficient
technologies, and to increase the sources that we actually
depend on each and every day.
The story for American based manufacturing, a top priority
of mine and I know for my ranking member, is more mixed, while
the cuts to nuclear and fossil energy research and development
would certainly be a setback for American innovation and may
likely continue the flight of companies to less regulated world
markets. The request would more than double funding for
advanced manufacturing research and development within EERE.
Precisely how that funding would be used and to what
advantage is not fully clear in the budget request materials.
And I expect we'll have much time today to explore this this
morning.
I ask that each of you please ensure that the hearing
record, the questions for the record and any supporting
information requested by the Subcommittee are delivered in
final form to the Subcommittee no later than four weeks from
the time you receive them. Members who have additional
questions for the record will have until close of business
tomorrow to provide them to the Subcommittee Office. And at
this point I turn to Mr. Visclosky, the ranking member, for any
comments he wishes to make.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.086

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
understand my statement and its entirety will be entered into
the record. Good morning, Doctor Kelly, Ms. Hoffman, and Mr.
McConnell, and along with the Chairman, thank you very much for
being here today.
The U.S. Energy Sector faces myriad challenges that pose a
persistent threat to our economy, national security, and
environment, cars and trucks of our citizens. The ships,
planes, and tanks of our military rely heavily on petroleum
fuels, much of which is imported from overseas. Power prices
continue to increase and our electricity supplies depend on
energy sources, they give off emissions, and operate on an
aging electric power grid.
Today we consider the budget request for applied R&D
activities at the Department of Energy aimed at addressing the
many difficulties we face. These programs, Energy Efficiency,
Renewable Energy, Fossil Energy, the Office of Electricity
Delivery, and Energy Reliability are all critical.
The budget request for Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy represents a large increase of 30 percent over this
year's level. Doctor Kelly, in this budget setting, I hope that
you have come prepared to discuss how this large increase could
be used efficiently and effectively in pursuit of our energy
independence.
I am particularly interested in your justification for the
large increase to the advanced manufacturing office, formerly
known as the industrial technologies program. I believe that
strengthening American manufacturing and returning to making
things in America is not only the best source of job creation
and economic recovery, it is an imperative.
I am hoping that the Department has a sense of urgency in
this area and can provide details on your plan. The request for
fossil energy represents a reduction of 21 percent from the
program level of 2012. I appreciate and understand the
Administration's belief in renewable energy and that it is its
preferred path towards our future.
While I agree that renewable energy is a necessity, Mr.
McConnell, I hope that you can explain why the reduction in
fossil energy is appropriate at this time. Given that fossil
fuels meet around 83 percent of U.S. energy demand, and I don't
anticipate that is going to significantly change next month or
by this summer, I would like to understand what the Department
is doing to deliver technologies that can provide cleaner, low
carbon electricity generation using domestic sources of coal
and natural gas.
The budget request for the third participant in the
hearing, the Office of Electricity, Delivery, and Energy
Reliability is approximately equal to 2012 levels. Given the
importance of the electricity grid, I would like to understand
how this program will allow the nation to maximize existing
resources and allow the expansion of clear energy generation
through the modernization of the nation's electricity
transmission and distribution system. Mr. Chairman, thank you
for the time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.088

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you; Doctor Kelly. Thank you for
being here and your remarks, in total, will be on the record,
but please proceed.
Dr. Kelly. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman and ranking
members, members of the Committee, for letting me come here and
talk about the fiscal FY13 Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy budget proposal. And----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You may have to move that microphone a
little closer.
Dr. Kelly. All right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Dr. Kelly. Or talk a little louder. In the State of the
Union, as the Chairman mentioned, the President called for an
economy that is built to last and one that is built to support
his commitment to safely and responsibly harness all of
America's energy resources in an all of the above energy
strategy. And renewable energy and energy efficiency are a key
part of that strategy.
So EERE has built its portfolio around three major
challenges. The first is to reduce the nation's dependence on
petroleum based fuels for transportation by developing
affordable fuels from more renewable sources. Vehicles capable
of using electricity, natural gas, and hydrogen, and extremely
efficient conventionally powered vehicles.
Second, we are seeking to diversify and expand the nation's
electricity sources by developing renewable electricity that is
competitive with other sources of electricity without
subsidies.
And finally, to help families, businesses, and government
offices save on their energy bills by optimizing the efficiency
of our homes, buildings, and factories. These goals are central
to a strategy for addressing the nation's energy and
environmental challenges, and meeting them will play a critical
role in spurring the U.S. economic growth and job creation.
The U.S. economy has always depended on innovation. And
clean energy technology supported by the EERE budget will spur
business and job growth in manufacturing and in many other
parts of the economy. And the clean energy market has been
increasing very rapidly and has been a key source of economic
growth in the U.S. and worldwide; its increase almost a factor
of five since 2004. But the global competition is fierce and
retaining America's leadership role will require significant
public and private sector investment in the next generation of
renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency solutions.
Since 2007, EERE investments have resulted in the issuance
of hundreds of patents supporting innovative clean energy
research. EERE investments in clean energy technologies have
played a part in many important commercial successes. For
example, nearly every hybrid electric vehicle sold in the U.S.
uses better technology developed under EERE.
Since 2007, EERE has successfully leveraged $60 million
worth of research investment to secure more than $1.6 billion
of private capital investment. Innovations in wind turbines
developed with the support of EERE at reduced costs and
increased reliability, allowing for 47 gigawatts of installed
wind capacity in the U.S. and 35 percent of all new capacity
installed in the last four years.
Standards issued since 2009 will save consumers hundreds of
billions of dollars in energy costs through 2030. Now EERE
plans to build on these successes by making strategic
investments that compliment those of the private sector. In
FY13, our reviews of opportunities and gaps in the private
investment resulted in a budget in which 60 percent of the
funding is directed towards energy efficiency activities, and
40 percent to renewables.
EERE's FY13 budget request of $2.3 billion emphasizes key
investments in energy solutions and renewable technologies,
where the potential impact is largest and where federal funds
are most critical. To give some examples, the vehicle
technology program will incorporate a new grand challenge to
develop technologies to make electric drive vehicles
competitive and multiple light duty vehicle markets by 2020.
This grand challenge will emphasize the accelerated R&D and
advanced battery technologies, with a major concentration on
better design optimization and innovative battery
manufacturing. Biomass activities will be focused on converting
non food cellulosic feed stocks to hydrocarbons such as jet
fuel, that can be directly substituted for conventional fuels
at competitive prices.
Our photovoltaic SunShot Program is on target to meet our
goal of a dollar a watt installed costs by the end of the
decade. On shore wind, as I said, has been a commercial
success, and we are now going to concentrate on the next
generation of challenges and opportunities, including a new
focus on capturing America's enormous offshore wind resources
at competitive prices.
And because residential and commercial buildings drive our
electricity consumption, something like 70 percent of
electricity goes into buildings, we continue to emphasize
energy efficient products and integrated building systems for
both new construction and for retrofits of existing buildings.
Major emphasis has been placed on the advanced
manufacturing program, which supports the research focused on
innovative energy efficient manufacturing processes and
advanced materials. And these new approaches will reduce energy
consumption and manufacturing cost, making American businesses
more competitive, and they will play a key role in driving down
the costs of all clean energy products.
So in closing today, the U.S. has poised its harnessing
ingenuity of American science, the industriousness of American
workers, and the creativity of American entrepreneurs to help
secure America's future prosperity and global leadership.
This 2012 budget request reflects tough decisions over a
balanced and diverse portfolio, with the understanding that
EERE's technologies will play a critical role in addressing the
nation's urgent energy and environmental challenges. The
Department appreciates the leadership of this Committee and
providing the resources needed to accomplish our shared goal of
creating a secure and efficient clean energy economy, and I
would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.097

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Doctor Kelly. Madame
Secretary, welcome.
Ms. Hoffman. Good morning. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to talk about the President's fiscal
year 2013 budget for the Department of Energy's Office of
Electricity Delivery, and Energy Reliability.
Our office's mission is to lead the national efforts to
modernize the electric grid, enhance the security and
reliability of our nation's infrastructure, and facilitate
recovery from disruptions to energy supply. This is a complex
and crucial mission that involves action on a number of fronts,
including research and development of new technologies, cyber
security, policy coordination and implementation, and energy
assurance.
Our fiscal year 2013 budget request is $143 million, a
three percent increase over the fiscal year 2012
appropriations. This request will keep us moving strategically
and steadily towards a more reliable, flexible, efficient, and
resilient grid.
To begin my discussion of our 2013 activities, I would like
to highlight several areas of the budget request that we see as
critical to the success of our mission. First, we are proposing
establishing a new electricity systems hub that will bring
together experts to solve system level challenges of grid
modernization.
The nation's electric grid is a complicated system that is
evolving. Now it is time to tackle some of the critical issues
and barriers associated with integrating, coordinating, and
facilitating the numerous changes that are happening system
wide. These changes include the addition of renewable energy
resources, like wind, fluctuations of load, and the growing use
of digital communications and controlled technologies.
Given the regional nature of many of these conditions and
needs effecting the grid, such as electricity use patterns,
generation sources, energy policies and regulations, we are
proposing to establishing two to three regional hubs, which may
be the best way to address both the unique demands of each
region, and the commonality shared at the national level.
Therefore, the President's request includes a $20 million
request for the establishment of these regional centers,
consistent with the quadrennial technology review. Another
priority is cyber security; there are numerous challenges with
protecting the grid from cyber attack. Most cyber security
solutions are developed for desktop information technology
systems or IT systems, and these are not designed to meet the
unique requirements of the energy delivery system.
Another challenge is protecting the legacy devices that
were installed before cyber security became an issue. We
continue to be active in this area, as seen by our recent risk
management maturity model initiative, which will provide a tool
that allows electric utilities and grid operators to assess
their own cyber strength and weaknesses and prioritize
investments.
The release of risk management process guidelines provides
a consistent, repeatable, adaptable process for the electric
sector. Our roadmap to achieve energy delivery system cyber
security, which was released last September, provides a
strategic direction of goals for public private partnership
activities over the next 10 years.
We are also involved in other efforts such as facilitating
timely sharing of actionable information. The 2013 budget also
includes a continued investment of $30 million to support the
development of a wide range of next generation cyber security
technologies.
Another priority is advanced modeling of the electric grid.
Our 2013 budget request provides $10 million for advanced
modeling grid research to focus on accelerating the performance
and predictive capability of operational systems, which uses
real time data from the increasing number of sensors built out
nationwide, with the Recovery Act funding.
Researchers will develop computational mathematical
understanding needed to transform the tools and algorithms that
underpin the electric systems planning and operation, and
applying new scientific insights in advanced computation to
grid data.
This work will involve collaboration with the Office of
Science and universities, and will lay the foundation for the
next generation computational modeling programs for the private
sector. We will continue funding the permitting, citing, and
analysis program that will provide technical assistance to the
states and regions on the electricity policies and programs.
As utilities have increased their investment in next
generation energy technologies, we have seen an increase in the
number of requests from states' electricity officials for
technical assistance on topics such as repairs for energy
efficiency, and demand response from renewable energy.
Our 2013 budget also provides continued support for the
infrastructure security and energy restoration programs work,
enhancing the security and resilience of the nation's critical
energy infrastructure and facilitating disruptions from the
energy supply. As the lead sector specific agency for the
energy sector, we closely monitor and assess the potential
impacts of events, such as tornadoes, hurricanes, and
geomagnetic disturbances on the electric grid. When a
disruption to the energy infrastructure occurs, we serve as a
focal point for responding and restoration efforts.
Additionally, we have worked closely with other government
agencies in the North American Electric Reliability Corporation
to evaluate and enhance planning and operational practices, to
address potential risks of geomagnetic disturbances, such as
the recent solar storms, on the power system.
The President's all of the above strategy marries today's
need for affordable energy with a modernized electric
infrastructure that will build a stronger future. Our 2013
budget request allows us to continue to follow a steady,
constant, focused path towards grid modernization. This
concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.104

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for your testimony. Mr.
McConnell.
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, Chairman and members. I
appreciate the opportunity to present the Office of Fossil
Energy's proposed budget for fiscal year 2013. The Office of
Fossil Energy's mission is to ensure that we remain able to
utilize our nation's abundant resources of coal, oil, and
natural gas by developing technology based energy options that
enhance the U.S. economy, provide environmental sustainability,
and ensure energy security.
Fossil also manages the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, the
Northeast Home Heating Oil Reserve, and the Naval Petroleum
Reserves.
The FY '13 budget request includes $420.6 million for the
Fossil Energy research and development, which is focused on
advancing technologies for carbon capture, utilization, and
storage, or CCUS.
This is a business driven, not regulatory driven approach
to capture and to utilize CO
2
from fossil
facilities, and through this utilization, to safely and
permanently store or sequester the CO
2
from the
atmosphere. The bulk of this R&D is directed at carbon capture
technology development, CO
2
storage, and utilization
options, as well as CO
2
monitoring, verification,
and accounting, advanced power systems that support CCUS and
cross cutting research.
We are currently developing commercial scale demonstrations
of first generation CCUS technologies, focusing on a range of
carbon capture options. Through our regional carbon
sequestration partnerships, we are also pursuing CO
2

storage in a variety of geologic formations, and the
CO
2
utilization will be accomplished via enhanced
oil recovery, or EOR, in oil bearing formations.
The benefits of EOR are very significant. EOR increases
domestic oil supplies. It creates jobs, improves our balance of
trade, and ensures that CO
2
is safely and
permanently stored. Our mission will ensure that measuring,
monitoring, and verifying the CO
2
in these
formations will be permanent and safe.
Because of CO
2
, EOR's substantial economic
benefits and its potential to catalyze the commercialization of
CCUS technology for the future, EOR must be an important
element of our R&D. With six major CO
2
EOR
demonstration projects underway across the country, we are
moving in that direction.
We're also exploring additional pathways to CO
2

utilization, and our current R&D to lower the cost of carbon
capture for the future is fundamental to this.
So in addition to these first generation technology demos,
we are also concurrently conducting and supporting long term
R&D to develop second generation technologies, to further lower
the cost of CO
2
separation, and enable the
utilization and low cost sequestration for the future. Our oil
and natural gas technologies budget includes $12 million for
oil and natural gas technology R&D, centering on the
sustainable development of unconventional oil and natural gas.
This request also has $5 million for methane hydrates. Efforts
in FY '13 will focus on continuing collaborative R&D with the
EPA, the DOI, and the U.S. Geological Survey to minimize the
potential impacts and to ensure the sustainability of shale gas
through fracking.
This is in alignment with the recommendations of the
Secretary of Energy Advisory Board Subcommittee which called
for improved safety and environmental performance of fracking
in shale gas formations. And we are currently developing a
joint MOU amongst those agencies to ensure interagency
alignment and collaboration.
The FY '13 request also includes $10.1 million for the
Northeast Oil Home Heating Reserve, which provides the
Northeast with a 10 day supply buffer against disruption in
heating oil supplies. The reserve's stock now is comprised
exclusively of low sulphur heating oil, and it provides for
storage and operation of a one million barrel reserve. This
request also includes a $6 million rescission of prior year
funds.
The FY '13 budget also includes $195.6 million for the
management, operation, and security of the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. The SPR has a capacity of 727 million barrels to
protect our nation against disruption in U.S. oil supplies, and
it also allows the U.S. to meet its IEA obligation to maintain
emergency oil stocks.
Key projects for the upcoming year at the SPR include
moving the degasification plant, pursuing a capacity
maintenance program, cavern volume creep, and cavern
remediation.
Finally in FY '13, the SPR will initiate plans to
repurchase oil sold in the IEA's 2011 Libya Collective Action,
using the remaining proceeds from that sale.
The Office of Fossil Energy is committed to developing the
science and technology that allow the nation to fully utilize
its abundant fossil energy resources in an environmentally and
economically sustainable manner. The FY '13 budget request will
be supportive of DOE's goals to address issues of energy
security and environmental security and sustainability. Thank
you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.112

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, Mr. McConnell, we could hear you
loud and clear. I am not sure you need that microphone. You
better push it away. So it is fine, I thought your statement
was right on target. To Dr. Kelly and Mr. McConnell, I know we
often invoke the future. What are each of you doing in your own
way, in your areas of responsibility, to lower gas prices right
now?
Dr. Kelly. Well, we are, of course, an integral part of the
President's all-of-the-above energy policy. The administration
is deeply concerned about the effect that gas prices or
gasoline prices are having on families and businesses around
the country, so we are pursuing things that can----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What sort of things? What are you doing
now that could maybe give us a sense there might be some relief
out there?
Dr. Kelly. Well, in the short term----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And more importantly, how is it
reflected in your budget?
Dr. Kelly. Well, our budget is, of course, principally an
R&D budget.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I realize that.
Dr. Kelly. And so we are looking at things that have--the
things that are paying off now are things that we have invested
in in the past. We have lots of things coming out of the
pipeline all the time. One of the things that we are doing is--
--
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is there anything you have done in your
recent history that is reflected in the price of gas and its
production now?
Dr. Kelly. Well, we have a successful biofuels program that
has--roughly 10 percent of the gasoline sold in the U.S. is now
ethanol based. We are now moving toward cellulosic ethanol at a
very rapid rate. We think we will have a competitive product
there. We have done a lot of work on material for vehicles that
have helped lower the weight of vehicles. And the very large
gain in fuel economy that has been proposed in the recent fuel
economy standards are made possible at least to some extent by
the technology that we have developed to lower the weight of
vehicles, and to make engines more efficient, and, of course,
now to move towards electrification.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. In your position, I assume people often
come to you to get your opinion on an issue which is pretty
critical to our constituents, how do we lower gasoline prices
now. How would you react to that? How do we do that? I am going
to ask the same thing to Mr. McConnell.
Dr. Kelly. Well, there is not a----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We understand, obviously, we have got
the possibility of the Strait through Hormuz and things that
have happened in the Gulf that shut down production, but is
there anything specific that you would like to suggest that
would help us reduce gasoline prices?
Dr. Kelly. Well, the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. In the short term.
Dr. Kelly. In the short term, you know, again, our
operation is an R&D operation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah.
Dr. Kelly. So the impact we have had is based on
initiatives that we have funded in the past. And I think we
have had a significant impact on making fuel economy more
efficient, making it possible to introduce alternatives to
petroleum very rapidly here in the next 10 years. To me, the
thing that we need to do is to have a sustained, predictable,
and very efficient investment in R&D and moving these
technologies out as soon as we possibly can, doing it in
partnership with industry.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And in terms of gasoline production, is
that reflected in your budget?
Dr. Kelly. That would be within the Fossil Energy Office.
What we are doing is looking at ways of using electricity as a
fuel, natural gas as a fuel, and, of course, biological
resources as a fuel.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. McConnell.
Mr. McConnell. I believe a large part of current gasoline
prices is concern about overseas speculation and a lot of
concern about energy security. A big part of what we have
focused our efforts on and really begun to launch is this whole
concept of utilization of carbon dioxide in carbon capture
utilization and storage. The concept of being able to take
advantage of domestic oil supplies that we have here in this
country through the utilization of CO
2
and enhanced
oil recovery will go a long way toward improving our energy
security, as well as creating jobs and other benefits
associated with it, and not losing our mission of also
permanently and safety storing CO
2
from coal fired,
oil fired, natural gas fired power plants and commercial
industrial facilities. That is one part of the mission that we
have shifted. And I think to the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If we were to give you $50 million to
add to your portfolio, what would you do with those dollars to
address the current high prices of gas? Could you do anything
with those dollars?
Mr. McConnell. Well, sir, I suppose if you asked me as a
person if I had more in my checkbook at home to do more for my
family or my neighbors or my church, I would tell you yes. And
there are things that we have in our portfolio that are very
important and we are enthused about. And if you are asking me
if I could do more if I had more, yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am asking you--you have a position,
and, you know, you have a responsibility. If we were to add $50
million to your operation to address an immediate issue, how
would you spend the money?
Mr. McConnell. I would not change anything in our portfolio
in terms of what we are doing. The activities, and the amount
of demonstrations, and the continuation of the mission that we
are on is strategically correct. And I believe that if we
continue on that mission, we will go a long way toward
addressing your question, as well as all of the questions
associated with the all the above strategy. So strategically, I
would not change anything. But if you are asking me if I could
do more if I had more, surely I could.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So if we were to give you money, there
would--nothing you could do in the short haul to address
lowering gas prices?
Mr. McConnell. The short haul that you are referring to
would be the strategic alignment of what we have in our
department today, which I believe, in the short and long run,
goes a long way toward improving our energy security and our
supply of oil, natural gas, and the generation capacities that
we have in fossil.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Doctor Kelly, the
Committee has been concerned over the multi-year grants that
had become common in the Department's Energy and Science
Offices. The practice not only inhibits programs from adapting
to new technology and market conditions, but it also promises,
most importantly to the Subcommittee, future money that your
programs simply do not know will be appropriated.
To address the issue, in the fiscal year 2012
Appropriations Conference Report that was signed in the law,
there was direction for the Department to transition away from
these types of grants. The Department, in late February,
announced a grant opportunity to lower the cost of solar energy
called Bridging Research Interactions through Collaborative
Development Grants in Energy. The grant announcement promises
$9 million in grants, but the Congress has not yet appropriated
$6 million of those.
In March, the Department issued a press release entitled
Energy Department Announces $180 million for Ambitious, New
Initiative to Deploy U.S. Offshore Wind Projects. Another March
release said that offshore wind gets $180 million boost from
DOE.
The problem is that only $20 million of that $180 million
is actually available, and the rest depends on appropriated
funds in future years. How and why was it decided to highlight
these two programs with monies that have not been appropriated
to the department?
Dr. Kelly. Well, we, of course, read the Committee report
and take it very seriously and are in the process of
transitioning to a system where we are going to be fully
funding many--a much larger fraction of our program. The
Committee report also did recognize that there were some areas
where multi year funding was going to be essential. And we
fully informed the Committee of our intention certainly on the
offshore wind project. We are not going to be able to make the
full transition in one year, but we are certainly moving as
quickly as we can. Each program has a slightly different set of
subprograms. But in terms of the offshore wind, we communicated
fully with the Committee--certainly at the staff level.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Would the gentleman----
Mr. Visclosky. Absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You know, last August you announced some
sort of a biofuels initiative, is that right?
Dr. Kelly. With the Department of the Navy.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. With the Department of the Navy, yeah.
These sorts of announcements raise expectations here. We have
to pay the bill here. You have not raised our expectations in
terms of what the Department of Energy is doing relative to
maybe some immediate issues like gas prices, but you seem to be
coming out of a panic pretty quickly to sort of announce new
programs without, shall we say checking to see whether we have
the necessary appropriations to meet them. Back to you, Mr.
Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Doctor Kelly, if I could follow up for one
second. If we are short $160 million here on the offshore wind,
and the Department does not get the full request, have the
staff thought about what the configuration of that project will
look like?
Dr. Kelly. Well, the early stages of the project are the
least expensive parts. And, of course, everything that--the
competition makes it very clear that everything is subject to
appropriation. So there are very clear stage gates in this
project, and if funds are not available, we can stop.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. Also, relative to congressional
direction, for the budget request for 2013, there are a number
of initiatives in the budget documents from DOE that state they
were started in fiscal year 2011. The 2013 request includes
funding for the advanced grid modeling research and the
innovative manufacturing initiative.
As you know, in fiscal year 2011, your program was funded
under a full year of continuing resolution that prohibited any
new starts without congressional approval. And I am not aware
that the two initiatives that appear were begun in 2011 as new
starts were ever communicated to the Subcommittee, nor approved
by us. Were these two started in 2011 or am I mistaken?
Dr. Kelly. Well, I think that the grid modeling is a new
program. The innovative manufacturing initiative funding was
issued in 2012. Am I right on that? Yes.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. So I am mistaken. On the grid?
Ms. Hoffman. For the advanced grid modeling, we will be
running a solicitation that should be coming out this year for
the advanced grid modeling activity. The activities that were
related were under the renewables integration and the work from
our transmission reliability part of our organization, looking
at the sensors and the analytics around visualization.
So we have existing activities that were funded under our
transmission reliability line that were looking at sensors and
how we will visualize system impacts.
But for the grid modeling activities, those activities will
be funded by a solicitation that will be released this year.
Mr. Visclosky. So, Ms. Hoffman, you are suggesting that the
advanced grid modeling research was not begun in 2011?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes.
Mr. Visclosky. And, Doctor Kelly, you are saying that the
innovative manufacturing initiative was not begun in '11?
Dr. Kelly. No. The solicitation was issued in 2012.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I am done for now.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Womack.
Dr. Kelly. It did use 2011 funds.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So it does represent a new start? You
started something without giving us a heads up, is that----
Dr. Kelly. Well, we issued this thing in 2012, and we are
trying to use the funds available from previous years.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thanks to the panel
here this morning. In all three cases I want to thank you
personally for the splendid cooperation you give me and my
staff on these very important matters. I want to read a couple
of snippets out of this morning's Wall Street Journal which
will form the basis of a lot of my questions this morning.
And the headline says, Steel Finds Shale Sweet Spot. I
don't know that you have seen the article, but let me just read
a couple of snippets. Production for so-called tubular goods
used for pipes, tubes, and joints in gas drilling has doubled
in two years at U.S. Steel. With prices of natural gas down
more than 35 percent to 2.21 a gallon, a pretty significant
number when compared to a lot of our overseas competitors.
And after posting losses in the last three years, the
company stock price, and in the interest of disclosure, I am
not a stockholder, I am only reading, is up 13 percent in the
last 3 weeks. And then the price of natural gas, down 35
percent in America, 2.21 a gallon, in Europe it is 11.25 and in
Japan, nearly $16. Now help me out, Doctor Kelly. We have a
crisis on our hands right now. An absolute crisis, and people
in my district and across America are going to the pump and
more and more of their discretionary income is being taken up
by higher and higher gas prices.
The numbers and the basis of this article that I quote this
morning, relates basically to stationary power for U.S. Steel.
But with these kinds of price differentiations, if that is the
word, it seems to me that we are missing an opportunity to
harness an energy source. And I will come back to Mr. McConnell
later about what the numbers suggest in so far as our long-term
capacity.
But with these kinds of prices and this kind of supply
availability, what is your vision for how natural gas fits in
to the overall, all of the above strategy that this president
seems to want to champion?
Dr. Kelly. Well, it certainly is fortunate that we have
this resource. And again, we certainly share your sense of
urgency about trying to make sure that transportation fuel
stays as low as it possibly can. This metro gas is in fact a
key element of this. We have discussed--well one of the things
that is interesting of course is that we have been putting a
lot of emphasis into domestic drilling and U.S. oil production
is the highest it has been in eight years.
And in fact, imports is the lowest that they have been in
12 years. So we have been pushing very hard on this.
Mr. Womack. But we could do more.
Dr. Kelly. Yes, we could do a lot more.
Mr. Womack. So much more.
Dr. Kelly. So natural gas in transportation specifically,
it certainly seems to make sense for heavy trucks. One of the
things that we have been wrestling with is what the federal
government can do to help, because the private sector, given
those price differentials you have been talking about, has been
very active. We know technically how to use natural gas in
trucks and cars, so there is not really an R&D issue here.
It is purely a matter of getting the infrastructure in
place. So I would say that what is going to happen fastest is
that you are going to see truck fleet vehicles, fleet vehicles
like taxis, and heavy trucks move towards natural gas quite
quickly. But the natural gas is a wonderful addition for easy
and expanded use of renewables because you can turn it on and
off very quickly. So natural gas powered electricity generation
and renewables is a nice combination.
Mr. Womack. Well, if I remember in the budget correctly, we
have only allocated in this overall budget, Mr. Chairman, about
$12 to $15 million toward this natural gas phenomenon. And I
want to say, and Mr. McConnell you correct me if I am wrong, I
want to say most of that money is dedicated toward insuring
that fracking is environmentally friendly. Is that----
Mr. McConnell. That is correct.
Mr. Womack. Is that pretty accurate?
Mr. McConnell. Yes it is.
Mr. Womack. Okay. Now I have done a lot of budgeting in a
previous lifetime, and usually you could look at someone's
budget and get a clear idea of what their vision is. And in
this budget, I do not get a clear idea that the vision is to
harness this resource against the backdrop of our competitors
overseas who do not have this capacity.
We do, and it is an incredible resource. And it is not just
in my district, but it is all over this country. And I would
like to know, what is our capacity long-term? What are the
current projections as to how much gas there is, and if we were
able to successfully harness it and make it important in both
stationary and transportation power, how long could we sustain
with available resources?
Mr. McConnell. Well I would not do justice to the answer to
your question with a projection. I could give you some ideas in
terms of what is currently known today. And then there is
another whole region of geologies that have not yet been
explored and that potentially the proving of those additional
reserves might answer your question quite a bit differently.
What I can say, is that I have heard the word fortunate
used several times this morning about natural gas prices, and I
think it is a combination of fortune, but it is also largely to
do with the funding that the Department of Energy has had even
back into the '70's when fracking was originally developed as a
technology at The National Energy Technology Laboratory. And I
could have sat here five years ago and everybody would have
been certain that natural gas would have been $13 or higher
here in the United States for the next 20 years.
And then this technology that had been developed in the
'70's came about and we are in an incredibly fortunate position
today. And that is through largely a lot of the development
work that the DOE did along with industry. In terms of the
future, the other thing we all know is, is it is a bad deal in
energy to bet on any one thing. And having a portfolio for the
future is incredibly important.
And so it is important that we continue to harness natural
gas as you have described. I believe it is also important to
continue to focus on ways to improve and help our domestic oil
production and oil supplies. But in terms of the rest of our
portfolio, renewable power, solar, wind, all of the things that
we have in our portfolio, it is incredibly important for the
future for anybody doing business planning to have a portfolio
approach.
Mr. Womack. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I have got one more
question, and I am going to give this question to Doctor
Majumdar when he comes in on ARPA-E, because I think it has got
an ARPA-E component to it because of the risk involved. And I
am going to throw this out on the table and any three of you,
if you would like to comment, fine. If not, it is just in my
mind. I know why the discerning public, using a normal gas-
powered engine, cannot fill up, if you will, at home. I get all
of that. That is loaded with complications.
But we are talking about electrification where you plug in
a car at home and power it up so that you can get a certain
amount of mileage around town. But I have got natural gas at my
house. Is it possible with a little bit of investment, maybe in
the ARPA-E area going forward, is it possible that we could
develop the type of cylinder, if you will, that you could drive
home at night, or I could drive into Mr. McConnell's
neighborhood and knock on his door and say, hey I am running a
little bit low, can I gas up here? Then we might have solved
the infrastructure problem. So is that crazy?
Dr. Kelly. Actually, it is not crazy. It may be difficult,
but it is certainly something that we have been looking at. And
one of the dilemmas on putting natural gas in cars, is
getting--as you said, getting the tank in. We have been working
with ARPA-E on trying to find ways to make a pressurized tank
that looks more like a conventional gasoline tank.
And some of these advanced materials that we have got like
carbon fiber, will let you make more complicated shapes so you
are not stuck with these big cylinders. Safety and other issues
associated with actually letting people charge at home is
challenging, but it is certainly not to say that it is
impossible, and we are definitely looking at it.
Ms. Hoffman. I definitely think from the electric vehicle
side, it is possible and folks are looking and doing--plug-in
hybrids at home and looking at plugging and charging the car.
The greatest opportunity is giving consumers that choice of
what fuels, and being able to decide what fuels are most cost
effective for them to use as they run their vehicle on a daily
basis.
Mr. McConnell. And I will go back the previous question
that you--or comment that you raised. I think that
environmental sustainability in the fracking industry today is
not mutually exclusive from the ability to harness that energy
supply for the future and make sure that people in
neighborhoods and people down the street can live in an
environment with fracking that is occurring.
And so a big part of our focus will be that sustainable and
environmentally correct manner in which we are able to get
natural gas and be able to enjoy that abundant resource that
you have referred to.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Womack. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number of
questions and I do not know what order to do them in. Let me
start with you, Mr. McConnell. It has been a number of years--I
am now in my 20th year of Congress, I am convinced that at
least for the last 10 years, we have been talking about carbon
capture, sequestration, and such. And yet, I have no real sense
of what the progress has been.
Now you spoke in rather general terms about carbon capture,
separation. You used sequestration and utilization. I think
there were really three functions among those terms. One
capture, one which must include some separation, and then
sequestration and how you store it, and then you also used
utilization. And you said, I think, that there were options in
which your office is involved for each of those, if I may use
capture and storage and utilization as terms that I understand
best.
Is there a plan for the research that is going on in your
department that lays out what those options are and what the
stages are of the research? So that sort of summarizes what the
status of the research is in each of these areas, because each
one of the options that you have--if you have five different
options for capture in the first place, then each one of those
might be used in one or more of the utilization modes that you
are talking about, and also of the intermediate mode of
separation, sequestrations, storage.
So is there some kind of a broad roadmap that one can see
as to where those things are? I would love to see how much
money we have spent on each of those and which ones seem to
have the best prospects for the future. Now I do not expect you
to be able to give me much of an answer other than is there
such a plan and is it possible to see such a document that
would show those factors?
Mr. McConnell. Well, let me try to give you a halfway
decent answer, if I could. I think any of us sitting here, 5-10
years ago, as a lot of the development went on in CCS, Carbon
Capture and Sequestration, anticipation of climate legislation,
etcetera, driving industry and many in industry concerned about
sequestration of CO
2
from the atmosphere.
And as we sit here today, the absence of that legislation
has caused us to look into other areas of CO
2

capture and sequestration and pursuing business-based
opportunities to actually utilize that CO
2
in the
sequestration. That is really the strategy that we have moved
to and begun to shift to.
To answer your question, yes, there is a large portfolio of
carbon capture technologies that is being explored in
industrial applications, whether it is for stationary power,
industrial applications, manufacturing facilities. All of these
opportunities for us to bring in second generation and third
generation technology through the R&D development to be able to
lower the cost of CO
2
separation, and ultimately to
be able to utilize that CO
2
.
Just to digress just a little bit, the enhanced oil
recovery industry has for years, utilized CO
2
. But
in today's environment, there is not enough CO
2
to
continue to develop this industry at the pace in which it could
make a meaningful impact to our domestic oil supplies. So now
we have a business opportunity to drive forward in terms of
developing this carbon capture technology for the future, for
the purposes of not just enhanced oil recovery, but in the
process of doing so, also to safely and permanently store this
CO
2
through a process such as this.
Mr. Olver. Well that is what I am looking for. I am trying
to find out whether you have some sense of where we are in the
sequence of how much research and development is required
before there is a commercial end product that one can use in
any of these. And I do not see how these options in capture and
in storage and in utilization fit together at all.
Mr. McConnell. Well in fact sir, what will be occurring--
over the next several years, we are in the process of
developing and actually constructing several of the large
scale, commercial scale facilities that have been funded and we
anticipate starting up those facilities by the 2014-2015
timeframe.
Mr. Olver. How much money has been appropriated already to
do this?
Mr. McConnell. There was over $3.4 billion of----
Mr. Olver. How much of that has been expended?
Mr. McConnell. A small portion of it. As many of these
projects in the stage gates that they are in are in the
development stages. And so the ordering of the equipment, the
installation of that equipment, and the purchases, we will see
a large amount of that funding actually being spent over the
next two to three years.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. John, if we could go to Mr. Nunnelee in
a minute, please.
Mr. Olver. Let me--if I can write out a question properly
that you can answer in detail, that would be great, with
documentation. And I will try to do that. Let me just say that
you mentioned at one point the issue of methane clathrates.
Well there is an enormous amount of methane clathrates in deep
waters and in the permafrost.
And there is so much and methane is so critical as a very
strong greenhouse gas, that that one really deserves a lot of
attention, but I do not think any--very much at all has been
given to it yet. So let me just leave it at that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Olver. Mr. Nunnelee,
thank you for your patience.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. McConnell, you
oversee the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Just give me an
overview. What is the function of that? And tell me how you
manage the deposits and withdrawals of the SPR.
Mr. McConnell. Several years ago, the United States made a
commitment to the IEA to participate in a global capability for
oil storage for the purposes of international disruption,
whether they are weather-related, wars, disruptions as such.
The United States maintains roughly half of the global supply
of crude oil for those interruptions and we operate four sites
along the Gulf Coast in Texas and Louisiana, where we utilize
underground, large, salt dome cavern storage of crude oil. We
have a nameplate capacity of 727 million barrels of oil, which
is roughly 90 days of supply here in the United States for
imported oil. And that is part of the responsibility that we
have undertaken as a nation to the International Energy Agency.
It is a responsibility that we have. Our department funds and
oversees the day-to-day O and M, Operations and Maintenance of
that facility, and projects associated with it, to keep it in a
ready-to-run and safe and in a sustainable position so that
when policy decisions are made to release oil or bring oil in,
et cetera, we make sure it is ready to go and safely done.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right, and you released 31 million
barrels last year. Is that right?
Mr. McConnell. Thirty, yes, sir.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thirty, all right. And I keep hearing that
you are considering releasing more this year. Is that something
that is being considered?
Mr. McConnell. It is being considered and our job at Fossil
Energy is to ensure that if the decision is made, we will be
ready to respond and if the decision is something different, we
will be responsive to that, as well. And, so, our job at Fossil
is really to have all of the facilities in a ready-to-go
condition and safely operated.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right, so, if it is being considered,
what is the triggering emergency that is causing it to be
considered?
Mr. McConnell. Well, that could be anything. This past
summer, of course, the Libyan Crisis generated an international
response to the IEA that the United States responded to as part
of an international reaction to that activity. As things move
forward, those policy decisions and determinations are not made
at Fossil Energy, but, certainly, we have a responsibility to
be ready to respond however they are.
Mr. Nunnelee. Okay. And then the 30 million that was
released last year, has that been replenished?
Mr. McConnell. No, sir, it has not. That money has been set
aside and there is a repurchasing plan in place between 2013
and 2017 where that oil, over time, will be replaced, but we
continue to maintain the caverns and the capabilities of that
remaining oil to be able to respond. So, just roughly, rather
than having 90 days of supply, today, we have approximately 80
days of supply.
Mr. Nunnelee. Okay, so, the release last year lowered our
availability by 10 days.
Mr. McConnell. Yes, it did.
Mr. Nunnelee. Or roughly 11 percent.
Mr. McConnell. That and a combination of several other
maintenance and project-related activity, today, we sit at
approximately 81 days of capacity, yes, sir.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right.
Mr. Chair, I will yield back at this point and go the next
round.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay, thank you, Mr. Nunnelee.
Dr. Kelly, I want to just get back to one issue that I
mentioned a few minutes ago. And grants from your Department of
Energy Supply and Research Program I think we know when you
make announcements, can affect nationwide markets. And I want
to talk about that August 16 press release, where you touted
the $510 million program, which includes $170 million for the
Department of Energy to build jet biofuel refineries. This
practice of putting out press releases when there is no funding
attached to it, how do you explain why you do that?
Dr. Kelly. Well, this was a Memorandum of Understanding
between the Navy, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the
Department of Energy, and it was a Statement of Intent to work
together. Obviously, all three agencies had to work with their
appropriations organizations in order to provide that funding.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There was not much enthusiasm on the
Department of Defense side. The Navy was interested in it.
Dr. Kelly. Yes, but----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The committee on which both Mr.
Visclosky and I serve on, Defense Appropriations, did not fully
embrace the purposes for which you were signing that
memorandum.
Dr. Kelly. Well, clearly, the memorandum depends on
appropriated funds and----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes, I know, but I think there is a
potential for affecting markets here, and I think there is a
degree of inappropriateness here, and I think this is something
which registers high on the irritation scale.
My second concern, and I am not sure we heard your last
words, the issue of new starts, you issued on June 24, 2011, a
financial assistance FOA, Funding Opportunity Announcement, for
innovating manufacturing initiatives.
Dr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How does that not constitute a new
start?
Dr. Kelly. Well, it was issued in 2012. Our intention was
to send----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. No, wait, wait. The issue date here is
June 24, 2011.
Dr. Kelly. June 2011. Okay, I was just misinformed in that
case.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well----
Dr. Kelly. Okay, but our intention is to spend FY12 money--
--
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, you spent 2011 money.
Dr. Kelly. No, this----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Fifty million dollars.
Dr. Kelly. If I am understanding this correctly, these IMI
grants have not actually been funded yet. Well, the selections
have been made. I was not aware that there was sensitivity
about using FY11 money on it. If there is, we can sit down and
discuss this with you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, there is some sensitivity. Your
budget calls for $100 million for the IMI and you are going to
tell us a little bit about what it does in a few minutes, and
we are a bit surprised to find out that half of this is to pay
mortgages and awards first made with fiscal year 2011 funds.
So, when Mr. Visclosky asked you was the IMA a new program in
fiscal year 2011, you said no.
Dr. Kelly. I was mistaken about the date when it came out.
But it is certainly going to be funded this year.
Am I getting this right? This is into a detail that--so,
the funding will be FY----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The information we have--
Dr. Kelly. Yes, yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is that you had spent 2011 funds.
Dr. Kelly. I have got to double-check this, but, so far, we
have not spent any----
Ms. Hoffman. The awards----
Dr. Kelly. Yes, the awards are being made and if we are
prohibited from using FY11 funds, we will certainly not use
FY11 funds.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay, Mr. Visclosky?
Mr. Visclosky. Just following-up on the Chairman's remarks
here for a moment, relative to the program with the Navy, I
think his concern is that those types of announcements can also
move markets and lead people to make decisions in anticipation
of events. There was an Energy Trade Journal article dated
January 23, and I am quoting from it: ``To get a commercial
plant in operation, United Airlines and its partners plan to
tap into the $510 million investment that the Departments of
Agriculture and Energy, as well as the U.S. Navy dedicated to
advance to drop in biofuels in August.''
In our earlier discussion, Dr. Kelly, you also referenced
``stage-gates.'' Are those milestones when you use the term?
Dr. Kelly. Yes, they are places where you build certain
performance expectations into these agreements and to say
further funding is dependent on meeting those expectations.
Mr. Visclosky. Are you moving in that direction as far as
your grants and agreements with individuals that use federal
monies?
Dr. Kelly. Yes, absolutely, and we are moving very
aggressively in that direction and also really making sure that
we have very effective program management so that we follow the
progress in each one of these very carefully and make sure that
when they claim that they have made a stage-gate that they
actually have.
The one thing I would like to say on the Navy agreement,
one of the things, that if we are actually going to be getting
drop-in fuels for the Navy, the Navy cannot use ethanol. They
need really a substitute for the jet fuel and for diesel, and
we are trying to find a way to accelerate the introduction of
the fuels. Of course, the airlines need the domestic--there are
a lot of other domestic uses for this. If you can move from an
alcohol fuel to something that is a direct substitute for jet
and diesel, that is a huge breakthrough and we think we are
poised on being able----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Visclosky. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is it financially feasible? And the
question might be asked: Why has the commercial sector not
invested in it themselves or have they?
Dr. Kelly. Well, because of the Recovery Act, we have a
number of commercial and pilot-scale operations underway. We
expect the information from that to allow us to move to a much
larger scale fairly quickly, and that was what this project was
intended to do. It is very risky. One of the things about
energy markets is the uncertainty makes it very difficult for
investors to take very big risks----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, that is all the more reason not to
be announcing things before we really have things nailed down.
Dr. Kelly. Well, it was to demonstrate first of its kind
production of this stuff. It was, in fact, not funding a
commercial operation, it is to invent a commercial operation,
and, so, we are working with USDA on developing new feedstock
supply chains and Navy would be----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We want to make sure, if the gentleman
will yield, that it is financially feasible here.
Dr. Kelly. Yes. Well, we are saying it only makes sense if
it is economically-competitive with conventional supplies of
jet fuel and diesel.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is it?
Dr. Kelly. Not now, but----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It sure is not.
Dr. Kelly. No, it is not, and that is the reason that we
are doing this development work and----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kelly, my sense is historically the department has used
bilateral agreements on these milestones where both parties
would have to agree for a termination. My understanding is you
are going more in a direction with these stage-gates
milestones, that if certain criteria are not met, then
unilaterally, the government can terminate these agreements.
Dr. Kelly. Yes, and this is understood by the recipient at
the beginning that if they do not meet the mark there, we have
to make a tough decision.
Mr. Visclosky. I, for one, appreciate you moving in that
direction and I encourage you.
Dr. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Visclosky. On mechanical insulation, buildings are
responsible for about 40 percent of U.S. energy demand, and in
the Fiscal Year 2012 Appropriations Conference Report, we had
language encouraging the Department to continue working with
the industry relative to the use of mechanical insulation as a
means of energy efficiency and job creation. Currently, the
Industrial Technologies Program has partnered with outside
groups to execute a mechanical insulation campaign.
Besides that campaign, what other plans are there in EERE
to promote energy savings through mechanical insulation?
Dr. Kelly. Well, we have been working with people that help
train people in installing this material. We have several
programs that are encouraging retrofits of existing industrial
facilities in particular to upgrade their plants. There is
something called the Industrial Assessment Centers, which take
teams of engineers and students in to help develop proposals
for small and medium-sized businesses to upgrade their
facilities, and, often, the recommendations will include this
kind of insulation.
Mr. Visclosky. With encouragment in that regard, I just
think many of these issues are unseen by the general public,
but can translate into great energy conservation.
One other question, if I could, Mr. Chairman, for this
round. Dr. Kelly, my question is about waterpower. My
understanding is the fiscal year 2013 request would reduce
funding for research and development in this area by 66
percent. Why?
Dr. Kelly. The reductions are primarily in conventional
hydropower, and we have done a fair amount of work on the
technology of turbines, particularly fish-friendly turbines in
the past. Getting these things used is the most important
activity. So, we are trying to make sure that we are doing work
on identifying where you could upgrade facilities or where you
could put power plants on existing dams that are not powered.
That is much less expensive than doing the research. We are
swinging the pendulum towards marine and hydrokinetics, which
are more of a technology issue, which is, of course, our
comparative advantage. So, we are looking at tides, waves, and
other technologies in the water area.
Mr. Visclosky. For that section of your water power budget,
would that be an increase in funding as far as research
dedicated to it?
Dr. Kelly. I believe it is about equal to last year. I
could look that up and get back to you, but it----
Mr. Visclosky. Yes. Are there other possibilities as far as
inland waterpower besides dams specifically? Because, to be
honest with you, being an accounting major, you never thought
about various types of turbines and lifts and buoys and the
oceans. Makes a lot of sense to me once somebody acknowledges
it. Are there other things people are looking at as far as
inland water systems?
Dr. Kelly. Some of our projects, actually, we have funded
last year looking at things in rivers, canals, and other inland
areas.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. I want to go back to vehicles for a minute. I
will stay away from natural gas. I think I made my point there.
Secretary Hoffman and Dr. Kelly, the budget request puts a
large emphasis on energy storage research and in particular on
batteries. These are important technologies for the energy
sector and could be vital in manufacturing, but there are
significant risks that most advanced batteries invented through
your programs end up being manufactured overseas. So, let us
not forget that while we invented the lithium battery used in
most portable electronics, that most manufacturing for these
projects has been moved offshore in the last several decades.
So, what can you do to ensure that the innovations that we
are developing here in this country lead to manufacturing jobs
here in this country?
Dr. Kelly. Well, thank you. First of all, actually, the
lithium ion battery manufacturing, we are hoping is a success
story. We had almost lost that business completely, but because
of the Recovery Act, we are able to make significant
investments in domestic manufacturing. There is now a very
active lithium ion battery manufacturing enterprise in the U.S.
We are going to have to make sure that we continue to maintain
this and grow it, but the general point you are making is one
that we care about very deeply, that we are frustrated by
seeing American-developed technology ending up creating
production jobs overseas.
There are several things we can do. One is in the case of
clean energy technology to make sure we have a high demand for
it and the president has called for a national clean energy
portfolio standard that would certainly help. We have a 48C tax
incentive that is designed entirely to try to encourage
investment in domestic manufacturing.
And, in our case, we have been trying very hard to work
with industries in a way that would encourage them to build
their prototypes and their first plants here in the United
States. We have something called the Affordable Manufacturing
Initiative that is trying to get production back in the U.S. It
is a place where we had a 40 percent market share a decade ago
and it is now 4 percent. So, we really need to jumpstart
domestic manufacturing in that area.
So, as you may know, there are certain restrictions on what
we can do with intellectual property, but within those
restrictions, we are trying to be as creative as we possibly
can to encourage any of our recipients to produce domestically.
Mr. Womack. Secretary Hoffman.
Ms. Hoffman. And I would echo what Dr. Kelly started for
our activities. We are looking at energy storage system for the
bulk power system. So, we look at flywheels, batteries, flow
batteries, different energy storage in support of the electric
system and we do as much as possible to encourage manufacturing
within the United States, and, of course, that the deployment
of the product is directly related to the electric system
asset.
Mr. Womack. And then my last question is: I have a company
in my district that staff of DoE's have visited in the past,
Arkansas Power Electronics, which I guess part of its genesis
came out of ARPA-E. But it produces a silicon carbide
electronics component used in electric vehicles and it is a
very impressive facility. It is a source of a number of jobs in
my district.
As EERE looks kind of toward the future on the Vehicle
Technologies Program, knowing that I think, if I remember in
the budget correctly, about 40 percent of the Vehicle
Technologies Program was electrification, Where do you see the
silicon carbide component these technology solutions?
Dr. Kelly. So, in the electronic program, obviously,
batteries are the best cost driver and they are a significant
portion of what we are doing, but we are also looking at power
electronics and control systems where these silicon carbide
devices would be very crucial to getting high efficiencies and
low cost and low volume. Of course, we are also looking at
efficient electric motors. But the silicon carbide is also a
key part of our Program because the power electronics
associated with turning the DC, the solar cells, into AC that
we can use goes through an inverter and the inverters would
benefit enormously by the advances in silicon carbide
technology.
Mr. Womack. So, it has a place.
Dr. Kelly. It has many places.
Mr. Womack. Okay. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Womack.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Hoffman, you deal
with the electricity grid, essentially, with General Power and
the quality of the grid. Now just for clarity, conventional
water power would probably be in your portfolio then, I take
it, because we do produce a lot of electricity that generally
goes into the grid through the conventional land-based power
system.
Ms. Hoffman. Actually our efforts are generation technology
neutral. So what we do is actually look at the system to ensure
the system is flexible to accept any form of generation. And
then our goal is actually to look at how do we optimize that
generation portfolio, so we have an efficient system. So
hydropower was originally under the energy efficiency program.
We do not do generation technologies under our portfolio.
Mr. Olver. Okay. All right. I continually get confused as
to who's got what in their portfolio. To you, my sense is that
natural gas fired turbines and coal fired turbines and nuclear
fired turbines, nuclear powered turbines all produce at least
10 percent; 20 percent in the case of nuclear and 50 percent
within coal. And water powered, what is the water power amount
in what presently is our grid electricity?
Dr. Kelly. I will give you the right number but it is in
the order of 8 percent.
Mr. Olver. Eight percent? All right. So that is the fourth
one. At first I did not have the water power component and
should have. But there are at least four major components that
get you to that kind of percentage. Oil is now below that, I
think, by a good deal.
In the case of renewable energy, let me switch over to you,
Dr. Kelly. The major things in renewables seem to be your sea-
based research and development issues in water power. There is
wind. There is solar. There is geothermal. There is biofuel,
but biofuel really is mainly in transportation. That would not
get into grid, particularly. That is not a grid-related issue.
Dr. Kelly. It is a little bit of biopowered----
Mr. Olver. Yes. Well there are a few burners that do that.
But I do not think that we ever expect that the accumulation of
wood burners is going to get up above the one percent. Do all
of those have a potential to produce, all the ones that I have
talked about, have a potential to produce one percent or more
of renewable energy?
Dr. Kelly. Well, absolutely. This is the core of the all-
of-the-above strategy. And of course, the big new contributor
in the last few years is, it has been on-shore wind. Something
like 35 percent of all capacity added in the last three years
has been on-shore.
Mr. Olver. We are above one percent on on-shore wind.
Dr. Kelly. Definitely.
Mr. Olver. We have almost no off-shore wind yet.
Dr. Kelly. Well, we have zero off-shore wind, to be exact.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Well on-shore and off-shore wind are a
little bit like a separation between on-shore water power and
off-shore water power, in a sense. And my real question is sort
of similar to what I asked Mr. McConnell earlier, which is, is
there a document, a planning document--it could be fairly long,
I suppose, that gives a sense of what the expectations might
be, what the status is for the research and development on each
of these programs, and if each of these programs has
significant subprograms that are a significantly different path
in the way you have to function? Some of them might take years
and years and years, and some of them are fairly close. Is
there a document that summarizes that so that one can see what
it is that is in our overall portfolio? What should be in our
minds, or if we were trying to think comprehensively about what
looks to be available in renewable energy?
Dr. Kelly. Yes. Of course, there is the official forecast,
the annual energy outlook by the Energy Information
Administration that has their view of this. We have also done
some internal planning work to say if we succeed in meeting our
technology goals.
Mr. Olver. Well a critical component of that would be, just
where are we now at this stage of commercialization as to what
the cost is per kilowatt hour, or whatever. We sort of know
what it is for coal fired or natural gas fired or nuclear.
Though in the case of nuclear, it is quite a bit of
subsidization so it is a little hard to be certain whether you
are getting it all. Is there something that brings that aspect
in, the cost now and what our prospects for how long it is
going to take to bring that cost down to the level of others?
And does it also include with it a sort of life-cycle costing
program for what one has to think about over a 50-year period,
since most of these facilities are going to last that long? Do
you have a document that would do it?
Dr. Kelly. Well we have the information you need. In fact,
some of it is actually summarized in the budget document. You
will see these curves. And what these curves are doing is
saying, what is the cost of electricity from the technology of
today and what do you have to do to get to the end point, and
how long do we think it will take to get there.
Mr. Olver. The budget is a very long document. I will pass.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are going to pass the baton onto Mr.
Nunnelee, are you?
Dr. Kelly. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Olver. Certainly.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Olver. Mr.
Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Kelly, I
understand you are looking at regulating decorative gas
fireplaces and log sets. Just give me an update on the status
of that rule.
Dr. Kelly. Well we are sort of proud of the way we are
setting rules like this. We have a very open process. We take
comments. We have gotten comments. I believe that this is now a
matter of litigation, so it is a little difficult for me to
talk about it. But all I can do is assure you that the comments
of all parties are being very carefully considered and we are
going to have to wait for the outcome of this litigation.
Mr. Nunnelee. You used the term proud. What does that mean?
What does that imply?
Dr. Kelly. That means that we have a process for setting
standards that is based on the best available data that is
reviewed by experts. It is completely transparent and open. We
get public comment and we have a process of adjudication that
we think has worked very well.
Mr. Nunnelee. I understand your hands are tied if it is in
litigation. I just want you to give me your assurance that you
are working with all parties. I am not sure how you come to the
conclusion that these are heaters, but I will be anxiously
following your progress on that road.
Dr. Kelly. Okay. I know that there are many opinions on
this subject, and they are certainly all being fairly
considered, is the one thing I can assure you.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. Also the 2012 report language
included a commitment to manufacturing from this committee,
including an investment of $12 million for state manufacturing
improvements. And I just want you to give me your assurance
that in FY2012 we are spending $12 million for solid state
manufacturing improvements in your budget.
Dr. Kelly. If you told us to do it, I will assume we are
doing it, but I would prefer to make sure that I double-check
this with our guys.
Mr. Nunnelee. Okay. Can you do that and get back with me?
Dr. Kelly. I will definitely get back to you with it.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. That is all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is good to know what you are doing.
Yes. Thank you. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me apologize for
being late but I had a cyber security briefing having to do
with my other responsibilities on CJS. But I am here and I
thank you for holding this hearing. And I want to thank all of
the witnesses for the extraordinary work that the Department is
doing, even in the face of a political dynamic that is
unfortunate and not really focused on I think the real
challenges, so let me try to set this up.
The European Energy Alliance has just announced in the last
couple of weeks that, based on the efforts of what is being
done here in the United States, that the European Union, in
order to compete economically has to now invest in renewable
energy and energy efficiency. They have set up a series of
goals related to 2030 because they say that, given the emphasis
that has been placed here, it is the only way their industries
are going to be able to compete.
And, you know, I have been around. I have seen the fuel
cell. I was out in New Haven, Connecticut visiting a new
supermarket construction where they are using fuel cell
technology. And, as you know, many new supermarkets are using
fuel cells and they are very energy inefficient, generally. But
now with the fuel cells, they can operate these supermarkets,
which require a lot of energy.
And right in the Philadelphia area, Bloom Energy has now
hired over 1500 people in a plant making fuel cells. UTC is
making fuel cells. All of this is a result of the investments
that you have made. And we have seen the same thing with
industry in terms of trucks, based on investments made.
I went out and visited the Argonne Lab in Chicago, which is
focused on batteries. And I know that these batteries have been
licensed by the Department to the private sector and that they
have a capacity that ranges between 100 and 300 times more than
the normal batteries. So I think that a lot of work has been
done.
I have been a big proponent of the renewable energy sector.
Notwithstanding that, I mean, the Department has been working
this term of art on all of the above, you know, the new nuclear
plants that have now been licensed for the first time in 30
years, and on and on and on.
The politics of this, I cannot figure out. I mean, we are
competing economically with China and the European union and
others. I would like you to speak a minute about what our
competition is doing in this regard and how you see our efforts
relative to this competition for the kind of quality of life
that Americans expect as a global leader, vis-a-vie, what our
competitors--and we are fine with competition but it should
bring the best out of us. So talk a little bit about what you
see internally.
Dr. Kelly. Well countries all around the world understand
that clean energy technology is a place that is going to be
driving growth and they want their share of that growth. And
places like China have made an extraordinary investment in
capturing key parts of these markets. They have been pushing
for manufacturing of photovoltaics for efficient lighting. Now
they are getting into electric vehicles, and so we are, of
course, very concerned. And the Europeans are also very active.
If you look at something like off-shore wind, there are
major projects in Denmark, in Germany, in Korea, in Japan and
China. So we think that we can out-innovate these guys but it
is going to be tough competition. Of course, there are very
aggressive government programs in many of these countries.
Mr. Fattah. So the largest wind farm is now in Honduras?
And you also have activity in South America. And on this front
you have a lot of activity. So I just think that the community
and we as a country should be aware and I think the committee
is aware. I know the Chairman is because we have had a chance
to visit some of these national laboratories and see the work.
It is critically important that we make these investments
because we are not shadow-boxing. And it is a cost to our
industry if energy costs more here. I met with a host of CEOs
of chemical companies in Philadelphia, which happens to be the
home of a large share of the chemical industry, yesterday.
We were talking about how--because of the low cost of
energy, mainly through natural gas and other vehicles, that
they are able now to bring a lot of these jobs back home that
had been outsourced. And so I think it is very, very important
as we go forward that we keep in mind that the investments we
make now are not just investments, vis-a-vis, what we can see
clear to invest, but also relative to what our economic
competitors are investing, and what it means if we lose this
competition, if we lose the competition on batteries for
vehicles.
The belief among the experts is that we would also lose the
car industry itself. Whatever country wins on developing these
batteries, that is where these cars are probably going to end
up being made. And this is a competition that will impact not
really many of us, because we are kind of over-the-hill or
headed that way, but for our grandchildren and their quality of
life, it will have a big impact. So thank you for the work that
you are doing and thank you for your appearance, and I thank
the Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. Do you agree with
Mr. Fattah's contentions that things are happening abroad that
should concern us? And let us just focus for a few minutes on
the American solar industry. How would you describe its state
at the moment?
Dr. Kelly. Well, as I said, we had 40 percent world market
share about 10 years ago and it is now 4 percent. We went from
40 percent to 4 percent. It is now around 4 percent, so we are
very concerned. And, of course, we are now coming out with a
new generation of technologies, technologies that are very
efficient, a new generation of thin films and other things. And
we are trying to make sure that all of these new technologies
are going to be produced here, and we are making every effort
to do that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So we commend you for that. How do you
actually protect that intellectual property?
Dr. Kelly. Well, you know, there is a Bayh-Dole Act which
puts pretty clear guidance to what the----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, you are aware, obviously the
Department of Commerce has announced new rules to address this
sort of a subsidy issue, but what about the greater
intellectual property issue here?
Dr. Kelly. Well in the case of Bayh-Dole, the smaller
companies and the universities are given a hundred percent of
intellectual property. That is just in the statute. And the
idea was, you do not want the feds holding it; you want the
private sector to have it.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are not against That.
Dr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But I am just saying how do we actually
maintain it here. Both Mr. Visclosky and I and every member of
this committee are interested in what we could do to promote
manufacturing jobs here and keep them here. Is that a pipe
dream or what?
Dr. Kelly. We share your concern. And as Mr. Womack was
pointing out, trying to find strategies for keeping this
production in the U.S.----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So what would you suggest would be the
strategy?
Dr. Kelly. Well, one thing is certainly to make sure that
we have got a very strong domestic demand for clean energy
technology and----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Which we do.
Dr. Kelly. Which we do, a lot of states have various kinds
of renewable or clean energy portfolio standards. Getting a
national one, we think would help the 48(c) tax credit, in our
view, very successful in encouraging domestic manufacturing
investments here in the United States.
Mr. Visclosky. Which tax credit?
Dr. Kelly. It is called 48(c). We requested actually $5
billion for this, if I am correct. This is part of a program
that was in place two years ago. I believe it was part of the
recovery act, but it gave----
Mr. Visclosky. Was that used to import windmills?
Dr. Kelly. No, no. This was to give tax credits to
companies that build factories in the U.S. And it was solar
factories, wind factories and----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How would you characterize where those
factories stand today? We have made these investments. I assume
you are familiar with how successful they have been.
Dr. Kelly. Well it is a little difficult to do a survey
since it was a tax and went through IRS, but we are trying to
track them down and make sure that we understand the effects.
Of course they do not get the tax write-off if they do not do
anything.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But collectively, certainly, the
Department must have a pretty good idea who is out there. I
mean, New Haven was mentioned. I think Connecticut has an
indigenous fuel cell company, I assume.
Dr. Kelly. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There used to be five or six that I was
familiar with. So you have an overview of the landscape here?
Dr. Kelly. Well on that particular program I know they are
collecting data. Exactly where it is, I will have to get back
to you. But I know we are----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. No. I wonder, because if we are going to
match what you are doing to what is out there, it might be good
to know what is out there.
Dr. Kelly. Well we are trying to track down--as I said,
trying to work through the IRS to collect this information.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah. But in reality, the Department of
Energy is pretty good at coming up with--I forget what that
component is--a lot of energy information, for that portion of
your operation. I am sure some people would like to eliminate
it, but in reality I like the idea.
Dr. Kelly. Well in this case we are trying to go out and
contact the firms and find out exactly what is happening.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well let us maybe work on that. I just
want to focus for a minute. Our committee has been very
supportive of the mission and goals of the Industrial
Technologies Program. Every year we seem to undergo some sort
of name change but now it is renamed the Advanced Manufacturing
Program. But whatever it is called, we are supportive of things
that strengthen American industry and manufacturing, and there
is a lot more to be done on that front.
But setting the goals aside for a moment, I would like to
discuss the implementation. We have serious concerns about the
proliferation under the program of the last two years of a
variety of different centers, all of which must require some
sort of physical and permanent space.
In the last few years, within just the Advanced
Manufacturing Program, the Department has established clean
energy applicant centers, industrial assessment centers,
manufacturing demonstration facilities, advanced manufacturing
clusters and an energy innovation hub. To say the least, I have
serious concerns about the out-year commitments that these
centers require, a commitment which is $141 million in fiscal
year 2013 for a program that had $160 million appropriated in
the current year. This raises serious concerns about the
propensity to start centers here, this issue of raising
expectations. So I would like for you to comment on these
different centers, first the Industrial Assessment Centers.
Tell us a little bit about--you have, I think, $6 million in
there?
Dr. Kelly. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Tell us about how many there are when
you first asked them for them in your budget request, when they
were established, how long we anticipate they are going to be
around.
Dr. Kelly. They have been around for a number of years, I
believe over a decade. What these are----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So how many are there?
Dr. Kelly. I do not know off the top of my head.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Could somebody in back of you maybe
provide us with that information? Because I am going to ask you
about the manufacturing demonstration facilities, which you
devoted $28 million for those in fiscal year 2012 yet they are
not mentioned in your budget request. So maybe we can put some
meat on the bones here.
Dr. Kelly. Certainly. Well, the clean energy application
centers were----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, what about the industrial
assessment centers, the manufacturing demonstration facilities
and then maybe give the committee some information on the clean
energy application centers.
Dr. Kelly. All right. The new facilities are the
manufacturing demonstration facilities. The other ones have
been in place for some time.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. They are new but they are not mentioned
in your budget?
Dr. Kelly. They are an implementation of the program that
we described in the budget. Our thinking is that we have
developed some very specific ways of implementing what we said
we were going to do in there. So there are three concrete,
three specific things that we are going to do that account for
most of the growth.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, where are they going to be and how
long--are they going to be around indefinitely? Here we
obviously have set them up.
Dr. Kelly. Well, let me go through the new ones. As I said,
there are a number of these things that have been created by
statute and we are continuing that have been in the program for
some time. The industrial assessment centers are university
based. They train students. They do audits and retrofits for
small- and medium-size businesses. They have been very
successful from our point of view.
The clean energy application centers were established
primarily to look at----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How much money do they get now?
Dr. Kelly. I would have to look that up.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Does anybody know?
Dr. Kelly. Yes, I can look it up. I just do not have it in
my hand.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Well, let us start on the advanced
manufacturing clusters. After some inquiry, the Department
tells us that you would like an increase of funding for them
from $6.7 million to $20 million, but your official request
documents do not mention them at all. Can you give us some
information on them?
Dr. Kelly. Certainly. There are a number of questions on
the table so I can start going through them.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah, there are and so we need just some
basic facts on all these centers.
Dr. Kelly. The ones that have been existing are the clean
energy application centers and the industrial assessment
centers. Those have been--those continue and I can go into the
details of the budget and find out what they are. The new
things that we are proposing here are first a program that is
going to be looking broadly at innovative proposals and
research on advanced manufacturing and advanced material. And I
can give you some examples of those, but these are things which
both help improve the efficiency of the manufacturing process
itself--and about 30 percent of our energy goes into
manufacturing so it is energy, productivity, and
manufacturing--but also driving down the cost of clean energy
products is what we do throughout our organization. So we want
to get cheaper lighting, cheaper photovoltaic, cheaper wind
machines, cheaper batteries, and so on. All of that is a
manufacturing or a lot of it is a manufacturing issue.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So where does the critical materials hub
come into this?
Dr. Kelly. So the critical materials hub is a new proposal.
It is funded in the FY12 budget. We will be putting out a
solicitation for that probably within a month.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The issue here is that we have got all
these centers and I am sure there are some remarkable people
that are working to make them successful and would work to make
the new ones successful, but I think we are going to find
ourselves in one heck of a budget squeeze here. What would be
your priorities in the overall--in this sort of a budget
environment?
Dr. Kelly. Well, the critical materials hub----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We have to have some priorities here.
Dr. Kelly. Right, exactly, and we plainly show in the
budget that we think manufacturing is a priority. This has come
out of the concern of the entire administration and Congress.
And we had a big commission put together by the President`s
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology that made a bunch
of recommendations. They set up this panel that is chaired by
the president of MIT and Dow that has been looking into this in
detail and has had hearings around the country. So that is
where this came from.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I think we value that contribution from
the private sector and academia, but there seems to be an over-
commitment here and I just want to make sure we do not raise
expectations. That is related obviously to----
Mr. Womack. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes.
Mr. Womack. Do these programs ever go away?
Dr. Kelly. Yes, programs go away all the time.
Mr. Womack. These centers, these hubs, I mean, as
technology changes, as emerging technologies--as evidenced by
the line of questioning this morning--things now become
important, rare earth, et cetera, et cetera. Do they take the
place of other programs that have previously been authorized
and funded by Congress?
Dr. Kelly. Well, the increase that you see here is not just
building on the, perpetuating everything we were doing before.
We cut a lot of things out to do this. For example----
Mr. Womack. What have you cut out--and maybe provide that
for the record?
Dr. Kelly. Conceptually what we are doing, for example, in
biomass we are moving from ethanol to drop-in fuel. In wind we
are moving from onshore to offshore. In batteries we did nickel
metal hydride batteries for a long time. They are now
successful in commercial. We just declared success and got out
of that, and we are now doing lithium. And a few years from
now, we will move from lithium to something else.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Something else. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. I would like to follow up in just a bit of a
different fashion on the comments my colleagues, including the
chairman, have just touched upon. And it gets back to the issue
of manufacturing where we have gone from 40 percent to 4
percent relative to solar as I understand the statistics. I,
too, am very concerned about the proliferation of centers at
the Department. We have got 46 frontier research centers. A
colleague asked if we ever get rid of anything. We have three
bioenergy research centers. We have a genome institute. You
know, 13 independent programs within your jurisdiction itself.
And we went from 40 percent to 4 percent on solar, and we are
spending hundreds of millions of dollars a year, billions of
dollars a year, on research for energy in the United States of
America. When asked by the chairman what we are doing to keep
this intellectual property and these jobs in the United States,
you mentioned that we need to ensure we have demand for this
energy. I agree with you. And to an extent, the government has
a role in developing that demand by buying the energy. But that
is an external demand. You mentioned the 48(c) tax credit. That
is not within your purview, although I understand you support
it. That is terrific.
You also mentioned collecting data. As I like to tell my
colleagues sometimes, we have been dialoguing with the Chinese
on steel forever. Now they make four times more tonnage than we
do, and we have been dialoguing. We are going to dialogue
ourselves to death. And now we are collecting information.
If you could for the record, with solar--because we are at
the end of our game now on solar and we are going to have more
questions on solar tomorrow and batteries, there has been a lot
of emphasis on batteries--if you could just concisely, simply,
bullet-point what are you and your department doing to make
sure all of this money we are spending stays here in jobs? I do
not want to hear about green jobs. I am sick of green jobs. No,
it makes me sick. I tell people I am going to talk to the
Secretary in a minute about it. My green job is the United
States steel industry using 30 percent less CO
2

since 1990 to make a ton of steel. That is a lot of trees. That
is my green job. So I would ask for the record, besides the tax
credit, besides increasing demand, besides collecting
information, what are you doing to make sure we do not lose
batteries and we do not lose that last 4 percent for the
record?
Now talking about the various centers and hubs. Secretary
Hoffman, there is a proposal this year for an energy innovative
hub. We have five. You have made a request for another one.
This is different in that as I understand it there would be
multiple hubs. Will they be called hublets?
Ms. Hoffman. I said regional hubs.
Mr. Visclosky. Hublets, sub hublets?
Ms. Hoffman. If you like the term hublets, but we are
calling them regional hubs.
Mr. Visclosky. Regional hubs. Besides New Jersey and
Indiana, where does the third one go?
Ms. Hoffman. We will be running a solicitation so the hubs
will be determined by a solicitation.
Mr. Visclosky. All kidding aside, why do you need three?
Why do you need three physical locations?
Ms. Hoffman. Actually we are looking at two to three, but
it reflects the regional nature of our electric grid. In
different parts of the country, we have different generation
resources. So the generation mix in the southeast is very
different than the generation mix in the west. We have
different markets and policies that are being implemented
differently across the United States. PJM is a market whereas
in the southeast they operate under bilateral agreements. There
are different state policies. So what we wanted to do with the
regional hubs was to actually build upon some of those local
differences, to say how do we advance the electric grid in
modernizing the grid, looking at data that we are getting in
those regions, looking at the capabilities of how do we deal
with cyber security in each of those regions considering the
mix is different, the technology is different, the architecture
is different. So we recognize that there are differences in the
regions, but we want to pull that together and make sure that
we can do a national effort.
Mr. Visclosky. You cannot, with all the scientific
knowledge we have at the Department of Energy, do that from one
location? As my colleague from Pennsylvania, I am over the
hill. I do not telecommute, but I understand a lot of people in
the federal government do that. And a lot of research is done
through the Internet and video conferencing, and you think we
need two or three centers to do this?
Ms. Hoffman. We need two or three centers to reflect the
different nature of the regions in the United States. There are
parts of the centers that we can pull apart and do nationally
as we look at demand response and the impact of demand response
nationally. But we need those centers to really identify those
regional differences. The wind integration and the renewables
are primarily in the west. The east deals with a different
generation mix and a different market and policy structure that
has to be tailored to the needs of those regions.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McConnell. The pipeline is set up to deliver oil to
distribution centers, most probably in the Cushing, Oklahoma
area and ultimately end up in regional refineries along the
Texas Gulf coast. 50 percent of the refining capacity in this
country is along the U.S. Gulf Coast. That oil and the
characteristics of that oil are well-suited to be refined in
those refineries along the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Mr. Fattah. And then what will happen with these refined
products, in your judgment? Based on your knowledge of the
industry.
Mr. McConnell. Refined products are very likely to be
consumed in the United States in the domestic market.
Mr. Fattah. Okay. Now, we are a net exporter now of oil?
Mr. McConnell. No.
Mr. Fattah. No?
Mr. McConnell. No. We are a net importer.
Mr. Fattah. We are a net importer. So, then what do we
import and how much do we import?
Mr. McConnell. Well and again, if you are speaking about--
--
Mr. Fattah. China was at, over the last five years, double
the amount that it utilizes, right? I mean, where are we at in
this? Are we growing in the amount that we are importing? Are
we decreasing? Where are we at?
Mr. McConnell. Actually, over the past several years we
have decreased the amount of imported oil from approximately 70
percent to approximately 50 percent.
Mr. Fattah. And the difference is being made up by less
demand or what? Where is the difference being made up?
Mr. McConnell. It is a combination of improved domestic oil
supplies in the United States, demand, new technologies, and a
good part of the all of the above strategy.
Mr. Fattah. If you were looking forward, how do you see the
next five years? Is the demand for imported oil going to be
greater or less?
Mr. McConnell. The way the policy and the way our efforts
are aimed is to improve and continue to work at improving
energy security in this country. Domestic production versus
imported production are aspects of an energy security strategy,
and a big part of what we are constantly working at in terms of
a portfolio approach is to make sure that energy security at
the top of the list is first and foremost.
Mr. Fattah. Now, we are the wealthiest economy in the
world, right? So like today there is an announcement they found
oil in Kenya for the first time, right? And oil is on the world
market, right? It would seem to me, logically, we would want to
buy as much oil from other places as we possibly could and hold
on to domestic supply. Is that illogical? Why was it in our
national interest to make sure that oil was on the world
market?
Mr. McConnell. I am not sure I understand your question,
directly, sir.
Mr. Fattah. Okay. I am trying to understand why it is we
insist, for instance--I mean, you know, our number one foreign
policy goal vis-a-vis Venezuela is that it all be available on
all markets, right? So, we want oil wherever it is found,
right? To be sold on a world market. That is our government's
policy. And I am trying to make sure that even though that was
set a long time ago, that that is still a good policy going
forward, in your judgment.
Mr. McConnell. Well in my judgment, sir, I do not know that
we are in a position to create a world policy on oil and its
availability, and I think that is the biggest concern we all
have in terms of energy security. There is not any world
policy, there is only our ability to access oil as it is
available, the price that it is available from, and the ability
to secure supplies necessary for this country. So again, back
to a portfolio approach of being able to access the most
available oil at the most attractive prices. That is business.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much. I want to have some other
questions for the record. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. I want to very
briefly enter the comments about the hub--the grid-related hub.
It sounds to me that it is more three parts because we
developed it at an earlier stage, before we really started
hubs, a group of biofuel centers which I do not think that--I
have not seen a very different approach from those bio-research
centers. And I forget just where they are. I guess they are
under the Offices of Science--what you are describing.
It just does not seem to me that there is much difference
between the universities--there are lots of utilities, our big
four in terms of power generation remain coal, gas, nuclear,
and maybe we ought to have wind. Wind, you say, is in the West,
but we also have some substantial wind on-land production in
the East.
So, I really do not see why there is a need for just
regionalization. Although I am a supporter of the concept that
one should not put all one's energy eggs in one basket. I am
trying to see how--much of the questioning here as I have heard
it this morning is that this is a diffuse expanding universe of
programs, in essence. It is almost like a cosmic expansion of
the universe, which physicists tell us is going on and has been
going on since the Big Bang in the first place. I just see it
getting larger and larger and more diffuse in the process.
I wanted to ask Secretary Kelly. You have a critical
materials hub that you are going to be going out for
solicitations on that. That will be one hub?
Dr. Kelly. One hub, yes.
Mr. Olver. One hub. The battery hub is not under you. The
battery hub is under the Office of Science?
Dr. Kelly. Correct.
Mr. Olver. And when they get finished with proving that
things can be done scientifically, then it is your office's job
to help them to commercialization. It is really taking it
farther up the development chart from the relatively long
research and early development to the development that gets you
toward commercialization. So, you do not have--you will not
have the hub, but you will get the partially-developed--the
proven science. Your office would be the one that is supposed
to try and find the companies that can do this and bring it to
fruition. But you do have hubs. You are going to be putting up
the critical materials, but you also have the building
materials hub at the--I am sorry, but my colleague from
Philadelphia has not yet raised it. In Philadelphia, it has
been up there for a while. Give us a good positive reading of
exactly where we are on that building efficiency hub.
Dr. Kelly. They are doing extraordinary work in
Philadelphia.
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Dr. Kelly. Lots of Philadelphians involved. Well first, on
the battery issue. We have a tech team in the Department that
includes ARPA-E, our office, and the Office of Science. They
collectively put together the solicitation so we are in very
close communication with them all the time.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The solicitation on the critical
materials is one that is being done by this tech team? This?
Dr. Kelly. The battery one you mentioned. So, we actually
have--the people all working on the basic science, the people
working in ARPA-E and the people in EERE working on batteries
are working very, very closely together, and doing exactly what
you described.
Now, the Philadelphia hub. It has been up and running for
about a year. We think it has got a tremendous opportunity to
help us understand how buildings actually work. Its focus is on
improving computing models of how buildings operate, how they
could work with new technologies, how they could work as a
whole, and then validate those models against real buildings.
The good thing about having it in the Philadelphia Navy Yard is
that they are going to be retrofitting a bunch of buildings in
that area, and so they will be able to really do a first-rate
job.
What they have done already is, they have built computing
that is helping researchers all around the country work
together and develop this work. They have built a very
interesting 3-D visualization environment where architects and
engineers and others can work together to both design the
building and understand the energy implications of the way it
is going to operate. They have actually installed the state-of-
the-art or beyond state-of-the-art building sensors and control
system in part of their own facility that is hooked onto a very
sophisticated modeling tool.
If you compare the way energy systems operate in an
airplane with the way energy systems operate in a typical
commercial building, they are just light years apart. One of
the things they are able to do is really build the kind of
sophistication into buildings that can allow you to make sure
that everything is operating correctly.
Until recently, sensors and controls were very expensive,
but now you can actually imagine doing this, and that center
has been really at the cutting edge of that.
Mr. Olver. So we do not yet have any real sense of how this
is going to spread out into the general economy?
Dr. Kelly. Well you know, it has attracted 22 partners,
including a lot of industrial partners who have been
participating in this. People are already using this 3-D
visualization center.
Mr. Olver. Okay, I wish you the best of luck. I mean, there
really is an enormous amount of energy conservation. It is
still the low-hanging fruit, there is no question about that.
Dr. Kelly. Yes, and it certainly is a lot cheaper, in most
cases, to save electricity than to generate it. So there is a
huge opportunity space out there.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your patience.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Olver. Just a few brief
questions. Secretary McConnell, recoverable shale oil? Can you
talk about that? There is certainly a view that we have some
real potential there.
Mr. McConnell. We agree there is a real potential----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And what are we doing? What is the
Department doing in that area?
Mr. McConnell. Well as suggested previously, a lot of the
work that went on in the '70s was a big part of hydraulic
fracturing.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You gave us that history lesson. I
thought that was valuable, but----
Mr. McConnell. We do not have anything specific in our
budget related to shale oil, sir, for the coming year.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But if we talk about diversity and all
the above, this is not something which--you do not believe it
has merit? Or do you think it is too complicated? It is not
financially feasible? How would you characterize?
Mr. McConnell. There are a lot of challenges to shale oil
development. There is a tremendous amount of uncertainty. But
also at the same time, potential for that resource.
We do not have anything on our budget for the coming year.
We were required to make strategic choices in terms of the
areas that we were going to focus on, and that was not one of
them.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is the private sector doing investments
in this area? And how would you characterize those investments?
Mr. McConnell. Yes, they are doing investments. It is very
early on and very much in a discovery mode.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay.
Mr. McConnell. And if I might?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes, please do.
Mr. McConnell. If I could just pick up on something that I
said earlier. I want to make sure based on the age of the
Internet that I said exactly what gets picked up. I was not
speaking about any specific release from the strategic
petroleum reserve. The Administration has consistently talked
about no options being off the table in terms of where we are
with the strategic petroleum reserve, or in terms of any supply
interruptions that have or may occur, but I was not speaking
specifically of anything being considered right now,
specifically.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes, well I did not characterize your
statement as being imminent----
Mr. McConnell. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. I can assure you. I think
it would be ill-advised, but we understand.
Mr. McConnell. But just in case somebody else might. Thank
you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Whoever picked that up I am sure will
correct the record.
Mr. McConnell. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Very briefly, for Secretary Hoffman and
Dr. Kelly. There was an announcement recently about using the
four power marketing administration's goals. Can you talk about
that, to transforming the nation's electric sector?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes. The Secretary sent a letter out to the
power market administrations, looking at some policies and
looking at what the power market administrations can do to
advance the deployment of renewable energy, look at energy
efficiency, among other topics. The power marketing
administrations are not under either Dr. Kelly or under my
jurisdiction, but we expect further information to come out
with respect to how that policy will be implemented with the
administrations.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So that does not provide me with very
much information.
Ms. Hoffman. We can provide you with more information for
the record.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, you are going to be involved in
those activities?
Ms. Hoffman. We communicate on a regular basis within the
Department of Energy on the activities.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Is this budgeted for? Or is this just
talk? Is this just contemplated?
Ms. Hoffman. I do not have----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Has there been any direction?
Ms. Hoffman. I do not have any details on the direction. We
could probably provide that for you, for the record.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Mr. Visclosky, anything further?
Mr. Visclosky. If I could, Mr. Chairman, for just a few
minutes. Keystone has been mentioned and it is relevant to the
issue at hand, but it leads back to my concern about the
attention of all three of you and your departments about the
money we are spending to keep and create good-paying living
wage jobs in the United States of America for the Keystone
Pipeline. I disagree with the President's past position,
potentially it is evolving. A great boon to job creation. The
only problem is, almost every ounce of steel for the pipeline
was poured outside of the United States of America. Nobody was
thinking about the steelworkers then, and I am not blaming
anybody on the panel. I am just venting here a little bit. It
will be fabricated in the United States--somebody poured it
outside. It is a private pipeline, that is their prerogative.
On SPRU--and I know you have not even brought SPRU up
today, Mr. Secretary. I heard nothing about SPRU. Well, the
last time there was a release, there was a waiver of the Jones
Act that allowed foreign flag vessels to transport the oil. The
Jones Act is in place for a very specific reason, and I know
that is not your policy decision either but I am trying to send
a message here.
There is potentially an argument there is not enough U.S.
domestic-created ships. Why? Because we are not doing enough to
encourage ships being built in the United States of America in
the first place to take this oil and put somebody to work in
this country. Again, not a lecture to you. But, assuming all
options are on the table, I would hope waiving the Jones Act is
not one of them.
I would like to talk about coal, if I could just for a
minute or two, Mr. Chairman. My understanding is in 2010 coal
represented 21.3 percent of energy demand by fuel in the United
States of America, and that the EIA estimates that by 2035, 46
percent of our electricity will continue to come from coal. I
mentioned the steel industry saving 30 percent CO
2

per ton. A lot of trees.
I believe in global warming. I think we ought to move from
a carbon-based economy. I absolutely believe that. As a
pragmatist, I am looking at the statistics saying that almost
half of our electricity is going to come from coal in 2035.
Why was the coal budget savaged? We worked on turbines for
water to get more energy from the same amount of water in those
waterways. Why not work to get more efficiency out of that
ounce of coal we are going to continue to burn until 2035. Why
take all that money out of coal?
Mr. McConnell. I agree with everything that you mentioned,
and when I took this job I made a commitment to do everything
we can do with what we have available to do exactly what you
just described. And that is what I am going to continue to do
as leader of the Fossil Energy Organization.
Mr. Visclosky. I assume you being a very bright individual,
if you had additional resources at your disposal--mentioning
your household income earlier, you would be able to put it to
good use.
Mr. McConnell. Whatever----
Mr. Visclosky. If you volunteered to do so.
Mr. McConnell. Whatever resources I have got available in
fossil energy, you can bet we will put them to good use.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you. Anything else, Mr. Fattah or
Mr. Olver? Anything else? Secretaries, we thank you all for
your time and effort here this morning. Appreciate your
testimony. We stand adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791A.290

Tuesday, March 20, 2012.

OFFICE OF SCIENCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

WITNESS

WILLIAM F. BRINKMAN, UNDER SECRETARY FOR SCIENCE (ACTING), DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY, OFFICE OF SCIENCE
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good afternoon, everybody. The ranking
and I want to apologize for the late start of the meeting. We
had a vote and we may be interrupted by some further votes
during the hearing process, but we want to acknowledge the fact
that all of you were here on time even if we were absent.
We have before us today Dr. Bill Brinkman, Director of the
Office of Science, to discuss the Department's Fiscal Year 2013
request. Dr. Brinkman, welcome once again to our subcommittee.
Dr. Brinkman, although most of our constituents may not be
aware that the Department of Energy is one of the major
government supporters of basic science, we are all well aware,
acutely aware of the importance of your mission. The scientists
and technicians under your direction are responsible for world
leading advances in technology, science, and intellectual
property, and I thank you and all your colleagues for their
important work.
Last year our Subcommittee fought hard, given the limited
funds we had available, to ensure that your office was fully
supported. The final act provided $4.9 billion, a $46 million
increase, no small change when every dollar is carefully
allocated among competing priorities. That $4.9 billion,
however, was $500 million below the President's request last
year. I know the request was based on a desire to double
funding for basic science research across the government, but
that plan was simply not achievable under current budget
restraints.
Your Fiscal Year 2013 budget request seems to begin to
recognize this reality. At $5 billion, it is a $103 million
increase over last year, and you make some hard choices within
that request. We likely will not agree with every choice you
have made, and we will be exploring these during our
discussions today, but we appreciate that you are now making
them.
Unfortunately, even though your budget request is more
reasonable, it still includes investments which were only
supportable under the doubling path, not under a more realistic
flat-funding outlook. We need to understand how the
administration is going to shift its longer-term planning,
which is why in the conference agreement last year we directed
you to provide the committee with a flat budget scenario by
February 10th. This report has not been submitted, and you can
be sure we will ask why.
Dr. Brinkman, please ensure that the hearing record, the
questions for the record, and any supporting information
requested by the subcommittee are delivered in final form to
the subcommittee no later than 4 weeks from the time you
receive them. Members who have additional questions for the
record will have until the close of business tomorrow to
provide them to the subcommittee office.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.002

Mr. Frelinghuysen. At this point I will turn to my ranking
member, Mr. Visclosky, for any comments he may have.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry for being
here late. Dr. Brinkman, welcome.
The Secretary of Energy, Dr. Chu, has said that he regards
his two principal challenges to be energy independence and
climate change. In the long term I believe that much of the
inspiration to overcome both of these challenges will come from
the Office of Science. I appreciate that the administration
continues its support for basic science by requesting a 2
percent increase in the Department's budget, this is not the
boost in funding that many advocates had hoped for; yet in a
constrained fiscal environment it is significant.
In many areas of science and technology, American
researchers arguably remain the best in the world. However, our
margin of leadership is neither as wide nor as clear-cut as it
has been in the past, and in certain areas we have fallen
behind. Given the constrained environment we face, it is
particularly important that we strategically plan each program
to ensure that we are proceeding in a deliberate and thoughtful
manner, increasing or maintaining our lead in areas where we
can, and limiting our investment where we cannot.
U.S. leadership in many areas of science and technology
depends in part on the continued availability of the most
advanced scientific facilities. However, I remain very
concerned that many of the infrastructure plans of the
Department were developed with a far more optimistic funding
profile than the current reality will support. We have also
ensured that any redundancy is eliminated in order to maximize
the scientific and technological advances within tight fiscal
constraints. It is an issue I am very concerned about. I hope
to hear from you today how the Office of Science has begun to
reevaluate the strategic plans of major program areas.
While the committee has been supportive of the Office of
Science and other related programs, such as ARPA-E, we also
continue to have concerns regarding the duplication and
interaction of several recent organizational initiatives. The
Energy Innovation Hubs, ARPA-E, and the Energy Frontier
Research Centers are just a few examples. While the
subcommittee will examine the performance of ARPA-E separately,
the justification for this program in part was that different
organizational models were necessary because the Department's
existing programs were not sufficient agents for
transformational or disruptive technological advances.
While I appreciate that some of the early reviews of these
new models have been positive, I would like to hear what you
and the Office of Science are doing to ensure that this new
culture is, in fact, being integrated into other science
programs.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield back my time.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Visclosky.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.004

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Dr. Brinkman, the floor is yours.
Mr. Brinkman. Thank you very much, Chairman Frelinghuysen
and Ranking Member Visclosky and members of the committee. I am
pleased to come before you today----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You may need to move that mic a little
closer to make sure we can hear you.
Mr. Brinkman. Is it on?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is on.
Mr. Brinkman. Okay. I want to thank the committee for its
continuing strong support for our office. Even in this
challenging fiscal environment, the Office of Science is the
largest source of funding of basic physical sciences in the
United States, and the research facilities funded by the office
are critical to enhancing U.S. competitiveness and maintaining
U.S. leadership in science and technology.
In his State of the Union address, President Obama
emphasized the importance of basic research and urged Congress
to support the same kind of research and innovation that led to
the computer chip and the Internet, to American jobs, and to
American industries.
The President's fiscal year 2013 budget request for the
Office of Science is $5 billion, representing a 2.4 percent
increase from 2012. Within the President's request for the
overall flat discretionary funding, this increase to the Office
of Science demonstrates the President's commitment to basic
science, which is vital to producing the discovery and
innovation that will strengthen our competitiveness and
economic leadership.
The Office of Science is doing its part to ensure that the
United States is a global leader in clean energy science and
technology. Our three Bioenergy Research Centers are taking
complementary paths toward producing next-generation biofuels.
We support 46 Energy Frontier Research Centers across the
country, which conduct research in an array of material science
and engineering issues related to the solving of various energy
problems.
The Fuels from Sunlight Hub is ramping up operations while
already producing scientific output and publications. I would
like to thank the committee for its support of the second
Energy Innovation Hub on batteries and electrical storage,
which will accelerate development of energy storage solutions
for both transportation and grid sectors. The Basic Energy
Science program is on schedule to make a selection for that hub
by the end of the summer.
The ten national laboratories in the Office of Science
routinely produce cutting-edge science and technology and
operate a set of user facilities that are the envy of the
world. We have created the world's first x-ray laser which
unlocks new areas of research in multiple fields. Our
synchrotron light sources regularly make key contributions to
our understanding of protein structure and materials, our
scientific computing facilities enable ground-breaking research
and development to produce exascale computing, and we will
deliver a strategic plan on exascale to you soon.
In the biological and environmental research division, the
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory integrates
computational and experimental capabilities as well as fosters
collaboration among disciplines to characterize biological
organisms and molecules. The Atmospheric Radiation Measurement
facility, or ARM as it is called, makes critical measurements
of clouds and aerosols to aid in our understanding of the
atmosphere and climate. There are many examples of industry
making use of these facilities, and we have illustrated this, a
few of these in the handouts here.
While the President's budget prioritizes clean energy
research, we continue to be the primary funding agency for an
array of basic sciences. That has meant making difficult
choices and trade-offs in several program areas while focusing
on areas where we can make the strongest impact. High Energy
Physics continues its transition into the intensity frontier
and will deliver a report on the scientific opportunities in
the intensity frontier later this year.
This month our Daya Bay experiment, in collaboration with
China, measured one of the important characteristics of
neutrinos, the ubiquitous particle that is so poorly
understood. We continue to participate in the Large Hadron
Collider and the search for the Higgs particle now appears to
be bearing fruit.
Despite a challenging budget environment for nuclear
physics, the President's request includes $22 million for the
Facility for Rare Isotopes Beam at Michigan State University
and will allow the project to move forward. In Fusion Energy
Sciences the administration is committed to the ITER project,
an international fusion experiment involving six nations and
the European Union, and the culmination of decades of research
in fusion. ITER will produce the world's first burning plasma,
producing net energy from sustained thermonuclear reactions. I
want to emphasize that although U.S. contributions to ITER call
for us to build and deliver hardware to the project in France,
80 percent of the ITER funding is spent in the United States,
and if you include the support of American scientists working
overseas in France, that number rises to 90 percent. Although
the focus of critical energy research in the President's 2013
budget has resulted in difficult decisions across the Office of
Science, these decisions were made with extreme care, and the
resulting trade-offs remain robust, maintain robust research
programs in high-impact areas in both use-inspired and
discovery science.
I look forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman, and the
rest of the committee on the Office of Science budget request.
Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Dr. Brinkman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.016

Mr. Frelinghuysen. We all know you are faced with making
some tough trade-offs this year. With limited funds, your
request almost unavoidably had to make some tough decisions by
cutting funding from some programs that this Subcommittee has
historically been very supportive of, but on top of that tough
reality your request adds $92 million for new Basic Energy
Science research. Why has the Department made it more difficult
for a number of major programs, which we have supported, and
made it more difficult for some of your existing laboratories
and other facilities by proposing to add new initiatives when
those programs are worthy of support on a historical basis,
those types of adjustments?
Mr. Brinkman. I agree with you that those programs are
worthy of support on a historical basis, but at the same time,
the administration's high priority is clean energy, and we
regard it as a very high priority to try to improve on our
ability to make clean energy without CO
2
, and the
additions that we put to BES are designed to do that. They are
focused exactly on that subject.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So you defend your decision for new
spending, based on the administration's priorities?
Mr. Brinkman. Right. It is based on the administration's
priorities, that is the way it was worked out. We believe that
we want to support this idea, this program, towards directing
of the Department to work on clean energy and to try every
technique we can think of to push that forward because of the
importance of the program, so we added----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So we are pushing some new initiatives
forward, and what are we doing with the historical commitment?
You mentioned some, you mentioned within nuclear physics the
request delays by a year the start of the Facility for the Rare
Isotope Beams facility in Michigan, cuts in half the operating
time for the RHIC at Brookhaven.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What does that mean to our overall
mission and the direction we are going if we are putting those
on the back burner here?
Mr. Brinkman. Clearly the budget for nuclear physics is not
sufficient to keep everything going, and within the next year
will we have to look at it very carefully and figure out what
to do.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, why don't we look at it right now?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, we are.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But I mean there are some layoffs at the
Fermilab in Illinois.
Mr. Brinkman. There will be some layoffs in Fermilab coming
up this year.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, let me just focus, as you might
anticipate, on fusion. You are quite familiar with fusion, with
all of your Princeton connections.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I think we all understand that budgets
are tight, and we have a responsibility to make tough budgetary
choices. But I would like to take a moment just so there is a
focus on, shall we say, the fusion accounts. The President's
budget request's funding for domestic fusion is cut by $49
million, and ITER is cut by $50 million from its planned level,
while it increases funding for other science programs. I would
say fusion comes out as a loser here. Why is that?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, it is the same thing I said earlier.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Because this is one area, as are the
other areas, I assume, where only government would have perhaps
the resources to make this type of----
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, fusion is definitely in the government
domain, and we have not gotten as much money as we would like,
and we are trying to keep both these things alive. We had to
make some very hard decisions in the fusion program as to what
we would do and would not do in the coming years.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So what is literally going to happen to
those who are involved in these kinds--I can certainly cite
Princeton, but MIT, General Atomics, I mean there are a lot of
players in here that are involved.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. It was a very hard decision that needed
to be made among those three: the General Atomics, the DIII-D
machine; and the Princeton NSTX machine; and Alcator C-MOD. And
our folks who run that program took a lot of time to think hard
about which one they felt was least beneficial to the future.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So the people who thought hard about it
were not the people in those facilities? It was people under
you?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, of course the community also had its
own views of that, but mostly the people----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Not people over in OMB, I hope?
Mr. Brinkman. No, no. That particular issue was not people
at OMB.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But there is a domestic component here.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Because you made the point yourself that
a lot of the money that is spent here goes out--80 percent I
think was the figure you mentioned, right, goes back to our
economy?
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What about our international
obligations? To ITER?
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, the insufficient funds you mean?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes.
Mr. Brinkman. That is a problem that we are working right
now. We have been talking with our partners.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You made it more difficult by putting
more money into other accounts here.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, that is true.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so what will become of the ITER, if
you will pardon the expression, maybe because I had oversight
of NASA, but it is like the international space station in many
ways.
Mr. Brinkman. I hope it is not quite that bad.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, it is a huge asset, and ITER will
be, too. You have a lot of contributing nations here.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What does it mean to us that we are not
fulfilling our obligations when I assume other countries are
doing it?
Mr. Brinkman. We intend to fulfill our obligations. We may
not have enough money this year, but we certainly intend to
fulfill our obligations to ITER, and the administration has
stated very clearly that they support, will support ITER, and
so we intend to make those commitments. Now, we were short this
year, but we will try to figure out how to compensate for that,
and we are working at trying to do that and figuring out the
best way to do that. You know, ITER is a very different problem
than the space station, the way it is set up.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Maybe it was an unfortunate analogy, but
there are a lot of contributors, it is an international
project.
Mr. Brinkman. There are a lot of contributors. I think the
big difference----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And our reputation to some extent is on
the line here.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, I agree with that. I agree with that. We
do not want to fail. We do not want ITER to fail because of the
United States; let's put it that way.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And this does impact people on the
ground here in a variety of laboratories and in the private
sector as well?
Mr. Brinkman. It does, yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And the committee has had a keen
interest in making sure that wherever we are making these
investments, there is some commensurate area where in fact we
either protect or increase employment rather than reduce
employment.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You could be doing some things here in a
way that would impact, you know, the future probability of
success in some of these areas.
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, yes, I think we are definitely doing
that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I mean, the nuclear physics----
Mr. Brinkman. We are taking some risks here.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There are some risks, so you feel
comfortable with your recommendations here?
Mr. Brinkman. I feel as good as I can.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, we hope that you will have some by
the end of this hearing, we will convince you perhaps of some
other things. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Brinkman, the administration has highlighted that
American manufacturing is a major theme in this year's energy
budget, and it would seem to be particularly relevant to the
Department's applied research programs. Can you give us a
couple of specific examples of how the Office of Science is
going to specifically and discretely support manufacturing?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. In the last 10, 15 years, there has been
a very major change.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Doctor, you have got to move that
microphone right in front of your mouth so we can hear you,
please.
Mr. Brinkman. A major change in our national laboratories
in the sense that we used to simply do research experiments at
the laboratories with university people involved, but we have
now created over the last 15, 20 years a whole set of
facilities that are unique and that no company is really
willing to build, going to build. A synchrotron is not
something a single company is likely to build, and our high-
speed computing is not something a company, unless they are
Intel, will build. And so what has happened is we have had a
lot more interaction with U.S. industry. In fact, this little
brochure which we brought along has a whole host of examples of
how we have coupled and helped industry with our facilities,
and you can look on the back side here, just this whole list of
companies that have benefited greatly from the facilities we--
--
Mr. Visclosky. I see the list of companies. But the
Secretary in a conversation he had with me is saying that this
is a particular initiative in this year's budget 2013. What
examples can you give me in the 2013 budget that you have that
is going to provide assistance to maintaining and increasing
manufacturing in the United States of America because of the
Office of Science? We are talking about the 2013 budget.
Mr. Brinkman. I understand, but I think what he wastalking
about is the applied energy programs when he was talking. I don't know
that he was talking about us.
Mr. Visclosky. So you have no discrete programs in the
office at this time?
Mr. Brinkman. We have a lot, but we don't have a special
program that addresses that issue specifically. There is a hub
that we are going to put together.
Mr. Visclosky. We have five hubs now.
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, there are five hubs, but there is one hub
that is on critical materials, which is very closely working
with the industry. Our biofuels centers are very closely
coupled to industry, so we are working to transfer the patents
and know-how to industry through them. Our synchrotrons are
cranking out protein structures one after another these days.
Mr. Visclosky. But you are doing that today. The Secretary
emphasized there are going to be discrete new initiatives
because of the loss of manufacturing. What companies----
Mr. Brinkman. But I think that that is----
Mr. Visclosky. What specific companies are we trading
patents and trademarks with that are going to keep
manufacturing in the United States?
Mr. Brinkman. As far as I know what he is talking about
there is some of the things that he has got going in the
applied programs.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. If I could ask another question. On
your budget request for the Office of Science, there would
appear to be between fiscal year 2012 and 2013 some discrete
decisions made as far as priorities. For example, and the
chairman has touched on it, there is a cut of $15 million in
the recommendation for high-energy physics. On the other hand,
there is a request for $105 million more for basic science,
which would lead me to believe somebody really made a discrete
value judgment, whether we agree with it or not.
In looking at the composition of the Basic Energy Science
programs, and I will give you a couple examples here, in
fundamental interactions research we have chemical physics
research increased by $3 million and atomic molecular and
optical science increased by a million. There is a differential
there obviously of a factor of 2. When we get to chemical
transformation research, catalystic science is $4 million,
separations and analysis is $2 million, heavy elements
chemistry is $2 million, geosciences research is $2 million.
When we get to photochemistry and biochemistry research,
photosynthetic systems is $2 million, physical biosciences is
$2 million, solar photochemistry is $2 million. And when we get
to nanoscale science research centers, the Center for Nanoscale
Materials is $2.2 million, Center for Functional Nanomaterials
is $2.7 million, molecular foundry is $2.2 million, the Center
for Nanophase Materials Science is $2.2 million, and the Center
for Integrated Nanotechnologies is $1.7 million. Those are
almost all exactly the same number, and I don't have a sense
anybody made a discrete decision as to which had more value
between molecular foundry or the Center for Nanophase Materials
Science or physical biosciences. Everybody got $2 million more.
Mr. Brinkman. There is a whole group.
Mr. Visclosky. They all have exactly $2 million more value?
Mr. Brinkman. You are talking about a whole group of
sciences in chemistry and materials that really are the core
part of this whole clean energy activity, and so we have tried
to increase them some. It is true that it is rather spread
around, that is a fact, it may be spread around more than you
like, but it is important for us to get in this clean energy
initiative, to get all these different areas healthy and keep
them going.
Mr. Visclosky. Well, if I--with the chairman's----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I just want to make sure we get Mr.
Olver and Mr. Womack in here.
Mr. Visclosky. I am sorry.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But, no, I think that Mr. Visclosky
needs an answer.
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Olver is here in case he cannot--I will
defer, we are coming back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Womack, do you want to get your oar
in the water here, or Mr. Olver? I am not sure we want to have
two scientists go at it here. But we are prepared. Mr. Womack,
do you want to get in?
Mr. Womack. Not at this stage. I certainly hope that you
are not inferring that I am a scientist at all, because I am
far from it.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I
was getting very interested in where my ranking member was
going with that discussion of what sounded like very small
differences. Of course, I don't know what the total was for
each of those eight or ten items that he mentioned, all of
which went up $2 million essentially over the year.
Dr. Brinkman, in your testimony you point out that the
infrastructure modernization has been slowed somewhat due to
the budget constraints, but is still intact. You point out that
the budget does support four continuing line-item construction
projects. But I don't know, unless the chairman has already
mentioned a couple of them by name, what are those four
construction projects and what amount of money goes into those?
Mr. Brinkman. Let's see. Those are SLI construction
projects. These are modernization projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just to break down the acronym a little
bit for the record here.
Mr. Brinkman. I have forgotten what SLI stands for. They
are a laboratory improvement program. It is a special
laboratory improvement program.
Mr. Olver. Of the U.S. science laboratories?
Mr. Brinkman. Right, at the U.S. science laboratories.
Mr. Olver. National laboratories.
Mr. Brinkman. And so there are things like----
Mr. Olver. Which are the four that are the ones that also
supports all four continuing line-item construction projects?
Which ones are those, for how many dollars? Maybe somebody has
an answer.
Mr. Brinkman. There are four that we have going here. There
is one at the Jefferson Lab.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Put that microphone a little closer.
Mr. Brinkman. One at the Jefferson Lab, there is one at
Fermilab.
Mr. Olver. Those are the two that are new?
Mr. Brinkman. Those are new ones, but the old one is a
science building at SLAC.
Mr. Olver. SLAC, where is that?
Mr. Brinkman. I am sorry. At Stanford, linear accelerator
facility at Stanford. There is the energy science building at
Argonne National Laboratory, and there is a renovated science
lab phase II at Brookhaven.
Mr. Olver. Brookhaven?
Mr. Brinkman. Yeah.
Mr. Olver. What is the fourth one?
Mr. Brinkman. They are all infrastructure.
Mr. Olver. What is the fourth one?
Mr. Brinkman. Brookhaven. It is a renovated science lab.
Mr. Olver. I have Stanford, Oregon, Brookhaven. What is the
fourth one?
Mr. Brinkman. Not Oregon. Stanford, Argonne National
Laboratory.
Mr. Olver. Argonne.
Mr. Brinkman. Brookhaven, and--well, there are two at SLAC,
two at Stanford. There is a research and user support building.
Mr. Olver. So two of the four are at Stanford, one at
Brookhaven, and one at Argonne.
Mr. Brinkman. Those are the ones that----
Mr. Olver. What is the total amount of money involved in
the construction budget for the continuation of those, our
continuing line-item construction projects?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, the highest one is $36 million, the
lowest one is 14.
Mr. Olver. What is the sum total?
Mr. Brinkman. The sum total is $109 million.
Mr. Olver. One hundred nine million dollars is the amount
that is in this budget for those four?
Mr. Brinkman. Right. All of them, including the new ones.
Mr. Olver. Oh, including the new ones?
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver. How much are the two new ones?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, they are not much, $5 million.
Mr. Olver. There are the two that you mentioned in your
testimony at Fermi, one at Fermi and one at Thomas Jefferson.
Where is the Thomas Jefferson?
Mr. Brinkman. Down in Newport, Virginia.
Mr. Olver. I figured it was in Virginia, but I did not
realize there was a national lab sitting in--you do learn
something around here.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver. Those two are $5 million each?
Mr. Brinkman. Two-and-a-half actually. They are just
starting, it is just the design phase.
Mr. Olver. All right. So then it would sound as if there is
over $100 million for continuation of the four. Are those four
going to be complete with that $109 million or are those going
to have a continuing budget next year as well?
Mr. Brinkman. Let's see. I do not have those numbers. I do
not know those numbers. I think they are finished in 2014. Is
that right? That is not here.
Mr. Olver. Well, okay, I am----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Olver. Surely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You have some bigger projects in the
offing here, right?
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Some major construction ones.
Mr. Brinkman. This is a program. Let me try to make sure
that you understand. This is a program of around $110, $115
million which is meant to be for modernization of the
infrastructure at the laboratories. There have been lots of
complaints about the fact that the laboratories have really
gotten old and they need new buildings, and----
Mr. Olver. We have a lot of them. It would be hard to keep
them all up to snuff at maintenance levels. You do have
facilities that will degrade over a period of time, there is no
question.
The reason I asked that is that I also understand that, I
think you were here at that time, you asked for the two new
ones that are there in the 2011 budget. They were not funded in
the 2011 budget.
Mr. Brinkman. That is right.
Mr. Olver. You did not ask for them in the 2012 budget, but
now even though you are saying you are on constrained time, you
are asking for the start of these two new ones. I am not sure
whether the old ones will be complete.
Mr. Brinkman. The old ones will be----
Mr. Olver. I am not sure you indicated clearly whether the
old ones will be completed in this budget.
Mr. Brinkman. Can I just say one thing? We have a budget of
around $115 million, plus or minus, for this program. We try to
keep it at that level, and so we are phasing these projects in
and out to keep the total constant. That is our plan, to spend
about that much money every year on infrastructure.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Will the gentleman yield? This is
relative to modernization and renovation----
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So a variety of labs, bring them up to
speed.
Mr. Olver. So the implication of what you have just said is
that if any of the four old ongoing ones are completed----
Mr. Brinkman. Others will come in.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. And is no longer there, then in the
next year you are going to have others that will come along on
a list of priorities.
Mr. Brinkman. And we have a long list.
Mr. Olver. Keeping the whole of this at $100 to $115
million total.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver. For all the facilities that need upgrading.
Mr. Brinkman. That is right. I can tell you, we have a very
long list of things that the various laboratories would like
for us to do, so we are just kind of working our way through
this thing very gradually.
Mr. Olver. Okay. I will try to digest that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver, we better let Mr. Womack jump
in here.
Mr. Womack. The role in maintaining U.S. Leadership in
high-performance computing is a key to American innovation,
economic growth. The Office of Science, through its operation
of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center at
Berkeley and the leadership class facilities at Argonne and Oak
Ridge,has played a central role in keeping America in a
leadership position. Unfortunately, because of a proposed nearly 5
percent decrease for high-performance computing and an apparent lack of
urgency on exascale planning, the Office of Science's commitment does
not seem to reflect the importance of the issue. So the fiscal year
2012 enacted appropriations directed the Department to report to the
committee by February its plans for moving forward on the exascale
computing initiative, a report which to this day I do not think has
been submitted.
Mr. Brinkman. It is essentially ready.
Mr. Womack. Give us an update.
Mr. Brinkman. Pardon? It is there. The report will be to
you shortly. Look, we very much believe in working on exascale,
but we at the same time want to keep our computer centers that
we have at the cutting edge. And as you know, recently Japan
and China sort of beat us at this game, and we would not like
to let that continue. And so we are working on that and we are
working on exascale at the same time.
In the exascale world, there are some very fundamental
issues that need to be solved in order for us to do exascale,
and when there are kind of research-type questions, you do not
throw a lot of money at them. You get good research people to
work on them, and then when you figure out what you can do,
then you spend the money. So we are a little bit slower than we
might be on exascale, but we think we are doing well on it, and
so we think we will be pushing forward at a good, fast clip,
but there are just some very hard technical problems that have
to be solved.
Mr. Womack. Is there a timeline?
Mr. Brinkman. There is a timeline. We are shooting at 2020.
Mr. Womack. 2020, okay.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If the gentleman would yield, we are
upgrading our existing capacity in a variety of sites around
the country, right?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. The Office of Science has two upgrades
that are coming: one at Oak Ridge, which is a major upgrade of
that facility; and there is another one, there is a Blue Gene/Q
IBM machine that will be installed at Argonne National
Laboratory.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So it is Argonne and Oak Ridge. But the
report you allude to is our jump over that.
Mr. Brinkman. That is a jump over.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. A technological jump over that.
Mr. Brinkman. Exascale is a technological jump over that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So the report is, what, being vetted?
Where is this report?
Mr. Brinkman. It is somewhat near its concurrence.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Describe to me what ``concurrence''
means for the record.
Mr. Brinkman. It means various people have to approve it
before it goes out the door.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So is it variably good news? Where are
we going to be relative to the Japanese and Chinese?
Mr. Brinkman. No, no.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What?
Mr. Brinkman. We are going to take care of that issue.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Oh, we are?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. The plan is brought forth, and you mentioned
2020, and I understand it ranges 2019 to 2022. Will you have
discrete benchmarks for each of the fiscal years, so that as we
proceed the committee can review progress or lack thereof?
Mr. Brinkman. As I said earlier, we will, but we have to
get to a point where we have a path to get there. And that is
one of the issues right now is we have to get to a point where
we understand how to get there, and you cannot go running on a
path when you do not know what the right path is. So we are
spending money now to try to define the path.
We have these teams of people that are looking at this
problem trying to understand how we go forward with it. And for
instance even yesterday, there was a meeting looking at the
hardware part of this problem, trying to understand what we
could do to solve the energy-use problem that is a very, very
big important aspect of this problem. So we are doing those
kinds of things, but we have got to solve this problem first.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Allow me to use this opportunity, we
have two votes, so we are going to be absent from this room for
maybe half an hour.
Mr. Brinkman. Okay, we will be waiting.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good, I am so happy to hear that. We
will be back. Thank you. We stand adjourned.
[Recess.]
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am happy to resume our hearing, and
thank you for your forbearance, your patience. I just want to
follow up. I asked about exascale, and you were not dismissing
me, but I have some legitimate concerns about what the Chinese
and Japanese are doing.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And how would you characterize where
they are? I see it on the defense side. Both Mr. Visclosky and
I serve on the Defense Subcommittee, and people often say, you
know, that the Chinese will never measure up with aircraft and
submarines in their defense posture.
Mr. Brinkman. Right, until they do.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Until they do. And things are always, if
you will pardon the expression, accelerated. And I assume in
the world of supercomputers this is, if you will pardon the
expression, our great leap forward. And where do we stack up in
that area?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, at the moment they have this machine
that is, I think, second in the world. The Japanese actually
have the first in the world machine, but they built that one
with American parts. The Chinese are going ahead very rapidly
now to try to build their own microprocessors and build a
machine that is completely Chinese, and I have every reason to
believe that they will succeed. They are very dedicated and
looking to do that.
Now, we have our own plans which, you know, involve Cray
and IBM and Intel and Nvidia and these various companies, all
of which are working with us very closely to try to see to it
that we stay ahead, and get back in the lead; we are very much
hoping to be able to do that in the next year or two.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So the report you referenced will--what
will that report indicate?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, that report will only talk about
exascale, which is a longer-term thing, which is not the
immediate competition that is going on for the next couple
years, and so----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But the exascale is, in fact, to assure
in the future our superiority.
Mr. Brinkman. Right. At the moment we are only going a
factor of 10 from the petascale machine, 10 to 20, we are
moving up that much in the new machines, but exascale is a
factor of a thousand from the peta, so that is a very big step
forward. The current estimate is it would take a power plant
next to your computer to run it, that is not what is going to
get built, and so we have to figure out some ways. For
instance, a conference we had yesterday----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are you suggesting we do not have the
ability to build a power plant? I know we have difficulty
building nuclear power plants and oil refineries, but----
Mr. Brinkman. I think I suggested that I would not have the
budget to run a power plant.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, at the rate you are going--no.
I want to get back, if I could, in all seriousness, to
follow up where the ranking member was going in terms of
scientific research leading to something here in the U.S.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. To actual manufacturing. And the ranking
can state it, but he comes from Gary, Indiana, and whether you
come from Gary, Indiana, or you come from the pharmaceutical
capital of the world, which also includes parts of the former
Bell Laboratories system in New Jersey. We are keenly
interested in things that are inherently of value to the United
States of America.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so I want to get into what you are
doing to assure the type of investments we are making, and we
understand there are some tough decisions here, whether there
is a real focus here on American jobs and technology, our
industrial base. So give us some level of assurance.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, let me just say one of the things I
forgot to mention is that we have proposed as part of this
whole chemistry materials work a mesoscale physics initiative,
and we believe that that initiative is very much oriented
towards manufacturing. We want to make a strong emphasis,
especially for you from a pharmaceutical State, we have very
strong interactions with a whole host of pharmaceutical
companies; it is very interesting. Eli Lilly, the company, has
actually its own beamline at Argonne National Laboratory, and
they have theirresearch facility in San Diego. They send
proteins to Argonne to have the structure determined, and then come
back and they use it. It is an integral part of their drug development
today, and so they very much use our facility.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, Sandia has a little piece of the
action, too.
Mr. Brinkman. Sandia?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It actually does have some sort of
pharmaceutical connection.
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, yeah, that is a different kind of thing
completely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes.
Mr. Brinkman. I mean, there are other things, like General
Electric has used Brookhaven National Laboratory a lot to look
at their development work on sodium sulfur batteries. A sodium
sulfur battery is a big round thing and it has got sodium on
the outside in a membrane and then sulfur on the inside, and
you need to understand all the various interfaces between those
materials, and you can do that with x-rays at our synchrotrons.
They regularly come and image the battery, look at the battery,
and see what the battery is doing.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Our question to Dr. Chu, and this is my
view of where we were going when he testified before us, is
that we are involved in all these things. You are providing
invaluable assistance in terms of these types of developments,
but how do we actually keep the essential intellectual property
here? Dr. Chu gave us the impression that there is no way we
could stop the migration of some of these discoveries, and it
gets back to what we would like to do to resurrect our
manufacturing base and better own the waterfront.
Mr. Brinkman. Look, I am certainly not an expert in
international patent law, but certainly many of these things
are being patented. My impression is that we have a lot of
conflict over patent law with China, but I do not know anything
about that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But you have under your jurisdiction a
lot of centers.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver pointed out some. And then
there is, what, 82 frontier centers, and----
Mr. Brinkman. Forty-six.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You have these hubs and everybody has a
degree of excitement about ARPA-E, we have got all sorts of----
Mr. Brinkman. They all have very strong patent and
intellectual property programs, and we try to patent as much as
we can. Every laboratory has a patent office that works to do
that. As you know, we have things like CRADAs and this new
thing we call Act, which is a new way for a company to approach
a laboratory, which is a little faster and maybe a little
simpler for smaller companies. So we have worked hard to try to
find new ways to do this.
For our user facilities it is a rather easy process because
we are not trying to claim their intellectual property. They
have to pay full cost recovery if they want to use the facility
for company private things, but if they are going to simply
publish the data, we do not charge them. And so we have very
specific processes to try to protect our intellectual property,
we have worked very hard at that.
One of the things we have done over the last few years is
we very much elevated the intellectual property technology
transfer organization in the Department. It now reports
directly to the Secretary, and so we have worked hard at
improving this situation.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky. Thank you for your
patience.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor, just to catch up to where we were right before we
left, we were talking about exascale computing, and you
mentioned that you do not have milestones yet, because you have
not defined the path which will be in the final report.
Mr. Brinkman. Let's see. It is not defining the path, it is
determining the path.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay, when you determine the path.
Mr. Brinkman. Yeah, we have to figure that out.
Mr. Visclosky. That path will be delineated in the report
that will be submitted?
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, no, no, no. The report you are going to
get is the next few weeks, and the path that we are talking
about here is a technology path that we have to figure out.
Mr. Visclosky. Right.
Mr. Brinkman. In that report we will talk about how we are
going to use, to work on the technology to get there, but that
is not a complete path.
Mr. Visclosky. Let me ask you this, then: In the report,
will you with any specificity be able to tell the Subcommittee
when we are sitting here next year what you anticipate will be
accomplished between now and next year, so that we can see if
you are making progress or not?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, there are several things that we are
working on that we need to understand. One of them I already
mentioned, this issue of the amount of power such a machine
would take. We cannot----
Mr. Visclosky. Right, but my time--because I have other
questions, but there will be discrete----
Mr. Brinkman. There are these discrete things that we are--
--
Mr. Visclosky [continuing]. Milestones that you will be
able to----
Mr. Brinkman [continuing]. Working on to try to understand
how to go forward.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. If I could get back to my original
line of questioning. Why did everybody just get $2 million
more? No, I am serious.
Mr. Brinkman. No, no, I understand that. And the answer is
that this distribution was notional. We will be competing
proposals across those various subfields, and however that
competition comes out, the money will be redistributed. So that
was a sort of notional effort about how much each one of those
little fields will get in that competition, but we will have a
competition.
Mr. Visclosky. When you say ``notional'', you are
essentially saying everybody gets the same, we will see where
the grants come in, and then we will move money around.
Mr. Brinkman. And then we will move money around.
Mr. Visclosky. Before the Department solicits for grants,
there is no anticipation as to what types of work, what types
of research, or what types of different proposals----
Mr. Brinkman. No, no, no, no, no.
Mr. Visclosky. There is a Department of Energy.
Mr. Brinkman. I am sorry. Don't get the idea that we just
let any grants come in. We have a thing called FOA, it is
Funding Opportunity Announcements, that we announce what areas
we would accept grants in.
And so we put out these Funding Opportunity Announcements
and specify what we are looking for, and they tend to be fairly
broad so that they can be used, you know, within that subfield
that we are talking about there.
Mr. Visclosky. In your mind, looking ahead a year, the
Department doesn't come to some conclusion that separations and
analysis under the chemical transformation might put more funds
in there and it creates more applications because there is more
need there?
Mr. Brinkman. If we get better applications then somewhere
else, we will put the funds over there. That is what it is
saying, within the confines of the larger program.
Mr. Visclosky. Why do you break it down by accounts if you
just wait to see what you get in? Why even bother?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, we could. But we put a notional number
there. We try to----
Mr. Visclosky. I know. Why did you even bother? Why don't
we just have transformation research?
Mr. Brinkman. It is a good question. We could have done
without it. We could have done without it. We thought it would
be helpful.
Mr. Visclosky. I find the answer very unsatisfactory.
Mr. Brinkman. Sorry.
Mr. Visclosky. The next question I have is the budget
request for fiscal year 2012 asks for $97 million within basic
energy sciences for major items of equipment. The final
conference report passed by the United States Congress in
December, signed into law by the President of the United
States, provides $97 million, explicitly providing funds for
each of the six major items of equipment projects at the levels
in the budget request. Doctor, how much money did the
Department allocate for these purchases for fiscal year '12?
Mr. Brinkman. For MIEs?
Mr. Visclosky. Yes.
Mr. Brinkman. I don't know if we know that number off the
top of my head.
Mr. Visclosky. $73.5 million, okay.
So in spite of Congress' direction for $97 million to go to
these projects, the Office of Science went in a different
direction. In fact, your 2013 budget request formally--and I
might add incorrectly--states that the lower $73.5 million was
appropriated in fiscal year 2012, and it begs the obvious
question as to where the money went. Of the six projects in the
request and that Congress funded, what did you cut to get to
your number?
Mr. Brinkman. Let's see. We probably cancelled something in
there. What was it? Team II and PUP? We cancelled one of the
projects is what happened.
Mr. Visclosky. The other one was the SNS power upgrade
project for $5.4 million.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, SNS, yes. That one was cancelled, right?
That was cancelled.
Mr. Visclosky. And you never communicated that to this
Subcommittee or to the Senate Subcommittee, as I understand it.
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Visclosky. After the fact, after the fact.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. We felt that we had to do that because
we wanted to put more emphasis on the Synchrotron.
Mr. Visclosky. I have got to tell you, Doctor, when people
cut down trees and put ink on a piece of paper in a sign into
law, I would expect that the administration comes back and
consults with the United States Congress, a coequal branch,
before they start moving around $23 million.
And my other question, and it is rhetorical, is out of a
basic energy science budget of $1.7 billion, of which $1.5
billion is research, that the Department couldn't find $11
million?
Mr. Brinkman. I don't know the answer to this. Can I get
back to you on this?
Mr. Visclosky. It is a rhetorical question.
Mr. Brinkman. Because I just don't know the details of
this. Okay, I will get back to you on this.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I have to wander back and forth around these
papers that I have in front of me in order to find what I want
to do, but, Mr. Secretary, you at several points have
emphasized that your priorities have been for clean energy and
that you, wherever there was change, you were giving priority
to clean energy.
Well, it seems to me that--I am now going into talking
about the fusion sciences. It seems to me that the high-energy
physicists and the fusion scientists and the plasma scientists,
wherever they happen to be--and this is similar to their
talking about inertial or magnetic containment--that they think
that that is the Holy Grail, truly the Holy Grail of clean
energy.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Olver. All right. But what we are seeing here is a
substantial change in the budgets. The budget for--and
realizing that inertial containment is in a different NNSA
program--the magnetic is all within your area, within the
Office of Science. And the Office of Science for fusion
sciences is flat-funded for this coming year.
Now, the chairman has already pointed out that there had
been at an earlier time a commitment for a higher number for
here than is actually provided, a number that was up in the
$200 million range for this year, and that is down, but a
sizeable amount up $50 million from what it was last year.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver. And the number of dollars for the domestic
programs, the various domestic programs, which include at the
science labs, at some of the universities which do theoretical
work around the country, and at the place that had experimental
facilities, mainly General Atomics and MIT and Princeton, in
the major scientific experimental equipment, that the sum total
for them is down by $50 million; and I think the chairman,
without driving it home, is questioning where we are headed.
If our commitment to ITER--and you are saying our
commitment has got to be whole--my impression is that ITER has
gone through some benchmark changes or goalpost movements or
something so that the timeframe has moved somewhat along, and
it has become considerably more expensive over a period of time
than was the case in the early years, 8 or 10 years ago, that
the total amount of dollars intended for that has gone up.
But in the coming years, in 2014, we go 1 more year and
they are talking about a $250 million commitment to ITER and a
$300 million a year commitment in the next couple of years even
going higher than that. And if we are going to end up with a
flat budget, then the domestic programs are going to really be
affected. At the moment, while the budget seems to really take
it, it puts the wood to the program at MIT, which was one of
our two functioning--well, I shouldn't say this. Maybe there
are more than two functioning tokamak laboratories right now.
I understood that Princeton is waiting for an upgrade, an
important upgrade that has to be done to get them back on
track. And when they come back on track, they will be in better
shape. They will be at higher capacity than others.
Mr. Brinkman. They will be back on track. They will be in
better shape.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Obviously, if we move ahead.
Mr. Olver. Right. But will we have any money left in there?
How are we going to get this kind of money with ITER? ITER was
going to eat our whole domestic program essentially in the
program with the numbers that are involved here.
Mr. Brinkman. Look, obviously, that can't happen.
Mr. Olver. Obviously, that can't happen. Tell me how.
Mr. Brinkman. You can't take ITER up to $250 million a year
and take another $100 million out of the bill of domestic
programs. There won't be a domestic program if you do that,
right? We cannot do that. We are going to have to find another
way to fund ITER.
Mr. Olver. Well, why isn't that obvious right now?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, it is obvious; and we are going to work
that over the next year to make sure we get it right.
Mr. Olver. Yes. Well, but it is kind of like a gun to the
head the way this is playing out. It is a gun to the head.
Anybody that is in any of the others--by the way, each--no two
of these tokamak programs, the magnetic programs, looks exactly
alike.
Mr. Brinkman. No. That is true.
Mr. Olver. Our biggest one that is operable at the moment I
think is the General Atomics facility.
Mr. Brinkman. That is right.
Mr. Olver. And there are others in other countries, some of
them larger; and all of them have different shapes, different
characteristics, different measures. All of them have done
work, and every one of them has done work that is ending up as
the baseline for ITER to do its work. Because ITER is just
basically an upgrade in size, in capacity, and power and so
forth----
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. To get us to something that, if
they can sustainably burn, which they hope to get to test by 15
years or so from now, sustainability to burn----
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, look, what has happened in this field of
magnetic fusion, over a period of something like 50 years there
has been a gradual building of larger and larger machines that
did more and more and got closer and closer to a burning
plasma. The last two of that sequence, one was JET in England
and the other was GFTR at Princeton, we got to that point and
then it became clear that the next machine, in order to really
demonstrate a burning freezer, was a very large machine, right?
That is when things went into this international fit and took
all this time to get going.
When I came on the scene, in 2009, ITER was frankly in
quite a mess because it didn't have the proper management. It
didn't have a whole bunch of things in the right place. We have
straightened out a lot of that now. I believe that the program
is now running much, much better than it was 3 years ago.
Through all of that, there are all these estimates of what it
was going to cost, and, frankly, they were often made almost as
guesses rather than real designs.
And now we have really real designs. We know exactly. We
had a really--working at detailed designs. We are trying to
find ways to save money on those designs and building them. So
we are doing a heck of a lot of work to try to understand how
to keep the cost under control and the project moving forward.
It is a very, very intense period right now for the ITER
project.
Mr. Olver. We don't even yet know whether the Holy Grail is
going to be through the inertial or the magnetic mechanism,
exactly.
Mr. Brinkman. That is true.
Mr. Olver. Yes, that is true. Maybe they both will work.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If the gentleman will yield, but if you
reduce the funding by $150 million, I mean, that is a shocker.
Mr. Brinkman. Peace.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. No. You must have come to some rationale
for that decision, and I would like you to----
Mr. Brinkman. The rationale of the administration is that
we need to push harder on clean energy, that that fusion is not
likely to occur for more than 50 years, all right, 2050, maybe,
and so, from an administrative point of view, it had less
priority than the other clean energy programs. That was----
Mr. Olver. Okay, well, it is whatever provides for clean
energy now. Although many of the other things that we are doing
on clean energy are not going to happen immediately or
commercialize within 10 years in many cases.
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. Look,
nothing happens in a few years. The kinds of things we are
doing take 10 years. For instance, you can't introduce a new
type of battery in less than 10 years by the time you do all
the safety things.
Lithium burns, so you can't--you have to worry about all of
the safety issues, et cetera. So typically 10 years for a new
product.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I want to get Mr. Womack in here.
Mr. Olver. Yes, fine. I will come back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Please do.
Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. I want to come back to computing again, and I
know some of this discussion maybe has already transpired right
after the votes and before I was able to make it back in. But
help kind of a lay citizen like myself understand, in this next
generation of computing, what is your vision for what this type
of speed, if you will, or this type of data processing can
actually do that we can't do now?
And then I have a follow-up question. I know you had a
military partner in this initiative with the NNSA, and I
realize there maybe are some futuristic things that could be of
some classified nature, but what does it do for our military?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, let's see. Let me take first the
science part, and then I will talk about the military parts.
In the science world, there are just many, many problems
for which we still cannot model these problems and simulate the
problems on our current computers. Various examples include
combustion and an engine inside of this. It is a very, very
difficult problem.
There are hundreds of different molecules that get created
in the process of that combustion, and a turbulence inside the
cylinder has to be modeled, and we just can't, even with
petaflop machines, we can't model that completely.
In a materials world we can model perfect crystals today,
but we want to be able to model materials with small grains and
see how the small grains of crystals interact and make better
and better materials, and that is part of the whole nanoscience
initiative to be able to do that kind of thing. We are seeing
results from that today.
Still we could go a lot further in those things. Fusion is
the classic example of something that needs a much higher level
to simulation before we really completely understand it. So
there are lots of problems. I am not worried about finding
problems to work on.
On the industrial side, we have worked with Boeing, for
instance, and did simulations of their wings for the 787. They
went out and bought their own petaflop machine because it was
so important to them to be able to get that simulation.
One of our favorite examples is this smart truck thing
where we used our petaflop machine to simulate the flow of air
around 18 wheelers, trailers. You know, the big problem with
the trucks is they have a very flat back, so they essentially
create a kind of vacuum behind them. Well, guess what? That
vacuum sucks on the back of the truck trying to pull it
backwards, right? So, we invented a small part that they can
slap underneath the trailer, which greatly reduces that vacuum
and, we increase the efficiency of those trucks by 12 percent.
This is a truck that gets 6 miles a gallon. So you save one
heck of a lot of gasoline with that.
So these kinds of simulations, even that simulation is not
as detailed as eventually you might like it to be. So I think
there is no question that we will be able to do that.
In the military, there was a big emphasis at the Livermore
laboratory which has been the simulation of nuclear weapons.
That is another very big problem because of the amount of
materials and the types of chemistry that goes on and that
nuclear reaction that goes on, and that is something that is
very hard to simulate.
So these problems are very hard to attack, and I think a
bigger and bigger machine will allow us to do that.
Mr. Womack. Before the vote, we talked a little bit about
the facilities piece and the investment that is being made in
this exascale initiative, and I know you mentioned China and
Japan specifically, and I think there was even some discussion
before I came back. But what about Europe? Where is Europe in
this race, if you will?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, I don't know where they are as far as
where they stand on this famous Linpack scale, but they
certainly are trying as well.
We have to remember also that there is this whole
international business, and IBM and Cray are trying to sell the
machines that we helped work with them to develop. They are out
there on the market right now trying to sell these things. And
that is all fine, right? That is what it should be. That is
good American industry, making money. And so that is happening
as well. You have to recognize that, as it is going on.
Mr. Womack. And if I heard you correctly before we ended my
last round of questions referencing China and Japan, upon
implementation, you are pretty confident that the United States
is going to be looked at as, shall we say, a leader in this
field.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. Yes. I feel confident that we will
maintain our leadership in this field. We have a set of
companies behind us and very good people at our national
laboratories, and I think we can maintain our place in the
field. I think you take Intel, you take Cray, you take NVIDIA
and IBM, these companies are very strong in this field, and we
can work with them to keep us ahead.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Dr. Brinkman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Womack.
Just for the record, where are we doing the truck
simulation?
Mr. Brinkman. That is at Oak Ridge.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And we are also taking a look at tires
as well? I don't want to get into where they are manufactured,
but I----
Mr. Brinkman. The tires work was done at Sandia, and it has
been going on for quite a long time with Goodyear. That
simulation apparently----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That is worthy of simulation as well.
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We hope that some of those tires might
be domestically produced.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, that is a different question.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I want to get back to some of the issues
I raised in my opening remarks.
Dr. Brinkman, this year is similar to the last two in that
additional funding for any program is going to be exceedingly
hard to come by. The budget for the Office of Science is
particularly difficult because of the existing commitments,
some of which we have talked about, to several large projects.
Those budgets are scheduled to grow this year, not all, but
some of them are.
But this committee must live within its means, and that
means making extremely difficult decisions. It is very likely
that we cannot count on having an additional $100 million for
you to add to the Office of Science in your budget request.
This will be based on the debate in Congress probably over the
next couple of weeks but certainly over the past year.
We look to you and the Department to help in prioritizing
as we make these decisions. To that end, the Fiscal Year 2012
appropriations conference report, which has been referenced
earlier, directed your office to provide us with what I would
call a flat budget scenario. That is, if you receive funding at
the 2012 level, how would you prioritize your budget? When are
we going to get that report, and would you outline for the
committee what you do with flat funding? Because there is a
strong probability it may be flat funding.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I wish it wasn't, but, in reality, that
may be where we are going.
Mr. Brinkman. The answer to that, I think, is a little
tricky. Because if we----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The report, though, where is the report?
That isn't tricky.
Mr. Brinkman. It is tricky. That has not gone through. We
do not have a report ready for you at this stage, and we need
to work on that.
What I was going to say is----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Let me just say, I think it is important
to accelerate that. I mean, there is a strong probability we
may be put in a position----
Mr. Brinkman. The problem with publishing a report of what
you do over 5 years with constant level budget is that in that
report, you are going to propose closing down a bunch of
things.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, you already proposed that in your
budget.
Mr. Brinkman. For this year.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. No, but let's lay it out. To some
extent----
Mr. Brinkman. I am going to lay out more.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. You have already signed a
warrant for certain actions, haven't you?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And that is going to ripple across the
public and private sector.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But I just think somebody over in your
operation ought to be taking a look at----
Mr. Brinkman. Well, we certainly are doing that. The
question is whether we can show whether we can release those.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The worst-case scenarios--I know we turn
to our military people, and we ask what happens when you reduce
the Army by 80,000 and the Marines by 20,000 and you have ships
under 285 and you have a reduced number of submarines? I can't
imagine we couldn't take a look at growth, the broad spectrum
of all of your centers and programs.
Mr. Brinkman. We do that. We do that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, we have asked for something.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, we will try to work that out, okay?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. On another issue, there was considerable
buzz last year in the science community and the general public
about a tentative of funding at the CERN, the Europeans'
physics center, showing that neutrinos actually move faster
than light. You want to talk about that? I saw something
actually in the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times.
What is going on?
Mr. Brinkman. What happened there is that the group that
was doing that discovered----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And give us an overview of what CERN is
doing.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, what CERN is doing there is they take
their accelerators and smash muons into a target and the muons
decay and give you neutrinos. You can time very accurately when
those neutrinos are created at that point, and then you can
time it very accurately when the neutrinos are detected at the
cave in Italy.
So what you are doing, you are timing the neutrinos between
those two points, but you also have to make sure you coordinate
the timing of those two points by light and up through the GPS
satellites. What happened is that there was a connector from
the sensor that captured the signal from the GPS to put it into
an optical fiber, and that connecter being loose turns out it
puts a delay in the time light takes to get from CERN to Gran
Sasso cave. So, because of this connector, not because the
speed of light was anything different, because this connector
had a delay in it, it looked like light was taking longer than
the neutrino. And that is where this thing came----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So do we have any labs that are doing
similar type research, and knowing you have Princeton roots and
this is all about Einstein, isn't it?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. This is all about Einstein. That is for
sure.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so what are we doing here at home
and where do you put Einstein on this question?
Mr. Brinkman. My own belief is that is what is going to
happen here.
I think, first of all, this answer that they have, the
group that originally published this thing, is saying this is
at the speed of light. The speed of neutrinos is the same as
the speed of light. My view is, I don't think we have got to go
check that again, frankly, but we are.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So are we doing anything that relates to
it here and where are we doing it?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, at Fermilab. At Fermilab.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor, the long baseline neutrino experiment would focus
obviously on neutrino research. The possible total construction
costs of the project as proposed at Fermilab could range in
excess of a billion to $2 billion. There have been hurdles in
arriving at the current design. Inparticular, the National
Science Foundation was slated to build and maintain the detector
facility, but they announced in late 2010 that they were pulling all
funding. This year's budget for your Department instead provides
funding to continue research while it evaluates the proposed plan.
Do you know when the Department is going to be making a
decision as to whether they are going to proceed with this
proposal or not, given the fact that there is also now a new
budget proposal in the House that cuts discretionary spending
by another $19 billion?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. Let me tell you where we are on this,
and what our thinking is.
All through summer and fall of this past year we have asked
Fermilab and the high energy physics community to figure out
and settle and come up with a real design, down select the
various options from the various options and give us a real
plan for what this thing would look like.
They have done all of that and they have done a really good
job. They really went at it in detail and came back to us. But
the problem is they came back with a very high price. So, with
constant level of funding, I don't see us being able to do that
specific experiment.
But we have a couple of smaller experiments that we are
doing in the Homestake Mine out in South Dakota. For $11
million we can keep the pumps running and do these smaller
experiments.
One of them is a dark energy experiment, and the other one
is called a Miranda experiment, it is basically a neutrino--
decay. These are two interesting experiments that will keep us
with that mine. South Dakota and their benefactor out there
have put almost a hundred million dollars into that mine at
this stage, and so we are trying to help them keep that open
and do some science.
But I think we are going to be looking for other ways. The
fact of the matter is that one of the very important parameters
of neutrinos has just been measured at Daya Bay in China where
we are a collaborator with the Chinese on an experiment which
looks at neutrinos coming from reactors.
Mr. Visclosky. But for budgetary purposes it is not being
built into the administration's budget in the outyears.
Mr. Brinkman. Not at this stage.
Mr. Visclosky. The next question I would have is the budget
proposal before us has $20 million for the Energy Frontier
Research Centers, and I have been a proponent of those centers.
There are 46 of them.
Mr. Brinkman. No, no, no, no.
Oh, yeah, yeah. You are right. I am sorry. Yes, sir. You
are right.
Mr. Visclosky. I stand to be corrected. All you have to do
is look at my pocket and know I am a goofball.
Mr. Brinkman. Now I know what you are talking about.
Mr. Visclosky. Has the Department made a decision as to how
they will distribute that $20 million between the 46 centers?
Mr. Brinkman. I don't think they have gotten that far. That
$20 million is meant to try to help to couple those centers
into projects in EERE. That is the thought behind it, and we
will see how it works out. We haven't worked that out yet.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What do you mean ``couple?'' Could you
expand? What does that mean? I think we know what it means, but
maybe you could explain it.
Mr. Brinkman. The Energy Frontier Research Centers are
creating a lot of really interesting new ideas for gadgets and
devices, and those things need to be taken further towards
development and then into development and manufacturing. That
is really EERE's job. So we want to try to enhance these things
in ways that makes that easier.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Excuse me.
Mr. Visclosky. If I could have one more question, Mr.
Chairman.
The budget request reduces funding for the RHIC facility at
Brookhaven National Laboratory, and it is my understanding that
this would reduce operating time in fiscal year 2013 to 9
weeks. The facility received $156.6 million in the request, and
I am led to believe that for an additional $3 million they
could run up to 15 weeks, enough to conduct a run in 2013. Why
not include the additional $3 million?
Mr. Brinkman. I would have to go back and look at the exact
numbers, how long they can run. I know that their budget, the
budget we gave them, did not allow them to run anywhere near
the full capacity, and that is very unfortunate, but that
reflects back on the total budget of the nuclear physics
program.
Mr. Visclosky. Yes, if you could, for the record, what the
trade-off was and why they didn't get to three.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, it involves the nuclear physics program
having a reduced budget in the proposed '13 budget. So between
trying to fund FRIB and RHIC and the Thomas Jefferson
laboratory, something had to give.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Before going to Mr. Olver, both Mr.
Olver and I mentioned the work at MIT. Does this basically shut
down their operation, or is there money in there to shut it
down----
Mr. Brinkman. There is money in there to see to it that we
handle the graduate students and let some of them finish; it is
a gradual shutdown.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. A major blow, in any case.
Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Okay, since you raised that one, Mr. Chairman,
thank you. Do any of the university programs in plasma science,
or fusion sciences have more graduate students than MIT?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, I am not absolutely sure, but there is
a large number. It is something like 300 graduate students
outside of MIT in the program.
Mr. Olver. In programs around, but I was just asking if any
one has as many as they have. I think they are in the 50 or 60
level themselves.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, Wisconsin is probably the next
competitor. MIT has a fairly large----
Mr. Olver. Very large.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, but these kinds of considerations were
all thought about in trying to come up----
Mr. Olver. Okay. All right. I understand that things are
not easy.
But let me follow a little line in these numbers. Over a 5-
year period, the budget has gone up and down. The proportion of
the budget 5 years ago for the national labs and the programs
in other institutions around the country was somewhat larger
than it is now. And it is now--for the first time, it is coming
down about $5 million.
As a side question, is the amount of money spent at Oak
Ridge as the leader of our ITER program, is that attributed to
ITER, as a contribution to ITER? That portion goes----
Mr. Brinkman. No, no, no, no. That whole portion is
attributed to ITER and not at all to the base program.
Mr. Olver. Okay. Then the three major ones, the major
individual programs which were General Atomics and Princeton
and MIT, those represent about a third of the budget, as it
looks like for now.
Mr. Brinkman. Right, that sounds about right.
Mr. Olver. And then ITER has been growing, and it is the
one that is just going up, up, up, if we are going to make
those commitments.
Now my intention would be that if we wish ITER to be
successful, then we have to have a successful group of these
major institutions that are continuing to function. Because
each one of them puts in things. What ITER is doing is simply
upscaling whatever works. And to terminate anybody at this
point in this game is a dangerous thing to do, not only for the
success of ITER but, of course, for the success of our own
domestic program as well.
I am repeating, I think, that every one of these components
has had some inputs into the development of the ITER program.
Mr. Brinkman. I agree with you that all three have had
inputs into the ITER program, all three of the national
facilities. However, if you asked me which has been the most
productive from the point of view of preparing for ITER, it has
clearly been DIIID. They have done a series of experiments.
Mr. Olver. And it has grown relative to the others in the
last few years, no question.
Mr. Brinkman. No question. And it has just done very well.
In fact, there is an annual, international plasma physics
meeting, run by IAEA, the International Atomic Energy
Commission, and 4 out of the last 5 years experiments at DIIID
have won the best paper at the meeting. So they have done very,
very, very well.
And the other thing, I don't want to belittle MIT's effort,
either. They have done some very nice work in particular on
tungsten walls and tungsten diverter walls in the bottom part
of the machine. But I have to say that is also being done at
JET in England. And so this is all the kinds of things that we
took into consideration.
Mr. Olver. One needs whatever it is that JET is doing in
England and whatever there are others doing in Japan or South
Korea.
Mr. Brinkman. You want to take those into account.
Mr. Olver. All those need to be part of this or else this
Holy Grail is going to be made hard.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver. One last short question. I started asking,
shortly after we started creating hubs, was there any
expectation that some of the research, frontier research
centers, which must be pretty close to hubs that are being
created----
Mr. Brinkman. Yeah.
Mr. Olver. Are any of them to be subsumed into the hubs as
reviews go forward?
Mr. Brinkman. Now, I would say it is very possible that
that would happen. For instance, right now, the hub that is
just getting started----
Mr. Olver. You only have one hub going at the moment.
Mr. Brinkman. Right. They have the Fuels from Sunlight Hub.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. If the gentleman would yield, I think we
are looking for some information on the hubs. I think we are
still missing an update as to what they are doing.
Mr. Brinkman. I could answer his question. I mean, the
answer is that in the Fuels from Sunlight Hub, the scout
techgroup, that head set actually was part of an EFRC. So, to some
extent, the technology with the EFRCs has been consumed into the hub.
In fact, Nate Lewis, who was a professor at Cal Tech, is using a whole
set of EFRCs to feed new catalyst into the hub.
Mr. Olver. But that should also happen with ones like the
battery science or the solar science one, the two hubs that are
functional out of Erie.
Mr. Brinkman. We are just getting the proposals to start
the battery hub.
Mr. Olver. That is right.
Mr. Brinkman. But here again is a situation, but I don't
know who is going to win this. But let me take Argonne National
Laboratory for a minute. We have an EFRC on batteries there,
and in that EFRC they have some people who invented some of the
new cathode materials that are being introduced into batteries
today, into Volt and things like that. I am sure they are going
to apply for a hub. If they win the hub, that EFRC will be part
of it.
Mr. Olver. They will be an applicant in it. But we will
still leave the other frontier science centers sitting where
they are.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The shades will be closed, but they are
not quite closed on this hearing.
Mr. Brinkman. I can see that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I don't know how you withstood it. You
could have winked at us or something, and we would have put the
shades down for you. We like--you know, we like transparency
and openness.
I want to just focus for a few minutes on the bioresearch
centers. You are plugging in a $375 million investment again
for the next 5 years; is that correct?
Mr. Brinkman. We are hoping to, yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes, can you tell us how you evaluate
each of these centers?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes. Well----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How do you actually evaluate their
performance and how do you match that relative to their
original goals? Each of them had a whole set of goals.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, we have very elaborate review processes
that we use. First of all, we have these places write a report.
We bring in outside scientists. Then they come--they either go
to the laboratory----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. They are independent peer reviewed.
Mr. Brinkman. It is totally independent peer reviewed. They
will spend at least a day either at the site or at a review
here in Washington, go through the whole process of reviewing
them.
We then asked each of those reviewers to write us reports
on what their views of the centers are, and a few of the
reviewers actually sit on review committees for more than one
center, so we get into some intercomparison among the centers.
And that process was just finished this fall, and then that
is why----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And so do each of the centers have
specific goals?
Mr. Brinkman. Each of the centers have specific goals.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And can you assure us they have been met
or is this still----
Mr. Brinkman. I can get you the specific examples.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Give us an example.
Mr. Brinkman. Well, let's see, the simplest example is one
that was done at JBEI at Berkeley where they took an E. coli,
these microbes that everybody gets sick on every now and then,
but they took them, modified the DNA and the E. coli so that
the E. coli would act as an agent for taking cellulose and
making it into--I think disabalene was the name of the
molecule, which is a drop in a substitute fuel for gasoline. So
they are making that kind of progress of finding new ways to
make fuels, and we are hoping that----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So one has a particular focus on
cellulose, right, and what we might describe as next-generation
biofuels?
Mr. Brinkman. The one in Oak Ridge, for instance, has a
very strong focus on breaking down ligon. One of the crazy
things about plants is the plant generally are coated with
ligon, and that is what makes the plant so strong. And in order
to get to cellulose to sugars you have to break down this
ligon, and it is not easy. So they have done the modification
of plants, of DNA so that the plant actually grows with a ligon
that is not so strong.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And are you focusing on plants that are
not involved with the food chain and food supply?
Mr. Brinkman. Absolutely.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So that is passe, is that right?
Mr. Brinkman. We are surely not trying to use corn.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good, glad to hear that.
So have you uncovered any specific concerns about any of
these three centers in terms of where they are going and what
they might likely be doing in the next 5-year cycle?
Mr. Brinkman. We believe that they are heading in quite
different directions, two I talked about. The third one is
actually heading and trying to understand what kinds of soils
and what kind of terrain you can grow these kind of plants that
are not food plants but would be good for fuel. And so they
have taken that tack, which means, all three have sort of found
their own direction to move, and I think it has been very good.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Does this program compare notes to
similar programs that might be----
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, they go to all the conferences and that
kind of stuff, so they definitely are in the field and know
what is going on.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Mr. Visclosky, any further
questions?
Mr. Visclosky. I have got more, if you wouldn't mind, Mr.
Chairman.
On the fusion budget, there is a request for about a $3.8
million reduction for fiscal year '13, but I understand that
there are reports that the Office of Science is exploring
having American fusion scientists do work overseas. Is that
true?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, what is going on there is the
following: we have not built any. The newer machines that are
being built are all being built with superducting magnets, and
also there tend to be stellarators, and we are not building any
machine like that. So we believe that in order for us to be
able to use and learn from those kinds of machines we are going
to have to work on some of the international machines.
There is a machine in Germany which is a stellarator, a
super ducting stellarator, which we would very much like to do
experiments on. With the kinds of budgets we haven't had the
kind of money to build those kinds of machines here.
Mr. Visclosky. Another question I would have is, my
understanding as far as the Department's commitment for
research grants--and I certainly understand multiyear funding
for these grants, that science just doesn't start and stop on a
12-month basis--but that the rotation right now would allow for
about 6.5 percent of fiscal year '12s monies to go to new
grants because of the multiyear funding. And I am wondering,
has the office looked at that to provide a greater window for
new opportunities as research is taking place, a new idea has
come so that there is more than 10 percent available in new
grants?
Mr. Brinkman. We worry about this. We worry about the ratio
of the number of renewals. Our typical grants are 3 years. So
you would say, well, there is a third will be coming up every
year. But you don't just want to renew that third. You want to
give a lot of opportunities for new things. So you tend to take
some 10, 20 percent of those older ones and not fund them and
put on new things.
Mr. Visclosky. So are most for 3-year periods, Doctor?
Mr. Brinkman. Most of our grants are 3 years, right?
Mr. Visclosky. And if I could just bring in ARPA-E in for a
second, my understanding of ARPA-E is that at the beginning you
have got 3 years and don't come back to us for this particular
idea.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Visclosky. Has the office looked at that to free up
money?
Mr. Brinkman. I don't know that--I would not have said
that--My understanding of ARPA-E----
Mr. Visclosky. I understand I might not be correct on it,
but----
Mr. Brinkman. My understanding of ARPA-E, the way they are
set up is they are saying, hey, we are not trying to fund long-
term research. We are trying to fund things that are very close
to development. And so we are asking you to march down a
development path, and if you can't get down that path we are
going to cut you off.
That is the thing, that is the way they work.
But I think we are somewhat different. We are trying to
fund somewhat longer-term research, and so we have to be a
little more careful about cutting people off because----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Longer-term research, some of which we
have been discussing, and we might be cutting a few off, right?
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver, I just have one question. I
want to get a little focus here. In the area of basic energy
sciences, you have $42 million for mesoscale science to apply
nanoscience. Tell us a little bit about this initiative.
Mr. Brinkman. I described a little bit of this earlier.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am aware of the NanoValley and a lot
of people are working in this area.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. What are you doing specifically?
Mr. Brinkman. Well, we, of course, have had these five
nanoscience centers that we have had for some time now; and
these, I think, have been very successful in doing new things
like, for example----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You have got to move the mike closer,
please.
Mr. Brinkman. These nanoscience centers that we have, I
think, been quite successful. One example, for instance, is
that we found that you can make palladium and platinum
catalysts much more effective if you make a very tiny, say,
gold particle and then coat the particle with platinum or
palladium. That gives a much better catalyst, a much more
effective catalyst. This is the kind of nanoscience that we
think is tremendously important, and so we are very interested
in doing that.
But we also believe we can make all kinds of new things
that reach up into the mesoscale. The mesoscale is at the
micron level and the size of cells and things like that, but
also we think that these kinds of materials where you use the
nanoscale size things to put them together in complex ways will
make for more--for instance, a very high-strength steel or very
high, composite materials that are much, much stronger than
what we have today. Those are the kinds of things we are
thinking about.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are doing it. Are others doing it as
well?
Mr. Brinkman. Oh, yeah.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There is quite a lot of our industrial
complex that is focusing on this.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am just hoping the twains are meeting
in terms of our support in a variety of different budget areas,
that these scientists are talking and collaborating where
appropriate.
Mr. Brinkman. Yes, and you know the NSF also has a
nanoscience program, a fairly sizeable one, in which we talk to
each other.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver, you are batting cleanup
standing between our votes.
Mr. Olver. Oh, are we about to vote? Oh, okay.
You are talking about mesoscale and nanoscale. I was going
to ask you, but you then answered that meso is micro. I was
wondering, what was this? Were we going in the other direction?
Are you involved in nano? No. Okay.
But you are doing the science, and once the science is done
under you, under your office, then that will end up in the
critical materials hub----
Mr. Brinkman. We would hope so. Yes, that is what we have
planned.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. Over here.
Mr. Brinkman. Right, but you have to be careful, right? The
critical materials hub is going to look at critical materials,
right? So we don't always invent new things that only use
critical materials or alternative critical materials. We will
be inventing things that will not just necessarily go to that
hub.
Mr. Olver. But you are going to be making the basic
materials.
Mr. Brinkman. We will be making things that they use in
various places.
Mr. Olver. And then they are going to be figuring out how
to commercialize them.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Olver. How to make them function much more
economically.
Mr. Brinkman. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Dr. Brinkman. Thank you for
being here.
We stand adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.143

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY, ARPA-E AND LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM

WITNESSES

DR. ARUN MAJUMDAR, DIRECTOR, ARPA-E
DAVID FRANTZ, DIRECTOR, LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good afternoon. I would like to call the
meeting to order, and I apologize to everyone for the delay in
getting going. Our hearing today is for Fiscal Year 2013 budget
request for the Department of Energy's Loan Guarantee Programs,
and for the Advanced Research Programs Agency--Energy, ARPA-E.
Dr. Majumdar, thank you for being here. Mr. Frantz welcome to
the committee.
We asked the two of you to appear together because of the
unique nature of your programs. Although you were authorized
before 2008, you both formed the backbone of some of this
administration's most visible initiatives. Now that we are into
the fourth year of the administration, you have enough of a
track record that we can have a more informed discussion about
the successes you have had, and some of your challenges.
Mr. Majumdar, this budget request for $375 million for
ARPA-E activities is a $75 million increase for the Fiscal Year
2012 appropriation. This is a 27 percent increase, matched only
by the 28 percent increase requested for energy efficiency and
renewable energy. At the same time, the request cuts funding
for fossil energy, and nuclear energy research and development.
While I would like to believe that the present support for all
of the above energy strategy is for an all-of-the above
engineer strategy, the facts indicate that this budget request,
in some ways, is more ideological than practical.
Yet, the ARPA-E program has identified an important niche
for itself by supporting high-risk, high-reward projects, and
given all of the political pressures surrounding your program,
you have made some tough decisions, including the termination
of projects which were not achieving their goals. And I think
that is commendable. I would encourage other parts of the
Department to learn lessons from the way you have done
business.
The Loan Guarantee Program, on the other hand, has been the
center of some controversy, starting with the Solyndra
bankruptcy, and now extending into questions about other
companies. Apparently, even the President no longer wants to
take responsibility for this program, according to remarks he
made last week.
Mr. Frantz, you are not asking for any new loan guarantee
authority, but given the billions of dollars that your programs
are overseeing, you will have some hard questions. We will have
some hard questions for you to answer today. We look forward to
your answers.
And may I say, parenthetically, I generally support loan
guarantees, but I do think, to some extent, and it is
unfortunate, that the water has sort of been poisoned here
because I think they have been a valuable resource. But we are
going to move on.
Please ensure that the hearing record, questions for the
record, and any supporting information requested by the
subcommittee are delivered in final form to us no later than 4
weeks from the time you receive them. Members who have
additional questions for the record will have until the close
of business tomorrow to provide them to the subcommittee
office. With that, I turn to Mr. Visclosky for any opening
comments he cares to make.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.146

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Doctor, it is good
to see you again, and Mr. Frantz thank you for taking the time
to be with us. Dr. Majumdar, I will be interested to hear what
progress is being made at ARPA-E. As you know, despite my
appreciation for the innovation and streamline project model
you use, I have repeatedly shared my concerns regarding the
programs's potential overlap with other areas of DOE. Many of
the activities pursued by ARPA-E are in the areas where either
DOE has applied programs or the Office of Science is also
endeavoring to make progress. I believe that there is a place
for competition within the Department, but in an era of scarce
funding, redundancies must be kept to a minimum, if not
eliminated.
I am interested in hearing your approach to coordinating
between programs at the Department, to ensure that overlap is
minimized, and how also you are working in your position to
spread, if you would, your new culture. While the subcommittee
was initially a reluctant supporter of the program, I believe
that given many positive reviews, we should pursue the ARPA-E
model long enough to determine if we can get a return that
justifies the investment.
Mr. Frantz, the Allison Report recently requested by the
White House found that the Federal Credit Reform Act
methodology the Loan Guarantee Program office uses was
appropriate. Further, using that measure, the report estimated
a potential budget impact of the outstanding loans is less than
DOE's current estimates, and below the loan loss reserve
provided by Congress.
Your own reestimate, as I understand it, confirms this,
showing that the total credit subsidy cost of the portfolio
went down from 22.5 percent to 13.2 percent driven by primarily
by the success of the Ford and Nissan loan guarantees. To be
fair, the statistics are dated.
After looking at the details of the reestimate, there is a
particular area of concern that I hope you will address today,
loans that have no link to a utility and are primarily projects
related to manufacturing. I also am keenly interested in the
actions the Department is taking both through its own
initiative and also in response to the recommendations made by
the report.
With that, gentlemen, thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.148

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Dr. Majumdar, please, the floor is
yours. We have a full house here today. There is a high
interest in the work that both of you are committed to.
Dr. Majumdar. I would like to extend my thanks to the
Chairman, to the Ranking Member and the esteemed members of the
Subcommittee for inviting me to present the Department of
Energy Fiscal Year 2013 budget request for the Advanced
Research Projects Agency--Energy, or ARPA-E. As I said before
to many of you, I consider you all to be my board of directors.
I am here to report to you what we have done in the past, and
what we plan to do in the future. ARPA-E is focused on research
to create breakthroughs in energy technologies.
Let me explain what I mean by using an example. Until the
1970s, we used to use punch cards like this to enter data into
computers, and in only 30 years, we went from punch cards to
this, smartphones. Most of the innovations that allowed
information revolution--transistors, integrated circuits,
wireless communication, and the Internet--were created first in
the United States, and then used globally. We didn't make
better and better punch cards. We invented the future using
technology innovations based on a strong foundation in science
and engineering. The U.S. has been doing this all throughout
the last century, from the Wright brothers and the airplane,
Jonas Salk and the polio vaccine, to Nikola Tesla and
Westinghouse creating the first AC electric grid.
These and many of the innovations by our parents and
grandparents created a better and more secure life for all of
us. ARPA-E's goal is to catalyze similar innovations in the
energy sector so that our children and grandchildren have a
better future than we do. ARPA-E's statutory goal is to invest
in research to rapidly translate science into breakthrough
energy technologies that are too risky for the private sector,
but ones that would ensure U.S. global competitiveness and
security. ARPA-E does not fund incremental improvements in
existing technologies, but rather quantum leaps in energy
technologies.
Let me give you a few examples of what I believe are early
ARPA-E successes.
Last month, an ARPA-E awardee, Envia, announced the world
record in energy density at 400 watt-hours per kilogram for a
rechargeable lithium ion battery, which is double that of
today's batteries. What does this mean? If we were to travel
from Washington to New Jersey, it would cost about $40 for
gasoline in a conventional car, whereas in an electric car the
electricity cost would be about $6; more than six times
cheaper. But the challenge in electric cars is that the battery
pack would cost about $30,000. Now Envia's battery is not yet
ready for prime time, but if you were to use Envia's batteries
today, it would cut the battery cost in half, and they are
trying to reduce the cost even further. ARPA-E's goal is to
reduce the cost of batteries so that electric cars can have
comparable range and cost as gasoline-based cars so that they
can be sold without subsidies and reduce our dependence on
imported petroleum.
We all know that algae can produce oil, but those oil-
producing algae don't grow very fast. We have a team at
Berkeley that is taking the set of genes that produce oil in
algae, and inserting those genes in a plant like tobacco that
grows fast and in bad soil. If this works, you would simply
squeeze the leaves of tobacco, and produce oil. I really hope
that research is widely successful because it could put our
tobacco farmers back to work and reduce our dependence on
imported petroleum by creating a renewable fuel. That is a win/
win/win proposition.
Our grid is an aging infrastructure.
Here is an example. The average age of a transformer in the
United States is 42 years, 2 years beyond its projected life
span. A typical 1 megawatt transformer in a distribution
substation weighs about 8,000 pounds and is manufactured by
foreign companies. An ARPA-E awardee, Cree, based in North
Carolina, is creating a quantum leap in electric power
technology. They are developing a 1 megawatt transistor--in
fact, here it is. This is a 1 megawatt electrical power
transistor that can handle 1 megawatt, that is 200 homes using
a single transistor made of silicon carbide, the size of a
fingernail. If they are successful, the 1 megawatt transistor
could shrink from 8,000 pounds to 100 pounds and greatly reduce
the cost and increase reliability. Now, here is the kicker.
Because the United States is the world-leading manufacturer of
silicon carbide, the Cree project could transform future
electrical power technologies, and create a large export
market.
These are only a few chapters of the ARPA-E story, and the
ARPA-E story is an American story. These pioneers are the
Wright brothers, the Salks, the Edisons, and Teslas of the 21st
Century. They will compete and sometimes fail, but they will
get back up and try again. The future prosperity and security
for our Nation depends on them. ARPA-E will continue to find
these crown jewels of our Nation and invest in them.
Last month we organized the third annual ARPA-E Energy
Innovation Summit which was attended by about 2,500 innovators,
entrepreneurs, investors, Federal and State agencies, Members
and staffers of Congress, and the White House. We showcased
ARPA-E funded technologies and also showcased technologies that
ARPA-E could not fund. We want them to win as well.
We had the pleasure of having Congressmen Womack and Fattah
of this Subcommittee speak at the summit and I hope you all get
a chance to attend the summit next year and meet the pioneers
and innovators from your own districts.
Let me report what we are going with Fiscal Year 2012
appropriations.
Last year, I promised that we would focus on the use of
natural gas in transportation. In February, we have announced a
new program to fund research on breakthroughs that would make
it cheaper to own and operate natural gas vehicles than a
gasoline-based one, and one you could refuel at home.
I also promised that we would create a joint program with
the Department of Defense to invent dual use technologies that
address our National security needs and also a civilian
economy. We are in the process of issuing a new funding
opportunity for improving the safety, reliability, and
performance of energy-stored systems.
ARPA-E is unique for issuing an open funding opportunity to
all of our Nation's innovators, to propose any new idea on
energy. This openness is important because innovators can
integrate across traditional silos, and create something new;
ones that we could not imagine.
ARPA-E projects involve risk that the private sector is
unwilling to take. Because this is research, some may fail.
Managing the risk on behalf of the taxpayers through active
program management is part of ARPA-E's DNA. We have
discontinued several projects where the idea simply did not
work. This is a promise I made last year, and one that we can
have now carried out.
ARPA-E will continue to proactively seek out, white spaces,
where it can fill a vital gap in early-stage research in
coordination with the Office of Science and Applied Energy
Offices. In Fiscal Year 2013, we plan to have an increased
emphasis on transportation, but with adequate attention to
stationary power systems.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify before you and I
look forward to answering your question. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Doctor.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.155

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Frantz, welcome.
Mr. Frantz. Thank you very much, Chairman Frelinghuysen,
Ranking Member Visclosky, members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you very much for inviting me to be here to talk about our
request for the Fiscal Year 2013 budget. Mr. Chairman, as you
indicated, we are merely----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Could you please just move that
microphone a little closer to you, please.
Mr. Frantz. Thank you. As you indicated, Mr. Chairman, we
are merely requesting an increase on our admin budget of $38
million for the Title XVII program, and $9 million to cover the
admin budget for the ATVM program. Because we are not seeking
an expansion of our loan authority, or any increase in the
appropriation for the credit subsidy, I am going to focus my
oral comments briefly, very briefly on an update of the program
and its current and future work plan.
At the onset, I want to particularly express my thanks to
all of you, the members of this committee, as well as your
respective staffs. You have contributed over the 5-year period
of our program immeasurably to the successes that we have had
through your support and interest in the program.
Before highlighting the successes and challenges that we
have faced over the past year, I would also like to acknowledge
and commend the LPO staff publicly for their unswerving
commitment and diligent work associated with the
accomplishments of the program. The staff is one of the finest
project finance teams assembled in the world today and its
record over the past year is unprecedented by world standards.
It is comprised of very experienced investment officers, most
of whom have worked all over the world, underwriting,
structuring, and closing financial transactions in much more
challenging legal and regulatory regimes than exist here in the
United States.
I would hasten to add that the GAO in its recent audit of
the DOE Loan Guarantee Program acknowledged that commercial
lenders interviewed by GAO stated that LPO's underwriting and
due diligence standards are as rigorous as or more rigorous
than those in the private sector.
It is noteworthy that the DOE loan program's office
represents the largest single debt financing for clean energy
projects in the United States, public or private. Two
transactions were recently recognized for their exceptional
structure by preeminent journals in the project finance field
as ``Deals of the Year.'' At this time, the LPO has committed
or closed $35 billion in direct loans or loan guarantees, which
financed nearly three dozen projects with total project costs
greater than $56 billion. When it ended on September 30, 2011,
the Section 1705 program included a portfolio of over $16
billion in loan guarantees for 28 renewable energy projects.
Collectively, the LPO projects are expected to support more
than 60,000 jobs and deploy alternative energy that will save
nearly 300 million gallons of gasoline per year. It is
important to note that the commercial projects closed under
Section 1705 fulfilled much of a legislative intent of Section
1703 as well. Together, the innovative and commercial projects
closed under Section 1705 represent a broad spectrum of
technologies including biomass, geothermal generation, solar
generation, wind generation, transmission and solar
manufacturing.
In addition, the LPO issued commitments, as you all know,
for loan guarantees for one nuclear power generation and a
uranium enrichment project. To date, the LPO has closed five
ATVM loans totaling over $8.3 billion. These projects support
advanced vehicle projects in the United States. As you have
indicated in your opening remarks, Mr. Chairman, we, of course,
have been challenged in our activities and we have reacted on a
continuing basis to fundamental lessons learned. Particularly,
in the manufacturing space, where marketing acceptance of
employed technology is much less certain due to the absence of
long-term off-take contracts, such as those that we obtain in
power purchase agreements which we have in all of our solar,
wind, geothermal power-generation projects. In addition, the
LPO has placed a high priority in developing and deploying
state-of-the-art business systems, including workflow
management and records management systems.
We are presently focusing on the staffing and employment of
processes and systems to support the LPO portfolio management
division. I would reiterate that these practices have been
successfully employed at the U.S. EX-IM bank and OPIC for many
decades. On the origination side, we are working diligently to
close our first advanced nuclear power project, Vogtle, and we
are continuing final due diligence and initial closing planning
for the AREVA uranium enrichment facility at Eagle Rock in
Idaho.
In addition, we are continuing to perform due diligence for
several fossil projects and we expect to resume within the next
few days the underwriting of Section 1703, qualified renewable
projects.
As indicated in my written testimony, we are proactively
addressing the dearth of applications in the ATVM program by
implementing a very proactive outreach program to the
automotive industry.
In conclusion, with your support, we look forward to
continuing to promote opportunities for the United States to
stay at the forefront of innovation in clean energy generation
and manufacturing, at the same time, supporting projects that
offer the benefits of job creation, and pollution reduction,
while ultimately protecting the interests of the United States
taxpayer.
In administering the Title XVII and ATVM programs, we
strive continually to improve our systems and processes in
order to manage loan transactions and portfolios in the most
effective and efficient manner possible. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.159

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Frantz.
Doctor, thank you for invoking New Jersey twice in your
remarks; not only the trip in the electric car from Washington
to New Jersey, but also the role of Thomas Alva Edison, whose
ingenuity continues to promote a lot of important research and
development across the board.
But the reality is that most of my constituents probably
couldn't afford an electric car, so much of the focus of our
committee has been what can we do in the short-term to lower
gasoline prices. Now, my constituents can't afford a Tesla, and
open sources have suggested that the battery you referred to,
it is either in The Journal or The New York Times, if that
battery dies, there is not much of an ability to resuscitate
it. And so you could find yourself with a very expensive car
with a battery that could be kerplunk.
So you want to put a little meat on the bones here? I know
maybe I should be reluctant to lock horns with you, but, tell
me, is there any truth to the fact that if the battery goes
out, then you have to go and buy another battery for the same
amount. So--this isn't foolproof.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, Congressman, I think the batteries that
we are focusing on, number one, is to reduce the cost and make
sure that electric cars have the same range and cost as a
gasoline-based car so that you do not need subsidies. I firmly
believe that is sustainable business. We are at the early
stages, and we are investing in a portfolio of 15 or 16
different approaches, and we don't know which one is going to
win. We just create the competition. But these are all for
rechargeable batteries, and we look for how many cycles. There
are two lives that are relevant. One is the cycle life, how
many cycles you can charge and discharge, and the other is the
calendar life. Our goal, and this is there in our programs, is
to make sure that they will outlast the car--that is really the
eventual goal. Of course, as I said, this is research right now
that we are investing in, but our target is to really make sure
that the battery lasts longer than the car.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But in reality, the battery that I
referred to, if it goes out entirely, you have to get a new
one.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, you can change the battery, but ARPA-
E's goal----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Change the battery at $30,000 a clip.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, ARPA-E's goal is to look for
technologies not used today. This is the research stage, and
translating the science into technologies that will at least
make cars in the future that the batteries that are
rechargeable and outlast----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are you looking at any innovative ways
to reduce gasoline prices?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, Congressman, this is an issue that I
feel I really understand what people are going through. This is
difficult for people--teachers, construction workers--they have
to travel, and it is really hard on them. I can assure you that
we are doing everything that we can in this Administration to
reduce the burden on our families. As you know, we now have
more domestic production of oil in the last 8 years. We have
for the first time in more than a decade reduced imported
petroleum to less than 50 percent, but that is necessary, but
not sufficient. I think the all-of-the-above strategy is
absolutely important, and if you look at what are the other
things that we are doing, we have historical mileage standards
that have been created, and that, will save $8,000 for an
American family per year. We are looking at natural gas, as I
mentioned.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Assuming they could be met, those
standards.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And you can impose standards, but in
reality, we hope that the private sector has the capital to do
it. But from everything we have seen, you need to have
substantial government support in order to bring people across
the finish line. I think my basic question, is there anything
that you are actually working on now, and we are highly
supportive of what you do. You have a lot of supporters, a lot
of ingenuity, a lot of innovation, that actually addresses the
issue of reducing gasoline prices?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, as I said, we are doing everything we
can within our means to do that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. For the foreseeable future, we are going
to have this incredible reliance on oil. You look at the makeup
of our energy picture, that is where the reliance is, nuclear,
coal. I just wonder whether you are doing anything in your
portfolio that relates to----
Dr. Majumdar. Yes, we are.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. New technologies.
Dr. Majumdar. Mr. Chairman, as I said, we are looking at
multiple technologies. We are technology agnostic. We created a
program for the use of natural gas for electric vehicles,
natural gas cars. Natural gas is abundant in the United States.
It is a domestic resource, and it is inexpensive. The problem
is that if you want to use a natural gas car and refuel at
home, it is expensive. Our job is to reduce the cost so that
the additional cost of putting a heavy duty tank for high-
pressure natural gas that gives you a range of 200 miles,with
the compressor cost can pay for itself in 5 years, and after that you
save money.
That is the technology that we are going to create. That is
a new program that we have created using natural gas that you
could then save money.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There is nothing you are doing in the
short-term here that is innovative to reduce gasoline prices.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, ARPA-E is----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I understand that. That is a long-range
commitment, but obviously, you have got some of the best minds
and innovators collectively here that we have ever had. And I
just wondered in your overall portfolio, whether there has been
anybody who has come up with an ingenious idea, that in fact,
could get some traction.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, at this point, we are looking at all
options, all of the above options, and I would love to engage
with you in a discussion as to how we can do that. This is a
concern not just of you, Mr. Chairman, but for all of us, and I
feel empathy for all of the people who, you know, have the
burden of additional gas prices.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay, Mr. Visclosky. Thank you.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frantz, you had mentioned the nuclear program, and you
have one conditional commitment. Looking ahead for the rest of
2012, what can we expect as far as any other additional
commitments possibly?
Mr. Frantz. At this time, Congressman, we are, as I
indicated in my remarks, working very vigorously to actually
close the Vogtle transaction. The condition of precedents to
our activities are focused, as you perhaps well know, the
obtaining of the COL license from NRC for each of the projects.
The next project to receive that license is the Summer project
in South Carolina, and they have not yet received that. I
understand it is possibly now within days of occurring. That
project is among four of the projects that we have had
discussions with. We haven't had an indication from them on how
they would like to proceed with us. We haven't been actively
pursuing that until they have received their license.
Mr. Visclosky. So that would be a precedent as far as any
settlement.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. Has the price of natural gas affected the
Department's consideration of the financial viability of the
loan guarantees?
Mr. Frantz. It has, to a certain extent, relative to those
projects that we call merchantman, that we have two projects
among the top four projects that are not rate based. Those
projects clearly have been affected by the price of natural
gas, as well as, frankly, the absence of carbon legislation. So
they are both merchantmen, one in Texas and one here in
Maryland. I think you are familiar with them.
Mr. Visclosky. Yes.
Mr. Frantz. That clearly has been a significant factor in
the decisions, particularly with respect to the investment
base, the equity investment base for those projects, to say
nothing of our concerns. So, yes, it would, in terms of moving
to a closing.
Mr. Visclosky. I appreciate your answer, but I have not, in
my mind, always discerned the difference between the two types
and understand exactly what you are talking about, as far as
merchant-based facilities.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, there are two--the PGM market here in the
East Coast and ERCOT is the market in Texas. Those projects
tender on a 24- to 36-hour basis for their power generation. So
they are not rate-based, and their power is not guaranteed to
be taken. Now, in normal instances, it is taken because of its
volume and its reliability, but they tender on a daily basis
for the delivery of that energy. In counter-distinction to the
rate base which is taken on a full contract.
Mr. Visclosky. Well, along the same lines, if I could draw
your attention to the fossil programs.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. I understand you said in your remarks you
have about $8 billion as I understand it.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. But at this point again, no commitments.
What activities, might we or might we not expect between now
and the end of the fiscal year on the fossil side?
Mr. Frantz. Thank you, that's a very good question.
Actually, on our solicitation, which was issued for the fossil
projects in 2008, we obtained eight applications. Of those
eight, four are in active due diligence with us under the
program. The one right now that we are most active with is a
rate-based project. We are in active due diligence on that
project, as well as three others. The first one that I am
alluding to, there isn't a chance that we can reach a
commitment in this fiscal year for that project. The other
three, because of the complications of the off-take
arrangements, as well as NEPA compliance, will probably be a
year from now.
Mr. Visclosky. And at this point in time, you would
anticipate continuing to consider these past this fiscal year.
Mr. Frantz. Oh, yes, sir, yes, sir. They are in active due
diligence, all four of them.
Mr. Visclosky. Is there a time frame that you have
established at some point that you cross that it is time to say
no?
Mr. Frantz. No, not for these particular projects. As I
say, they are well underway in terms of obtaining off-take
contracts for their power, the disposition of their product.
Two of them are gas generators, coal-to-gas generation. One is
a coal liquification, and the other is gas-to-electric power.
So these are long, complicated, large projects that require
significant amounts of time to complete those elements.
Mr. Visclosky. Just one more brief one.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. On that, the differential between the
liquification programs because of the environmental concerns,
is there any additional impact relative to your consideration
on that project?
Mr. Frantz. We are still spending a great deal of time
looking at all of the issues surrounding that project. It is a
very complicated project in that regard and it is under active
consideration.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. If his constituents can't afford
electric cars, then mine certainly can't, because yours are
rich compared to mine.
I have two questions that are kind of philosophical
questions. We talked a little bit about one in my office the
other day. One to you, Mr. Frantz. Ever since the Loan
Guarantee Program, this cloud came over it because of Solyndra;
more than a cloud, it was a big black cloud, came over it after
Solyndra. The question comes in from the public, why should the
government be investing in these technologies, or these
programs, or whatever, if the private marketplace won't do it?
The question I have, and this is kind of a question I ask
myself, is when you compared your program to the private
sector, you said you had more stringent rules and so forth than
the private sector, the one thing that the private sector
doesn't have is us looking over their shoulder. You get your
funding from us. There was criticism in Solyndra or accusations
that the administration put pressure on, and et cetera, et
cetera. The same things happen in other programs. The AREVA
plant, I met with your predecessor several times on the Loan
Guarantee Program for AREVA, because it was of interest to me.
Maybe undue pressure. I am sure that there are people from the
Ohio delegation that are probably talking to you, or will very
shortly about USEC and the potential for the loan guarantee for
them.
How does political influence, whether it is from Members of
Congress, the administration, whoever, influence your decision?
How much does it influence your decision, and is there a way or
should there be a way that you can make these loan guarantees
based on the marketplace, and what is required, rather than the
political pressure from us? And I, you know, I am not
criticizing the administration. I throw myself in there with
the rest of the people that have been interested in the
program.
Mr. Frantz. Thank you, Congressman Simpson, a very good
question. It could take me hours to answer. I will try to do it
very briefly.
Mr. Simpson. That is why I said it was a philosophical
question.
Mr. Frantz. Very briefly. The program with which you are
familiar with, was stood up, and I did that, frankly, in 2005
with these considerations very much in mind. And I am in the
Senior Executive Service. I am not a political appointee. Both
the previous administration in which we stood the program up as
well as this administration has been scrupulous in avoiding
putting direct pressure on the decisions we make in terms of
the underwriting of these projects, the due diligence, and the
fundamental decisions that we take on whether to go forward
with the project or not.
And that is absolutely true to this very day as it has been
from the time we set this program up in August of 2005. So I
can assure you that, yes, I hear it. Isee it, but it does not
impact the fundamental decisions we take on these projects.
Mr. Simpson. Should there be a way to reassure the public
that that doesn't happen, because I am sure you hear it just
like I do from the public, well, yeah, you know, the
administration comes and tells them to loan money to their
backers and so forth. Well, and I look at them and say, well,
you know what? I went and talked to them about AREVA, and
AREVA, we are talking thousands of jobs in southeast Idaho, and
it was important to me.
Did I put undue influence on the administration? Should
there be a way that we can separate those two things so that we
can reassure the public that that is not what is driving some
of these loan guarantees?
Mr. Frantz. Also, a very good question. I have
scrupulously, because of the requirements on me, quite frankly,
legally, to be as absolutely apolitical as I personally can
possibly be. Therefore, I have tried to the best of my ability
to avoid discussions that are purely political, and have
deferred to the political appointees to handle those
conversations and those decisions.
So I, for that reason, also have not been in the public
domain. I have not felt it appropriate for me generally to be
out giving speeches--and I have had enough work to do at my
desk without being in the general public. So I think your
question is a very good one. We are going to great lengths to
try to communicate what is really transpiring in the program
without----
Mr. Simpson. And I have to say that when your predecessor
and his staff would come in and talk to me, they were really
talking to me about the--well, I always wanted more
information. There was stuff they wouldn't tell me----
Mr. Frantz. Sure.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. They were telling me about the
process and where they stood and so forth. Have you ever pulled
the plug on projects?
Mr. Frantz. Oh, I certainly have, sir, yes, at all stages.
I think the point is, and I tried to present that in my oral
comments to all of you, I have been at this business all over
the world for over 40 years. I am not atypical of the staff. We
have a lot of experience doing these projects. The other thing
we emphasize clearly is that there are no guarantee that you
are going to be funded until the day we fund. I think this
Subcommittee is well aware of a project just recently in which
we had already been through the closing documentation, and we
are at the point where we could have funded, and we could not
get comfortable with something that you have all alluded to,
and that is the market conditions. I recommended to the
Secretary we not proceed and we did not proceed.
I mean, that is very expensive. That is one extreme. What
we attempt to do is to try to reach those conclusions much
earlier in the process, although you are well aware that we do
get criticized for that as well. You have heard that.
Mr. Simpson. Sure, from us.
Mr. Frantz. But on that, without sounding defensive, the
point and the bias is, particularly from my perspective, we are
in the business, at your behest, to complete transactions, not
to find ways to not do them. So if there is any fault, and it
is my responsibility that we draw out the process of
consideration, due diligence, certainly, we do it with the bias
with the attempt to try to ultimately do the transaction, not
to spend their--the client's--money or to delay them in the
decision-making.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I appreciate that answer. It is a
difficult issue, and if I could ask one brief question of Dr.
Majumdar. We talked a little bit about ARPA-E kind of replacing
a lot of the Bell Labs and those types of things that used to
do this research before. How do you decide whether you are
trying to drive the marketplace with your technology, or if you
are following the marketplace, if you understand what I am
saying.
Dr. Majumdar. Sure, the way we create our programs is,
number one, to recruit very smart people. Number two, we give
them a little bit of opportunity to understand where the
``white space'' is. As I mentioned before, our job is to make
the U.S. globally competitive; is to reduce the cost of energy,
and security for our Nation in the future. That is really what
we are trying to do. That could be translated into whether it
is natural gas for vehicles, whether it is power electronics
that I mentioned to make our grid more secure, and lower the
cost of electricity. So we get these smart people to identify
the ``white space,'' and the ``white space'' is where there is
a technological gap. We are in what we call the first valley of
death, where you have a science, and there is a future market
out there, but there is this gap of translating the signs and
understanding of nature into something that is tangible.
That is how we do business. That is how we create new
programs. Just to give you the natural gas one. It is obvious
that we have a lot of natural gas, and it is inexpensive, and
it is just that we do not--it is not cost-effective to use in
light-duty vehicles. It is cost-effective to use that in long-
haul trucking, and we said we are not going to go there because
it is a business proposition today, and our job is to get out
of the way. In the case of light-duty vehicles, it is too
expensive. Our job is, can we create breakthrough technologies
which will enable natural gas to be used in vehicles that is
not just cost-effective, but is actually cheaper.
Thattechnology does not exist, and that is where you can look at the
material signs and computation techniques, et cetera, to see if you can
make a technology that will enable the market in the future and make
the U.S. more competitive----
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate both of your programs.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you both. I am a big supporter of both of
these initiatives, and I think the chairman was correct to
point out that these programs which were launched by
legislation passed by Congress, and were started under the
previous administration are still needed.
Now, I think we can all agree that you can't have
innovation without failure. The two go hand in hand. I happen
to have the responsibilities as the ranking member on the NASA
appropriations. So you know, we launch a satellite; doesn't
make orbit; it falls down; it is $500 million that is gone. We
are not getting out of the satellite business. We are going to
get right back up and launch another satellite. We have done
this throughout the history of our efforts in space, with a
great deal of bipartisan support in this Congress and in the
country, because there is a realization that innovation and
failure go hand in hand. But let me just talk about the Loan
Guarantee Program for a second.
In your advanced vehicle program, the largest loan was
issued to Ford, almost $6 billion. Can you talk a little bit
about that deal, and what it portends?
Mr. Frantz. Well, I would prefer not to focus on specific
projects today, Congressman, but to the extent that there has
been a lot of public information associated with it, I can make
a couple of comments.
Mr. Fattah. Just what the loan guarantee provides Ford the
opportunity to be able to do.
Mr. Frantz. Well, at the time, it happens to be one of our
great stories of the program, I think, and clearly vindicates--
--
Mr. Fattah. I agree. There is some notion in the public
that Ford didn't benefit and I just want to use this as an
example.
Mr. Frantz. No, oh, not at all. They desperately needed us.
That is probably the fundamental point. The loan was made at a
time when we were in a deep recession. The automotive industry
was in serious trouble, and certainly, decisions are taken in
these major corporations with respect to new capital addition,
or what we call discretionary capital addition. It was at a
time when the company was fighting for survival, and by virtue
of our program, it enabled them to do discretionary capital
expenditure and get ahead of the curve for new innovation in
automotive applications. It was purely our program that enabled
them to do that simultaneously, as they recovered from the
recession, and the huge downturn in the industry. So that is
one of the great success stories, just very briefly, on how we
were very positively utilized in that automotive sector.
Mr. Fattah. Now, in terms of ARPA-E, you were modelled on
the DOD program, DARPA----
Dr. Majundar. That is right.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Which has been at the very
forefront of positioning our Nation in relation to National
security, making innovation critical to the development of new
systems to project American power and to protect our forces,
and to kill or capture our enemies. So the idea of ARPA-E is
really a model directly after that. I want you to tell us,
given the level of public investment in ARPA-E, how much has
been invested by the private sector in the same project that
you have; what the leverage has been, I guess vis a vis these
investments?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, so ARPA-E has been around only now for
almost 3 years. And in those 3 years, what we have found, as I
mentioned before, some projects have failed. That is part of
the risk that the government has always taken, and this is
research. But the ones that have been successful, that have
reached the milestones, and they are approaching the targets
that we had set out for them. Just to give you an example, 11
projects that received about $40 million for funding from ARPA-
E which allowed them to do the research, and translate it into
something that is the first breakthrough, have now received
more than $200 million from private-sector funding so it is a
leverage of 5 to 1, and individually, some projects have gotten
10 to 1 or so.
On an aggregate, the amount of funding that the private
sector has made on ARPA-E funded projects, is equal or now
increasing to more than what ARPA-E, the Federal dollars, have
actually funded on an aggregate basis.
So that is where we are in 3 years. And the private-sector
funding is going to keep on increasing.
Mr. Fattah. All right, thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. Mr. Womack.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my thanks to the
gentlemen for being here today. I will focus most of my
comments and questions with Dr. Majumdar, with whom, and his
team I have had a great relationship, very splendid cooperation
from the agency. And I want you to know how much I appreciate
that. And also, thanks for your visit to my district last year.
That meant a lot. And congratulationson the summit. That was a
terrific well-attended event where the attendance had to be capped, as
I understand it, because of the widespread interest. And you are to be
commended for your leadership there.
Let me open by offering something. As I was listening to
the testimony today, Mr. Chairman, I received an email and I
want to read a portion of this, Dr. Majumdar, because it will
interest you.
That the Small Business Administration's district office in
Arkansas has named Arkansas Power Electronics International as
the 2012 small-business of the year. They will be honored at a
reception next month. This is a program that has had a
relationship with ARPA-E, so you might just explain very
quickly what this power electronics organization has been doing
because it fits into what your organization is trying to
champion.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, thank you, Congressman, for the news.
It is great. I am delighted to hear that. Arkansas Power
Electronic International is a small business which has received
funding from ARPA-E to create power electronics using chips
like this to integrate into a system for battery charging of
electric vehicles. And this is going to be made in Arkansas.
And they have got Toyota as a partner in there, and Toyota is
actually co-investing money into Arkansas Power Electronics
International. So I am delighted to hear they were selected to
be the top small business and, you know, I wish them all
success.
Mr. Womack. It is a great segue into our discussion today
because I would submit, Mr. Chairman--and I am a huge fan of
ARPA-E, because I was a huge fan of the DARPA model, and I know
what Dr. Majumdar is doing in his agency--but I would submit
that if there were no failures, that you would have to agree
that they are into territory that probably the private sector
should primarily be in. And if there were only failures, then
you would have to agree that their model is probably off base.
I think the real test here is, there is going to be some of
both, and it is the ability of the organization. This is what I
like about the model.
It is the ability of the organization to do periodic
assessments with milestone reports, and a quick determination
as to whether or not these projects are on the right track, or
are not, and whether they should continue to be funded or not.
So in a recent conversation, you talked about an organization
that really never got off the ground and was canceled post
haste.
Dr. Majumdar. Right, thank you for bringing it up, Mr.
Congressman. Here is what we do, just to explain our go/no-go
milestone, and Congressman Visclosky, we had a discussion on
that in your office. We want these teams to do the impossible.
That is what we set out for them. Because if they reach that
impossible, that is innovation. So we put a target out there,
reduce the cost and make the energy density of the battery so
much, or reduce the cost of gas tank for natural gas, so on,
and on the way, they have annual go/no-go milestones because if
they don't reach that first milestone or the second milestone,
or if they are off by a factor of 10, they are unlikely to get
there. So that becomes a blind alley.
That is why we, you know, we take these go/no-go milestones
very seriously. We try to help them. The people we recruit are
some of the smartest people. They go and visit them on site
visits and try to help them to become successful. But
sometimes, the ideas just don't work out, and then based on
that big gap between where they are and what the milestones
are, we discontinue the projects, and put the money where
actually it is working. That is the model that we have used,
and it sends a signal to the research community that this is
something that they have to take very, very seriously. If
something is not working, it is a mutual agreement that they
would rather do something else. They learn from the failures,
and go back and try again, just like Edison and Tesla, and
others have done in the past. That is the American culture that
we have created. This is really where we are trying to go.
Mr. Womack. You mentioned, not to belabor the point on the
natural gas issue, but it is one that I have a significant
interest in because of the cost differentiations between what
we are able to produce with American resources, and how
competitive we are with other nations, particularly in the area
of stationary power. But as it goes back to transportation, you
have indicated that your agency does not have an interest in
the long haul truck fleet operations because that is already
being tried and tested in the private sector. But on the
passenger side, what specifically--because you have stood up
this passenger car program, and I met your program manager
recently--but what specifically do you believe that this
program is going to be able to demonstrate, if successful, in
the near term, to go back to Chairman Frelinghuysen's remarks
about what are we doing today to lower gas prices?
People are looking for alternatives, and some of these
alternatives are not ready for market. But what, on your
milestones, what do you see as being the key? Is it the tank?
Is it the capacity to be able to deliver some kind of a system
at the home? I mean, just what kind of a process are we going
through here?
Dr. Majumdar. Sir, we have to look at this as a system. So
if you ask the question, why aren't all of the carsnatural gas
today? Two things. Number one is that we don't have the infrastructure
to, like we have the gasoline infrastructure, we have 120,000 gas
stations around the Nation. Now, to create that infrastructure for CNG,
compressed natural gas, it will cost more than $100 billion, maybe $150
billion, and that is really expensive. However, natural gas goes to
many homes. So the idea is, can you do that at home--refilling at home
so that you avoid infrastructure costs. To do that, today you can buy a
compressor and put it in your home, and you can buy a Honda CNG car.
But the additional cost is cost-prohibitive for most American families.
So what we are trying to do is to create those technologies
that would reduce the cost of the system. That means lowerng
the cost of the compessors; so, if someone comes up with a
really low-cost compressor that can go from 0 to 360 psi, that
is great. That is part of the solution. But the other part of
the solution is to create a tank which is high strength,
lightweight, and low cost. This is not trivial. You need
science and engineering to do that. So we have to look at it as
a system so that the extra cost of both the tank--maybe it is a
new absorbent material that will suck up the natural gas be
there or maybe it is a new way of making the tank materials,
using carbon fiber and other materials--and the compressor: if
you could reduce the cost of the whole system to the point that
it pays back itself in 5 years and saves money, that is where
we want to go. And it needs innovation and science and
engineering to do that.
Mr. Womack. Thank you very much for your testimony. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was trying to get a
little bit of background data on this. Let's see. We have had,
for 25 years, what is called an SBIR program, Small Business
Innovative Research Program, which goes across virtually all
agencies, any agencies that do any research and development.
Dr. Majumdar. Right.
Mr. Olver. They are required to make available for small
businesses sums of money that go to programs. It is a very
specifically authorized, reauthorized several times, given
sizes of programs. In your work, the largest program that you
have funded under ARPA-E is how much? How large?
Dr. Majumdar. The average is about $3 million for 3 years.
Mr. Olver. $3 million.
Dr. Majumdar. The largest is about $9 million for 3 years,
and the smallest is roughly $300- or $400,000, something like
that. So that is the rough range.
Mr. Olver. I think we talked about this and I think I asked
the same thing, but I am quite a bit older than you are, so I
lose some of these numbers over time. Are you exempt from the
SBIR program, or do you have authorization under the SBIR
functions, does that have any implications for what you do?
Dr. Majumdar. Congressman, as you mentioned, we have to
have an SBIR program. That is, I believe, required by law.
Mr. Olver. Yeah. For 25 years, as I say.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. So we do have an SBIR program,
and as you know----
Mr. Olver. You have to do--even with money you get, you
have to----
Dr. Majumdar. Yes.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. You have to use the SBIR approach--
--
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. For a portion of the money?
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver. Really?
Dr. Majumdar. Yes, I believe that is 2.5 percent.
Mr. Olver. You actually make that available.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. We are making it available
now.
Mr. Olver. With all of the constraints that it has? I mean,
the SBIR program says exactly how much you can give as a first-
stage project and how much can you do as a second-stage project
and so forth. You must feel tremendously constrained by that.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, let me just say that before I came to
Washington, I was at a university, and I had actually started a
company which had received SBIR funding. So I am a former
recipient of SBIR.
Mr. Olver. How many first-stage SBIRs did you have to apply
for before you got one funded?
Dr. Majumdar. When I was outside the government?
Mr. Olver. Yeah.
Dr. Majumdar. I believe we wrote, my company wrote about,
you know, three or four proposals and got one funded.
Mr. Olver. And got one. And then did the whole spigot open
at that point? You got new first stages, and then on to second
and third stages?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, let me just say that one of the things
that we faced, and we are going to fix this is that when you do
a Phase I in SBIR, you get about 150K or so, 100, 150K.
Mr. Olver. The most recent authorization, may be larger
than that. But yes, it used to be $75,000, I remember.
Dr. Majumdar. Right, and then there is a gap where you have
to write a proposal again. It goes through evaluation and then
you get Phase II. And that----
Mr. Olver. And then you can get up to like $750,000 or
something like that.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. And that gap is actually quite
difficult. Because for a small company, and this is what we
faced, cash flow is everything. So we went under because we
could not sustain our operations through the gap.
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Dr. Majumdar. So I think one of the things that we are
going to do in ARPA-E, is to use this go/no-go milestone and
close the gap to zero. Because if in Phase I, you can reach the
milestones of Phase I, it should be automatic to go to Phase
II, so that you don't have a cash-flow problem, and I believe,
and I have talked to many small businesses, that this is
something that they would love to see.
Mr. Olver. And you can do that.
Dr. Majumdar. I believe we can do that within the law.
Mr. Olver. You can do that just administratively, since you
must do SBIRs, with those 2 or 3 percent or whatever of the
money. You can then change the whole pattern of the program.
Dr. Majumdar. I believe there is flexibility in doing so,
but I could take the question for the record, and get back to
you in more detail.
Mr. Olver. Okay, that would be fine. Am I already off my
time?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are----
Mr. Olver. Off my time.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Never off your time. But Mr. Nunnelee is
ready.
Mr. Olver. I will come back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Frantz, way back
in 1976, the Congressional Budget Office had a paper entitled:
Loan Guarantees, Current Concerns and Alternatives for Control.
It was referenced by a recent Congressional research service
report. Let me just quote from that one: ``Commercial lenders
originate loans that are guaranteed by the government. These
lenders may be more concerned with the adequacies of the loan
guarantee agreement, than by the actual risk of the project. As
a result, projects may not receive an adequate amount of due
diligence by the lender. Therefore, increasing the Federal
Government's risk of exposure.''
Mr. Frantz. Yes.
Mr. Nunnelee. Can you respond to that?
Mr. Frantz. Oh, I certainly can. When you, in a bipartisan
way, decided to enact the 1705 program under the Recovery Act,
we, in our office, took a look at it and created what you may
be familiar with, a subset called our Financial Investment
Partnership Program. We did it for two reasons. One was to
extend the capability of the private markets, to have a greater
breadth in the opportunity to loan; and secondly, to drag them
kicking and screaming back into this space in terms of new
innovative technologies, which they had vacated at the time,
particularly during the recession.
So, that program, which was sunset September 30, 2011, was
enormously successful. What we did, and I want to assure you
that we did, and this was a part, in fact, of the GAO report
reflected it--those projects went through double due diligence
process. The applicants were required to be financial
institutions. They had done due diligence on the projects
themselves, and then when they came to us as an application, we
started all over again on the projects.
So that those projects actually went through a double
credit underwriting and due diligence process. For that reason,
by the way, those projects are among the soundest projects we
have in the portfolio today. They largely focus on generation,
as you would expect, solar generation. So I think, if anything,
we have corrected, or at least addressed maybe some of the
shortcomings of the earlier program in that regard.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right, I am still new to this committee
and learning, but your contention is that without these loan
guarantees, the private sector would not have made the loan, or
there are not enough venture capitalists out there.
Mr. Frantz. Certainly not. I want to assure the full
committee in that regard, and that is true today. We are in
constant communication on a weekly basis with the major
financial private markets. It is a part of our
responsibilities, and they are still in a position where, in
many instances, they would not undertake these new and
innovative technologies, either in the first instance or at
utility scale where we are financing them today.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back. I
will get some more later.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Some good questions. I referred to it in
my opening remarks. I think a lot of players were shaken by
some of the challenges you have faced, and it is one of those
underlying uncertainties here. I just want to talk for a few
minutes, Mr. Frantz, about the Allison Report, and----
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. And the report recommending
that you better define what is a reasonable prospect for
repayment. That is obviously for the purpose of the loan
portfolio.
What is your understanding of this recommendation, and what
are you doing to implement it?
Mr. Frantz. Well, on this particular one, or all of them,
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, let's just start with the
reasonable prospect of repayment.
Mr. Frantz. With respect to that requirement, we have taken
a very, very conservative approach to that recommendation. A
50/50 flip of the coin does not meet our criteria. So we are
looking at very high percentages, as a function of our total
identification of risks and our mitigation of those risks, to
ensure that there is a very high probability that, for the
benefit of the taxpayer, our loan is going to be repaid. It
varies in terms of the percentage. It varies by business
sector, as you can well imagine, and----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So who do you pull from within your
organization to do this evaluation? Because I get people from
the private sector, shall we say, condemning us all in
Government for a lot of the things that have been happening.
You don't have the right people in place? How would you
characterize some of the people that are doing these
assessments here? Some come from the private sector with pretty
remarkable credentials.
Mr. Frantz. Virtually all of them do, Mr. Chairman. All of
my staff represent people who are essentially from the private
sector. For the most part, we are not career government people.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We salute you, the fact that you are in
Senior Executive Service, of course.
Mr. Frantz. We do a very thorough due diligence and
underwriting of these projects in the first instance with the
origination group. These are people who have been doing this
virtually for their entire careers. It is then reviewed by what
we call a very separate credit group. That group is referred to
in the Allison Report as the ``risk management group.'' We are
looking to address his recommendation in that area to tighten
that up, and change a little bit of its focus. But that group
operates and views these transactions very separately from the
origination group. So, that is the first checks and balances
that occur.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, there is a drum beat, which is
maybe over the last couple of days, that somehow we blame it
all on the Chinese. But in reality, somebody is looking, you
know, we are looking over our shoulder as to what is going on
around the world, and in China, and India. I mean, we are
taking a look.
Mr. Frantz. Exactly.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That has to be factored into the overall
equation here.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, and as a matter of fact----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We understand that there are subsidies
here, there is manipulation, there are currency issues----
Mr. Frantz. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. But in reality, if you have
all of these qualified people, they ought to be taking a look
at that.
Mr. Frantz. They are, and we are putting additional
emphasis on that per the recommendation in the Allison Report
with respect to the specific responsibilities of the staff and
the portfolio management group that I also alluded to. So those
folks are constantly looking at the world markets, and the more
macro issues that might pertain to these projects down the
road. That is a part of their responsibility once these
projects move into the portfolio management.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The stakes are pretty high here.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We have this underlying problem that
still carries a shadow over something which had been going, I
think fairly well, prior to this administration.
Mr. Frantz. Sure.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. And within this administration, but
obviously highlighted by some really dramatic situations.
Mr. Frantz. We also, we diversified the staff, Mr.
Chairman, so now within our program we now have a very
sophisticated technical group, and that technical group is also
separate from the origination group. It does its own analyses,
and they are also looking at all of the markets impacting all
of our projects.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Tell us a little bit about the early-
warning system, and what you are doing relative to managing
information reporting systems and so forth.
Mr. Frantz. I am happy to address that, Mr. Chairman. The
early-warning system is a process that begins, this--now, we
are talking about the portfolio management group.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yes.
Mr. Frantz. These are once the projects have moved from the
origination and closing into the portfolio management group.
The first piece of that oversight is what we call our watch
list. The watch list is for a variety of reasons and projects
move on and off the watch list continuously, but the watch list
is for those projects for a variety of different reasons,
either specific to the project, or to your suggestion specific
to the markets that might be involved, go on this list. That
list is reviewed on a weekly basis. The circumstances of the
projects on the list, and all issues surrounding them. That is
the first step.
The second step is that the officers are responsible on a
monthly basis for all of their projects, covering all aspects
that might occur. Those are the two first and major steps, and
then that feeds into another recommendation that was a part of
the Allison Report and that is, we have established a very
separate risk committee. That committee convenes every week on
Thursdays, and that committee oversees any updates or changes,
material or otherwise, on each one of the projects that may be
occurring on a weekly basis.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. How would you rate the health of your
current portfolio?
Mr. Frantz. We think it is very solid. You know, there
clearly are unknowns, Mr. Chairman. We are not perfectly
clairvoyant. We don't overall know what the future holds.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But some loans inherently are riskier
than others, aren't they?
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir, they are, and I alluded to them in my
oral comment, that is in the manufacturing phase. In that
regard, just as a parenthetical for all of you, in the
manufacturing in the solar phase, we have two projects that
have not even funded yet. And wedon't know if they ultimately
will be. We hope they are. We have also incurred milestones that have
to be met both prior to the initial funding as well as the continuing
funding, and that provides us off ramps in case these projects get in
trouble. We don't commit all of the U.S. taxpayer dollars to the
project.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. There have been lots of lessons learned
here.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir, certainly there have been.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just to the Doctor. The white spaces you
talked about, one of the things that the committee has learned
is how many new centers the Department of Energy set up. Across
the broad spectrum we have frontier centers, we have hubs.
Where do you connect to the hubs?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, it is a different model.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But in reality, they want us to set up a
new hub, and we have a number of functioning hubs. I think the
jury is out as to how well they are working, but I assume, do
you cross-pollinate? Do you communicate?
Dr. Majumdar. From ARPA-E's position, we coordinate very
closely with all of the things that are going on in the
Department including the hubs, as well as, you know, all of the
EFPCs, I think there was a question about overlap, et cetera.
Let me just address that very clearly. When we create programs
in ARPA-E, the first thing we do, as I said, is to recruit
really smart people, and then have a workshop. In that
workshop, we bring in all of the stakeholders, the scientific
community that are relevant, and sometimes communities that
have not previously interacted with each other. We have people
from the Office of Science, and all of the relevant applied
energy offices in those workshops and manning them. They take
some positions, leadership positions in creating that workshop.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Why don't you stop there? That is sort
of why I, you know, maybe I didn't get into Mr. Frantz'
portfolio well enough, is whether there are some things that
you are doing that perhaps could be directed towards a look-see
at some of those within your portfolio. In other words, there
are maybe some other stakeholders that would take a look at
some of the risks, or do you?
Mr. Frantz. We do. We do.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. All right, and then I will go to Mr.
Visclosky, but I just wanted to know whether there is----
Dr. Majumdar. Well, I think one of the questions in the
appropriations report is, have some of the practices in ARPA-E
been adopted by other parts of the Department? One of the test
cases is what we are doing in the SunShot initiative. And as
you know, the goal of SunShot initiative is to reduce the cost
of electricity from solar to 5 cents, or below a dollar per
watt within this decade. But internally, it is also a
coordinated management of all solar activities from Office of
Science, from EERE, as well as ARPA-E. What they have done is
adopted many of the practices of how we create the funding
opportunity; how we have a workshop to bring in the
stakeholders; how we review application; and how we then
contract. Our contracting time in ARPA-E is down to 3 months or
sometimes even less.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, you are sort of like the special
forces.
Dr. Majumdar. Special ops.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah, you are special ops. You are
like----
Dr. Majumdar. So SunShot is an experiment where we are
trying to take some of those best practices and see whether
they can work. Some of them are showing some very positive
results, and that is what we wanted to know.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Special ops often doesn't have to wait 7
years for something to be procured. They take it right off the
shelf. Mr. Visclosky.
Mr. Visclosky. But then I look at some of the troops behind
you, and Doctor--just a joke, I am sorry. You have to know the
personalities involved. Sorry about that.
Doctor, I didn't mean to ignore you, I do appreciate your
work, and would attach myself to the observations that the
chairman just made, especially about the milestones that you
had other interchanges with Members. EERE was in yesterday, and
many of their contracts are bilateral with both parties, and we
did have a discussion about this, have agreed to a
determination, and they now are beginning to more closely
integrate some of the milestones and have unilateral authority
if they are not met. And again, best of intentions, but there
are limited resources, and we ought to focus them. So I
appreciate, and again, would encourage you to every degree to
continue to do that.
I would just ask for the record, and not now, because I did
ask a question in EERE yesterday. You mentioned solar
batteries, and they were the two discrete programs I asked them
to respond to for the record. To make sure those jobs are clear
5 years from now, the response yesterday was we are looking to
create demand, we are looking at tax credits which have nothing
to do directly with the Department of Energy, and we are
collecting information. Not good enough for me. If you have
some ideas, and again, for the record, just what are you
looking to do? What should the Department do to make sure that
on two programs, solar, and keep the jobs here, create the jobs
here? I would appreciate that.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, I am sorry.
Mr. Visclosky. Go ahead. I wanted to have a conversation
with Mr. Frantz there.
On the health of the portfolio, and the chairman alluded to
that, I would ask if you could address the concerns raised
about the exposure concerning First Solar, as well as the
Spanish firm Abengoa, I believe it is, because of their out-
sized----
Mr. Frantz. Sure.
Mr. Visclosky [continuing]. Out-sized appearance in the
portfolios. Is there anything in particular you have concerns
about looking at as far as your staff?
Mr. Frantz. No, Congressman Visclosky, your concerns are
well taken. Any time that a concentration occurs in our
business, it is of concern, and it does require particular
oversight. We make it a priority to look at it. With respect to
First Solar, I would like to make two or three comments
quickly. One is that First Solar, we have three projects with
them; they are the big solar generation projects, but remember
that their participation in the projects now, is as the EPC,
the construction contractor, and the vendor supplier. Of those
three projects that we have, one of them was the deal of the
year. General Electric and Nexterra, two of the largest
corporations in the United States, are the sponsors and the
owners in that project.
Agua Caliente, we just had the experience that while NRG
was the primary sponsor, it sold down 49 percent of that to
MidAmerica. That has been publicized and that is a very
positive thing in terms of the dispersion of the concentration,
and Antelope Valley Solar, is one of the largest utilities in
the United States as well. So the point is, with respect to
First Solar, if there were any hiccups on any one of those
projects, which we have no suspicion that there will be, these
are sponsored by some of the largest corporations in the United
States that could support a financial hiccup, and certainly
would be able to readily change the vendor, or the contractor
on those projects.
Abengoa, your question, a very good one. On this one, we
were frankly delighted that Abengoa is one of our primary
project sponsors in the portfolio. Abengoa is a world-class
corporation in this space. Revenues of $9 billion this year.
Every one of their financial tests for 2011 are up. Revenues
were up 46 percent; EBITDA, 36 percent; net income, 24 percent,
and their leverage is going down.
They happen to be one of the most proactive and active and
successful corporations in the world in the solar generation
space. So they bring to the table enormous experience
worldwide, and they have very positive financial performance.
So in that regard, we are very pleased with their participation
and we are very satisfied with the results that are taking
place.
As a matter of fact, the Solana project among them is over
half constructed now and is going very, very well. Also a very
important point to make with respect to them, they bring to
this Nation the follow-down in manufacturing capacity. They
have built the plant which is now fully functional in the State
of Arizona which is manufacturing to support their projects
here in the United States. That is a big, big plus for the U.S.
taxpayer, and for us as portfolio managers.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay, thank you. I may have some more for
Dr. Majumdar, but I will defer to the Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier this month,
the House Oversight Committee issued a report on the loan
program. I have numerous questions. I will just pick a couple
of them from that report, and just get you to respond. One,
they say that the Department of Energy invested a
disproportionate amount of its funds in solar technology
leaving taxpayers vulnerable by overemphasizing a single
technology.
Mr. Frantz. The truth of the matter is, we did invest very
heavily in the solar space. It has been revolutionary. The
point of it is, and I would like to emphasize this point, that
the predominance of solar, we have 12 projects in solar
generation. All of those projects have what we call power
purchase agreements that exceed the tenure of our employed
loans, and that is one of the most solid aspects of our entire
portfolio.
So it is true there is a heavy concentration there, but it
is also is the safest, and ultimately will be the most
successful. There is no question about it. With respect to the
solar manufacturing space, I think I previously made the
comment, Congressman, that we had four projects in solar
manufacturing. They are relatively small amounts, in terms of
loan that have been borrowed, as well as project size, and two
of the four we have not yet dispersed; and we will not, until
we are satisfied that the satisfactory milestones have been
completed. So it is true, there is a disproportionate amount,
but that was where the demand for this program is. The good
news is that we have structured those deals to the point that
they are probably going to be our strongest and most viable
projects in the portfolio.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right, in another observation from House
Oversight it says that: The Department of Energy's failure to
diligently oversee cost and set prudent limitations on
executive compensation, while it distributedbillions of dollars
in loan commitments, has created a significant moral hazard, and has
created enormous risk for the Department of Energy and for taxpayer
funds. And the report cites Beacon Power Corporation, the second
recipient of the 1705 loan, paid three executives more than a quarter
of a million dollars and bonuses in March of 2010, and 18 months later
declared bankruptcy.
Mr. Frantz. Well, a quick answer to that one and a very
logical one. First of all, generally, not just us, but
generally, in the private markets as well, senior lenders do
not participate in board directorships. That is not what we do.
So in effect, we do not have direct control over the governance
of these projects and these corporations. That is left to their
board of directors. So the assertion may be true, but we do not
have the ability to control the compensation levels of
corporations and projects to which we lend to.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, if the gentleman will yield, unlike
the TARP, you don't have any role?
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, correct.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Troubled Asset Relief Program.
Mr. Frantz. Correct.
Mr. Nunnelee. You need to understand the awkward position
it puts me in. I have people in North Mississippi that are
spending $4 a gallon to get back and forth to work, and they
are struggling. And they get their paycheck, and withheld from
their paycheck are Federal income taxes, and that goes to pay
companies that pay multimillion dollar bonuses that declare
bankruptcy.
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Nunnelee. You understand the awkward position that puts
me in?
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir, I do. I do.
Mr. Nunnelee. All right, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Nunnelee. Mr. Olver.
Mr. Olver. Thank you very much. Sir, go ahead.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Fattah, sorry.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you. The loan guarantees, you have done a
number of deals in geothermal.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. Any of them relate to tidal-based energy, tidal
waves?
Mr. Frantz. Oh, no, no.
Mr. Fattah. So all of this--none of this is offshore.
Mr. Frantz. No, our geothermal projects are all deep drill
programs in primarily the West.
Mr. Fattah. Okay, now, the wind projects, any of them
offshore?
Mr. Frantz. No, we have none presently. We have four wind
projects, and they are all on the Continental United States.
Mr. Fattah. Now, you have a lot of international
experience, right?
Mr. Frantz. I do. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fattah. Honduras has got the largest wind farm. Do you
know how that was financed?
Mr. Frantz. No, I don't.
Mr. Fattah. Well, do you know anything about how our
economic competitors interact with the generation of renewable
energy in general? I know 2 weeks ago the E.U. in its Energy
Alliance Agreement talked in large measure about what the
United States was doing and how the E.U. needed to compete
around some of these same issues.
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. Because not doing so would put them at a
disadvantage. And I know here, we got into solar, which I
totally support, in part, because the Chinese were----
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Subsidizing it, and Germany has
been subsidizing wind in a variety of different ways. So I was
wondering whether you could share where we are relative to our
competitors in helping to grow these industries.
Mr. Frantz. Well, I think generally, it is true, that with
respect to the solar and the renewable space, that it is
important that there are incentives to encourage that
development. As you are well aware, the utilities in the State
of California, with the endorsement of their Public Utility
Commission, have permitted higher rates for the power purchase
agreements which has been very important. I would emphasize the
fact, and I think, Congressman, you are alluding to it, that
the returns to employed equity on these projects is very, very
low, so most investors go into them for strategic purposes, and
they go in for the long haul.
There are potentially two applicants in the offshore wind
space, and they will be in a position, we feel, that could be
very viable based on their location, and incentives that they
have locally.
Mr. Fattah. Well, I think that we have made some very
significant strides. Since the chairman spoke about New Jersey,
I will mention my hometown of Philadelphia. Our international
airport terminal is now completely powered by wind energy. The
Eagles, who are going to win the Super Bowl next year, the
entire stadium in which they play is now powered by wind and
solar power. So I think that there are significant
opportunities in pushing clean energy. On the nuclear side, we
haven't done any nuclear in 30 years; however, the
administration has really crossed a major rubicon in the sense
of moving the country out of this kind of a stagnant position
relative to nuclear, with a bias towards action. You had
mentioned in your testimony, that on the advanced nuclear, you
have a deal in, I don't know where it is in your process, but
it is in process somewhere.
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. Could you comment on that?
Mr. Frantz. Well, I alluded to the Vogtle project, which
you are well aware of.
Mr. Fattah. Right, the Vogtle project.
Mr. Frantz. This project is well along. There are over
1,500 people employed on the site. They did receive their
license. We are in the final negotiations to close the
documentation on that project. I have talked with the senior
management. I talk with the senior management of the Southern
Companies weekly. They are profoundly committed to completing
this project, and we have every expectation that it is going to
be a great success story in terms of the renaissance of the
nuclear power in the United States. And by the way, there are
discussions about destruction. We arein the process of finally
negotiating that deal, but it is a classic example of the strength of a
public partnership in bringing a very complicated and very large
project on line.
Mr. Fattah. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Keep an eye on the small modular
reactors, too. There is a lot of excitement in that area.
Mr. Frantz. We have been in discussions, Mr. Chairman, on
that subject, as a matter of fact. We are very interested.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Some real excitement, a lot of different
players. Some large, some small.
Mr. Frantz. We will have to come back to you with a new
solicitation, if you will permit us.
Mr. Fattah. We would be interested on a bipartisan basis.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Olver, you are at the end of the
line, but always front and center for us. Want to put a plug in
for your home State?
Mr. Olver. You are going to confuse me if you do that,
because I was going to talk again about SBIR, which my home
State does very, very well on. But instead, I wanted to talk
about carbon capture, and storage, and utilization because we
had a long discussion about that yesterday, where I think I
raised everybody's level of confusion in the process. You have
spoken in your testimony here about the cost of capturing
carbon dioxide from a coal-fired power plant at $80 per ton of
CO
2
. I take it that would apply also to gas-fired
plants. They would be of a very similar nature?
Dr. Majumdar. More expensive, because it is----
Mr. Olver. More expensive? Why is it more expensive for----
Dr. Majumdar. Because the amount of carbon dioxide is of
lower concentration in pure natural gas. You have less carbon.
So thereby, if you want to purify, you want to extract
something out which is more dilute----
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Dr. Majumdar. As a chemist you would know that it takes
more energy to do that.
Mr. Olver. Okay. But the technique of capture is no
different.
Dr. Majumdar. That is true.
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, that is--see----
Mr. Olver. Now, are there other places where--we aren't yet
getting around trying to do--we are looking at the big points
sources, which are these big power plants and the action of
capture. We haven't done anything about capture for
CO
2
in the case of our mobile sources like our
transportation sources, have we?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, Congressman----
Mr. Olver. Have we done anything on that? Are you doing any
research? Are you giving out projects?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, I think there are several ways of
addressing that. If you want to decarbonize the transportation
sector, you could look at biofuels. The goal that we have set
out for ourselves----
Mr. Olver. But that is not carbon capture.
Dr. Majumdar. That is not carbon capture.
Mr. Olver. I wanted to see. How many different options are
there for carbon capture, or is the technique essentially one
technique on whether it is coal, or gas-fired facilities?
Dr. Majumdar. Sure. So today, there are only a few
techniques for carbon capture. A few. And they are based on
chemicals or a chemical reagent. Either you have chilled
ammonia, or you have a solution of what is called
monoethanolamine. And so you have an air separation unit. You
pass CO
2
coming out of an exhaust of a coal-fired
power plant and you drop this amine solution down and it gets
absorbed. Then you take that amine solution with absorbed
CO
2
to a separate location and then you have got to
heat it to about 100, 120, 150 degrees Celsius to emit the
CO
2
again, but now you have got a purified form.
Thereby, you can concentrate it and you can then pump it to a
location where you can do utilization and pump it down and
produce oil, which is the whole idea of carbon capture
utilization and sequestration.
You can sequester the CO
2
below and produce oil
at the same time. Using that technique today is $80 a ton of
CO
2
for capture. While the cost is coming down, in
ARPA-E what we created is that look, we have to reduce the cost
way further.
Mr. Olver. So you have given out 15 projects which are
intended to reduce the cost.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver. So it is 15 projects, each of which has a
different approach to how they are going to do that.
Dr. Majumdar. Exactly, that is right.
Mr. Olver. So you are now getting two approaches, and out
of that process we might end up with a couple of these
approaches that actually meet your goals.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. And our goal is to reduce the
cost to $25 a ton, and why 25? Because the price of
CO
2
that is set by EOR and it has to be on the order
of 30, 35 or so.
Mr. Olver. That is an option for utilization, and you don't
go from storage. You go from the producing, to the capturing,
directly to utilization.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, that is the goal. When you pump
CO
2
down to produce oil, it also getssequestered at
the same time. So this is a win/win/win proposition, again, because you
can capture the CO
2
from the coal-fired power plants, pump
it down, sequester it, and produce domestic oil. So this is something
that we are deeply interested in, and the key challenge is to reduce
the cost of carbon capture, which is where ARPA-E and the Department of
Energy as a whole have focused to reduce the cost of carbon.
Mr. Olver. What are the sizes of your 15 projects?
Dr. Majumdar. On an average, about $3 million. That is a
typical ARPA-E project and some of them are a few hundred
thousand dollars.
Mr. Olver. Oh, you have some techniques for people that
propose to do this for much less than $3 million?
Dr. Majumdar. No. In our ARPA-E projects, the program that
we have created is focused only on carbon capture, because that
is the cost barrier that we have today. We are not focused on
pumping down and utilization.
Mr. Olver. No, I understand. You have all of these
different projects. You have some people who are thinking that,
have I either only asked for, or you have concluded that it is
risky, or something, and you don't want to spend so much to
give them all the same number?
Dr. Majumdar. Well, this is on an average. These are risky
ideas. These are game-changing potentially. The average is $3
million; $1 million a year. This is to try out a new idea; and
if it is successful, then they will go to the next stage of
scaling and putting it in a power plant, et cetera. But that
comes in a pilot plant, and that comes at a later stage. But
this is to try out other avenues.
Let me give you an example. There are something called
ionic liquids. These are new kinds of reagents, and the idea is
that could you take ionic liquids to capture carbon dioxide and
then move it away at a much more cost-effective and energy-
efficient way. There are other membranes that have been created
to do carbon capture. We have enzymes. We are capturing carbon
dioxide in our body and we are exhaling it right now and we
don't have to heat ourselves to 150 degrees Celsius. There is
something else going on.
Mr. Olver. Well, let me quickly repeat the question that I
had asked yesterday, and I had the impression that we had a
whole group of options for carbon capture, and we had also a
whole group of options for storage, and a group of options for
utilization. And you are not certainly contradicting that.
Obviously, utilization may be in many different things besides
the EOR program, and some of them will appear if we can cheapen
the amount so that we are producing CO
2
that you can
handle in serious tonnages in a better way than we can do now.
And I was asking, as a one-time chemist, is there someplace
where I can see a compendium, not too long, because otherwise I
would never get it read, but a review paper, or something like
that about the different problems that we have like the problem
of sequestration, the problem of capture, the problem of
storage, and the problem of utilization.
And sometimes it is going to have all three components, and
sometimes it may not have a long storage component. And I
wanted to see what we were doing in these, and what our
prospects were, how far along we are on this area.
Dr. Majumdar. I would be delighted to share the review
papers on these, and where we are on each of those components.
I will be delighted to share them with you.
Mr. Olver. You are talking now about several review papers.
There are review papers on each of these, and I will have a
pile of paper and it will never get read.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You will make sure that Mr. Olver has
those papers?
Dr. Majumdar. Yes, I will make sure. I will make sure you
have those papers.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are going to make sure you get those
papers. And I want to get back and I think the hour is late,
and we were kind of a late start. I just want to get back, Mr.
Frantz, you mentioned the 705 loan guarantee, you know, that
you ran out of authority on that----
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. To issue new loan
guarantees. You still have, I believe, over $500 million of
emergency funding that you have not yet obligated. Can you--
what are you going to use this funding for?
Mr. Frantz. Well, we feel it is very important to have this
availability, given that our tenures and the complexity of our
projects, and there will be a requirement almost certainly that
there be modifications to these transactions. Therefore, this
is a safety valve for us to accommodate modifications that may
have to be made in these projects in the outyears, given
circumstances that we can't foresee right now, but certainly in
all probability they will occur.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So just for the record, how many loan
guarantees have been modified to date, and----
Mr. Frantz. Well, none have been modified to date because
we are just in the initial stages.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So as we look ahead here, what would you
anticipate?
Mr. Frantz. You know, I couldn't, Mr. Chairman, put a
specific number on it, but they are almost certainly, given the
complexity and the size of these projects, there will be a
requirement for those modifications in the outyears.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Doctor, before we close-up here, Mr.
Visclosky asked about, and others asked about what are we doing
to actually maintain the intellectual property that you have
developed to make sure that it stays here----
Dr. Majumdar. Right.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. And that there is a direct
relationship between the creation of American jobs. I mean, we
have heard others from the departments testify, but we don't
get much reassurance that all of the creativity, innovation
that you are talking about, all of the best minds that
collectively you have put together on a variety of these
projects, that--we don't have a feeling of assurance that a lot
of that is going to stay stateside here. What are you doing?
Dr. Majumdar. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question. This
is something that is of deep concern to me. I am very
passionate about it. Actually, I wrote an article on this
called ``Make Locally, Sell Globally.'' And I have outlined
some of the issues, and I can share this with you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. You are going to give that to me when
you give Mr. Olver his reports?
Dr. Majumdar. This is a single page.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am concerned about patents.
Dr. Majumdar. I agree.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I am concerned about, you know, we are
aware that--it depends where you listen, the Chinese have a lot
more patents than we do in certain areas, and that scientific
papers are lacking sometimes compared to what we used to do,
and I just wondered whether we are keeping intellectual
property here as best we can, and protecting our manufacturing
base.
Dr. Majumdar. Yes, Mr. Chairman. There is no silver bullet
on this one. Let me just explain. There are multiple things
that have to be done. Number one is the IP part, and what we
have done is, for example, for small businesses, there is the
Bayh-Dole Act, and we have gone a little beyond Bayh-Dole to
ensure that some of the IP leads to American manufacturing here
in the United States. But if you are looking at manufacturing,
which as I said, I am very passionate about, there is other
things as well. Financing is very important.
So, and this goes beyond ARPA-E now. Because ARPA-E's job
is to look at the breakthrough, to demonstrate that something
can actually work. But we have created, and this is right in
the DNA of ARPA-E, a tech-to-market team within ARPA-E. Their
job is to look at the innovations that are coming out, and once
they are successful, to create the connective tissue for the
rest of the world which includes large business, which includes
financing, so that they can succeed in going beyond ARPA-E and
leads to manufacturing, and leads to jobs out here. Some of
that is showing success. I just heard yesterday there is a team
that we funded called Phononic Devices in North Carolina, and
our funding was to demonstrate that you have a new kind of
solid-state refrigerator, and they have been successful. Now,
that is leading to a pilot plant in North Carolina to develop
these devices right there.
But if you really want to look at manufacturing as a whole,
there are other aspects. There is a human capital aspect, which
I think is very important and you and I had a discussion on
that. There is a market demand that needs to be created, but
that is, frankly, I would say a little bit beyond ARPA-E. We
are doing everything we can.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, some of our best human capital,
and it is disturbing, but we live in a global economy, have
moved to China. I mean, there have been some remarkable people
that we have trained and educated who are now, shall we say,
setting up shop in China. And just for the record, do the
Chinese have multiple ARPA-Es? How wouldyou describe what they
are doing?
Dr. Majumdar. I have not heard of an ARPA-E in China,
frankly. Maybe they are doing something that I don't know of.
They haven't announced it, but what I could say is what we are
doing out here. I think we are doing everything we can to
transition some of the technology breakthroughs into
manufacturing out here.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I say that because both Mr. Visclosky
and I serve on Defense Appropriations Committee, and from one
of the military installations I represent, this individual was
followed around when he went to China, and he asked many of the
students who were gathered around him what they were majoring
in, and they said they were majoring in warhead development.
There were about like 150 of them. And I just wondered whether
what we, obviously--we don't have that type of, shall we say,
college or university major, but at the installations we have
people who focus on that in research and development. I was
just wondering whether you are taking a look over your
shoulder.
Dr. Majumdar. We are. All I can say is I strongly believe
in the science and engineering infrastructure out here, which
is the best in the world. I also believe in the capacity for
the United States to manufacture. I strongly believe in that,
which is why I am so passionate about it, and that is why I
wrote the article. But I really think that we have to align
multiple things and I think we have to align the financing. We
have to align the market demand created out here. We have to
align the human capital so that people get retrained and get
into the workforce, and we have to align that with the
technology innovations and the IP protection. We are looking at
whatever we can in our capacity in ARPA-E to do that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Visclosky, anything further?
Mr. Visclosky. If I could, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Frantz, on the
USEC program, it does not lack controversy in your office or on
this subcommittee, and I view it as multifaceted as far as your
consideration. One, is the technology, and the Department
obviously has looked at developing a $300 million research and
development program----
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Visclosky [continuing]. As well as the financial
standing of the company itself. Could you bring the
subcommittee up-to-date as to your impression from a loan
guarantee perspective as to----
Mr. Frantz. Well, sure. This project is no longer ongoing.
It has been--it is being managed separately within the
Department of Energy under a separate program. As you are
perhaps well aware, it was an applicant for the front end
uranium enrichment in the Loan Guarantee Program. We never have
been able to reach a conclusion that the technology was ready
for full commercial application, nor have we been able to
ascertain that the corporation was financially enough sound to
execute the overall project. So based on that determination
within my staff, the Secretary has chosen to establish a
separate program for that project within the Department.
Mr. Visclosky. On the auto program, markets have obviously
changed since the inception of that program, and I believe you
have about $4 billion left in the program.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. What is your forecast, if you would, for
assumptions going forward? Will it be demand from the industry,
and will it be from the manufacturers? Will it be from the
component side, and do you draw a distinction between the two?
Mr. Frantz. Yes. We do draw a distinction. I will work
backwards. You have asked me two or three questions. First of
all, given our experience in the sector, and particularly with
the OEMs, which the original equipment manufacturers, the major
auto companies, it is a known fact, and we hear it in the
marketplace all the time that they prefer to control all of the
integral parts within their organization from a quality-control
point of view, as well as the economics of vertical
integration.
So it is very, very difficult for an independent individual
component manufacturer who is not underwritten, or subscribed
to by the major automobile companies to actually penetrate and
become ultimate suppliers to them. So that is the impediment in
the first instance.
Yes, there has been a dramatic change, a very positive one,
wonderful news for the American economy for sure, that there
has been a dramatic turnaround in this industry. For that
reason, what I would want to assure the committee, is that we
have a very proactive initiative in the automotive industry
through Webinars, outreach to all the companies--not only the
major automotive makers, but as well as smaller individual
companies that we are still in business. We are open for
business. We would very much welcome their applications. So I
can't comment specifically, but we are doing a full proactive
outreach to this industry to make sure that everybody is aware
we are here.
We are still open for business, and we are still very
interested in helping them, in assisting them to bring new
technologies, particularly as they pertain to the CAFE
standards, and the efficiencies of motor gasoline.
Mr. Visclosky. The chairman made a comment, because I have
been on the subcommittee for some number of years and have been
through the iterations of the 2005 program, the auto program,
and the stimulus bill. And while, as far as the dollar amount
and the exact configuration of programs, it would be different
than if I was writing it individually, this is obviously a
collective effort, and I have supported all of them.
It would be easy, because there have been some problems--I
wish there had been no problems--to castigate you and the
Department for them. I wish they had not happened.
Mr. Frantz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Visclosky. I would encourage you as we go forward to
continue, from my impression of your testimony today, to
exercise that great care. My sense is you have had over 600
applicants. Some you probably threw away the first day. We
talked about USEC, it is in a different department now. I urge
you to continue to be very careful. I mean, we wouldn't have a
Loan Guarantee Program if there wasn't a risk.
Mr. Frantz. Correct.
Mr. Visclosky. Whether it is technological, or whether it
is financial.
Mr. Frantz. Correct.
Mr. Visclosky. Nuclear, I have had interchanges with some
of my colleagues who do not share my opinion, and said well,
there is not a technical risk. I said, but you and I are having
a political conversation. There is other types of risk. There
is other types of risk here.
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. I would encourage you to be as attentive as
you can on this program. And Doctor, I do appreciate your good
work.
Dr. Majumdar. Thank you.
Mr. Frantz. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I associate myself with those comments.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. If you are going back around, I will ask some
more questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Go right ahead. Mr. Olver is going to be
the last one to question. I am sure he will keep his remarks
short.
Mr. Fattah. Question, the CAFE standards, at one point you
had the automakers protesting, at and another point or a year
or so later after they were finally announced they were
standing with the President in agreement that we could get
above 50 miles an hour. In terms of the remaining $4 billion in
loan guarantees and I am just following up on the ranking
member's question about this. What expected deal flow exists
going forward to help those auto manufacturers who are on
board?
Mr. Frantz. Yes, the simplistic answer. That is the----
Mr. Fattah. We like simplistic answers, thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Simplistic answers, Mr. Olver. You are
the last out of the box here.
Mr. Olver. Mr. Secretary, early on in your conversation,
you said you terminated some projects on your major ARPA-E
projects. You had only been going for 3 years. I think you got
your first major money in within fiscal year 2009, but it was
actually through the passage of the American Competes Act, or
something, I think that may be where it came.
Dr. Majumdar. From the Recovery Act. That is where we got
the first dollars.
Mr. Olver. Was that authorized for $100 million?
Dr. Majumdar. In the Recovery Act, that is right.
Mr. Olver. In the Recovery Act? All right, okay. So that is
the only money that you have actually had up for as much as 3
years, because you got another $180 million in each of the
following, or thereabouts in each of fiscal year 2010 and 2011.
Dr. Majumdar. Right, so we had to obligate all of the
Recovery Act money by September of 2010, which we did. Then we
had fiscal year 2011 as the first budget that you appropriated
for us, and now we have the fiscal year 2012 appropriated
budget.
Mr. Olver. Have you terminated any of the projects that you
gave out with 2011 money?
Dr. Majumdar. Congressman, it is too early to--we have to
give them a chance.
Mr. Olver. So it would be among the $400 million that you
had originally.
Dr. Majumdar. Right, that is right.
Mr. Olver. And how many of those did you have----
Dr. Majumdar. We have terminated now nine projects, and
that money went back to Treasury.
Mr. Olver. But weren't those all by 3-year contracts?
Dr. Majumdar. The maximum was 3 years. It is anywhere from
2 to 3 years.
Mr. Olver. So did you terminate before the end of a
contract?
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver. You actually terminate before you got to the end
of a contract?
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. Because they did not meet
their milestones.
Mr. Olver. And you are actually following milestones.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. There are go/no-go annual
milestones and if they don't meet the milestones we terminate
the project. We discontinue the project before the end of the
project and we put that money back in Treasury. That is what we
did with the Recovery Act.
Mr. Olver. Okay, but these were fairly large projects. If
we were trying to do that sort of thing with SBIR, I am
commending you for the innovation that you were able to do. But
some of that money, even of the $400 million, had to go out by
the SBIR project, 2 or 3 percent of it had to go out by that,
so that was under constrained arrangements. You had not yet
gotten so innovative that you were trying to do this under
entirely different sorts of procedures.
Dr. Majumdar. Well, let me just say that so far, the SBIR
program in the Department of Energy has been centralized. This
is the first time in fiscal year 2012 that we are going to
launch an SBIR effort within ARPA-E. So we don't have a history
of doing SBIR before because it is all centralized and went
through one office. This time in fiscal year 2012 we are trying
for the first time in the SBIR effort within----
Mr. Olver. So then I guess you would change the answer to--
I asked, did you have to put out 2 or 3 percent of the $400
million into SBIR?
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver. So it was taxed into the central department
program?
Dr. Majumdar. That is right. It was a centralized effort.
Mr. Olver. That percent was taken out and put into the
central program----
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver [continuing]. Which was very bureaucratic in
nature. I mean, I say it was very bureaucratic. It is very
difficult to get it from the first one to the second one and
the timing as we talked about it earlier. My State did very,
very well. I was in the State Senate at the time that it was
created in the middle 1980s, and it immediately got the small
businesses in my area into it. And some of them eventually
began to get into the swing and others never could get anything
out of it. And yet as you said before, it took a long time to
get from the first one to the second one.
Dr. Majumdar. Right.
Mr. Olver. And a whole new application process, where you
are operating in a much more flexible way. It is interesting.
Dr. Majumdar. We are starting that SBIR now, and as I said,
I had the same experience, and we are going to take the time
gap between Phase I and Phase II and make it zero, and thereby
enable small businesses not to have this cash-flow problem.
Mr. Olver. It was a horrible gap.
Dr. Majumdar. That is right.
Mr. Olver. Okay.
Mr. Visclosky. The gentleman, would you yield? When you
were in the--you on the Finance Committee, right?
Mr. Olver. Yes.
Mr. Visclosky. That is why they all ended up in your
district.
Mr. Olver. No, actually, my district, in general--in
Massachusetts my district was in the western part of the State,
so we got a few of them anyway.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are going to send out an electric car
from Washington to Pittsfield. Anything else for the Good of
the Order? Gentlemen, thank you very much. We stand adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0791B.221

WITNESSES

----------
Page
Brinkman, W.F....................................................   359
Frantz, David....................................................   535
Hoffman, Patricia................................................   113
Huizenga, Dave...................................................     1
Kelly, Henry.....................................................   113
Majumdar, Dr. Arun...............................................   535
McConnell, Charles...............................................   113
Podonsky, Glenn..................................................     1


