- DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyNITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, Miles Taylor, and Cornell Teague
Staff Assistants
________

PART 3
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
National Protection and Programs Directorate.....................    1
U.S. Coast Guard.................................................  119
Federal Emergency Management Agency..............................  177

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
PART 3

NP&PD

USCG

FEMA

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013
?

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyNITA M. LOWEY, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Ben Nicholson, Jeff Ashford, Kris Mallard,
Kathy Kraninger, Miles Taylor, and Cornell Teague
Staff Assistants
________
PART 3
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Page
National Protection and Programs Directorate.....................    1
U.S. Coast Guard.................................................  119
Federal Emergency Management Agency..............................  177

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-438                     WASHINGTON : 2012

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri           JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana             SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio         BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 1, 2012.

NATIONAL PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE

WITNESS

RAND BEERS, UNDER SECRETARY FOR THE NATIONAL PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS
DIRECTORATE AND COORDINATOR FOR COUNTERTERRORISM

Opening Remarks: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The hearing is called to order this morning.
And today we will discuss the Department of Homeland Security's
National Protection and Programs Directorate, NPPD. To help us
better understand these programs, we welcome NPPD Under
Secretary Rand Beers.
Secretary Beers, this meeting will be more informal than
our usual hearings. So I understand you have a few basic
prepared remarks that will give us an overview, and then of
course I will allow Members to ask questions. Also, votes are
probably going to be--we will probably have an hour before
votes. I think we will have at least a good hour before we have
to leave to go vote, so that should give us time to have a
meaningful hearing.
Of course, let me remind everyone that there are no
electronic devices allowed--BlackBerrys, cell phones, iPads. If
someone has inadvertently brought one in, then one of the staff
can take it and stow it outside.
While there are many topics we want to discuss today, or
need to discuss today, I think there are two things that are
first and foremost on our plate. First, the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terrorism Standards, commonly known as CFATS. In December,
a very disturbing internal report was leaked to the media
concerning the management of the CFATS program.
The second is cybersecurity. The importance of
cybersecurity becomes more and more apparent each day, as we
read more and more reports of breaches in our private sector
and our government networks. The President's budget request
includes $769 million for the National Cyber Security Division,
an increase of $325 million above fiscal year 2012. This
includes an unprecedented $202 million for the Department of
Homeland Security to transfer to other agencies and departments
to fund projects that may reduce their cyber risk. This request
also includes a significant increase in other cyber programs.
However, DHS has not provided a clear, complete cost or
schedule information to justify either of these increases.
Secretary Beers, we need a justification for these funds, as
this Congress can no longer provide blank checks, no matter the
importance of the programs.
Additionally, Secretary Beers, we would again welcome a
quick update on the threats to our cyber and critical
infrastructure. So, given the breadth of these topics and their
relevance to nearly every aspect of our daily lives, we will
clearly have an interesting discussion today. So if you will
summarize your comments and hit the high points, then we will
allow time for exchange of questions and answers between the
Members.
But before we begin, I would like to recognize Ranking
Member Price for his opening remarks.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.004

Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you. I will be very brief, Mr. Chairman,
because I know we want to get on with the initial presentation
and then probably break for votes and come back, hopefully, for
a more extended discussion.
I want to also welcome the Under Secretary and his
associates here.
I think you very effectively highlighted the likely focus
of this morning's discussion. We do want to know more about
what it is going to take to develop a robust chemical security
program. We want to explore some of the delays in the ammonium
nitrate program. We will have a chance to talk about that in
the discussion to follow.
You are one of the few agencies, Mr. Beers, who actually
has an increase in the current fiscal year. It is not an
increase on paper, but when you take account of the US-VISIT
transfer, it is indeed an increase--a modest one, but one that
underscores the importance of this cybersecurity issue.
I, too, will want to get a better understanding of the way
this is going to work and particularly the proposed transfer of
$202 million to other Federal agencies to strengthen their
cyber networks. We are meeting in a classified setting, so we
need to have a good understanding of the current assessment of
these threats but also the rationale behind this kind of
interagency effort that you are envisioning.
So we look forward to your presentation.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.006

Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Secretary Beers, thank you for being
here again, and we look forward to your comments.

Opening Statement: Under Secretary Beers

Mr. Beers. Thank you, Chairman Aderholt and Ranking Member
Price and other distinguished members of the committee. I will
limit my remarks, in the interest of getting to the question-
and-answer session, and focus specifically on cybersecurity and
chemical security issues.
I have here with me staff who have detailed knowledge and
insights into each of these programs. And, as this is an
informal session, I may, on occasion, ask them to make some
additional remarks in addition to my own.
As you know, cybersecurity has become a fundamental issue
with respect to both the economic and the national security of
this country. We have a vast array of independent and
interdependent networks that are critical to communications,
travel, powering our homes, and running our economy.
But the efficiencies that we realize by this networked
society have also created vulnerabilities, and they are
frequently exploited by theft for both money and intellectual
property. These vulnerabilities also represent or create the
potential for cyber attack, to cause physical damage that
disrupts and destroys parts of our critical infrastructure that
we rely on every day--for example, the electrical grid or our
water supply.
This threat set involves nation-states, in particular
Russia and China, but it also involves criminals and just plain
old hackers, like the Anonymous group. The highest-quality
tools and attacks that we see certainly come from nation-
states. But I think everybody needs to understand here that, as
those tools appear in our networks, they also appear on the
view screens of criminals and hackers. And so, to simply say
that nation-states have corralled all of the most sophisticated
tools doesn't recognize the fact that there is a proliferation
of those very tools into the hands of criminals who may, in
fact, be associated with nation-states or may be independent of
nation-states and are just plain old hackers who, for whatever
purpose, would simply seek to do harm and disrupt the
functioning of our networks.
So these risks require, I think, prudent investments,
prudent investments that can deliver results. The fiscal year
2012 appropriations, which came with the leadership of this
Committee, provided a strong increase to prior-year funds. And
the President's 2013 budget asks for an additional increase,
specifically a 70 percent increase for our National Cyber
Security Division, over the fiscal year 2012 funds. We
recognize that this is being done in a time when difficult cuts
have to be made and found elsewhere in the government, but we
believe that this is a prudent and necessary approach and that
the increase is absolutely necessary.
Let me just briefly touch on some of the things that we
have done with the funding that you all have given us. In
fiscal year 2011, we were able to execute 98 percent of the
funds on time. And we will continue our commitment to
obligating prudently but in a timely fashion so that those
funds don't carry over.
NPPD has four roles that I want to emphasize here in
cybersecurity. We lead the Nation's cybersecurity awareness and
education efforts for the Federal Government. We coordinate the
Federal Government's national response to major cyber
incidents. We also protect Federal civilian networks. And we
work with owners and operators of critical infrastructure to
secure their networks.
Over the last fiscal year, fiscal year 2011, US-CERT
received over 106,000 individual reports of incidents from
Federal agencies, from critical infrastructure, and from our
industry partners. And we issued over 5,200 cyber alerts as a
result of this that were used by the private sector, by our
government, and by network administrators to protect their
systems.
We requested $93 million in fiscal year 2011, and that is a
$13.9 million increase, so that US-CERT can respond to this
growing number of Federal civilian and critical infrastructure
network intrusions.
Let's be clear: This is going to increase, the number of
intrusions are going to increase, and we need to be in a
position to respond. So this $13.9 million will add
approximately 23 additional persons on top of the number that
we expect at the end of fiscal year 2012 to help us deal with
the increased workload that US-CERT is going to have to deal
with.
In addition to specifically protecting Federal civilian
agency systems, we are, as you know, deploying the Einstein
technology to detect and block intrusions of these networks in
collaboration with our partners in the Department of Defense.
We have requested an increase of about $117 million to
accelerate this deployment of our system.
But let me be clear here: Neither Einstein nor any other
technology by itself, neither ours nor NSA's, is going to be
able to deliver entirely a solution to this problem. This is a
much broader, more complicated, and more sophisticated system
that we need to build. So while we need to have the money in
order to deploy the Einstein systems, we also have other
requirements. And that is what I want to talk about next.
As you know, we have requested a significant increase of
$202 million for Federal network security. And this is intended
to provide DHS with greater visibility into the vulnerabilities
that need to be addressed in Federal networks. So as Einstein
tells us what we see coming in, in terms of threats, this
request is designed to allow us to see on a continuous-
monitoring basis what the vulnerabilities within the other
departments and agencies actually look like, so that when we
see the threat coming, we can produce a response that quickly
seals off the problem that we face, but we can also see, in
advance of the arrival of those threats, where those
vulnerabilities are and to provide guidance and direction to
departments and agencies so that they can do a better job of
securing their own networks.
This is a program which allows us to have continuous
monitoring of departments and agencies. It is something that we
need to do our job as the managers of compliance with respect
to the Federal information security requirement that OMB has
passed on to this.
With respect to critical infrastructure, we work with the
private sector to help secure the key systems upon which all
Americans and indeed the Federal Government rely, such as the
financial sector, the power grid, water systems, and
transportation networks. In particular, we pay attention to
industrial control systems, which control processes at power
plants and transportation systems.
Last year, we deployed seven response teams to such
critical infrastructure organizations at their request in
response to cyber intrusions. In fiscal year 2011, we conducted
78 voluntary proactive assessments of control systems entities,
and we made recommendations to those companies on how they can
provide their cybersecurity. We distributed 1,150 copies of our
cyber evaluation tool, and we conducted over 40 training
sessions, all of which makes owners and operators better
equipped to protect their networks.
In fiscal year 2013, we have a request for $62.8 million
for our Critical Infrastructure and Cyber Protection Awareness
branch. This includes $6.5 million which will expand our effort
with the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center to
30 States. The funding for the CICPA program will enhance our
ability to increase the number of onsite assessments that we
are able to conduct to evaluate the resilience of critical
infrastructure. Given the importance of this program to the
Nation's cybersecurity, I want to pledge to you that we will
continue to work with you on this funding, and we expect to be
held accountable on this investment.
With respect to chemical facilities, we also recognize the
need for accounting to you the problems we face and the plan of
action that we have in terms of moving forward. We have asked
for $74.5 million to develop and implement mechanisms that will
assess high-risk chemical facilities and ensure that these
facilities meet the risk-based performance standards that we
have. This funding will support the development and
implementation of mechanisms to regulate the sale and transfer
the Nation's supply of ammonium nitrate, as well.
We have done a lot of work over the past few years to
establish and implement an unprecedented regulatory program,
but as you know from the leaked report, these challenges
remain. I asked the Director and Deputy Director--the new
Deputy Director and Director of this program to provide me with
a report last summer. They provided that to me in November of
this year. It was a clear indication that we had some serious
problems that we have to take into account, but it also
outlined in a lengthy plan of action a number of steps, 103
different issues that we needed to address and an indication of
the way that we need to address them.
And we have made progress with respect to this already. For
example, we had only 10 site security plans that were
authorized for an inspection; we are up to 55 now. That was
done as a result of a surge effort to go through those plans
and not to approve them just to get them out the door, but to
make sure that what we were authorizing, in fact, were plans
that deserved that authorization. And we will now conduct the
inspections necessary.
We expect to complete the review of all of the site
security plans in the Tier 1 category, the category with the
most vulnerabilities, in the next several months. We will begin
the process of issuing authorizations on Tier 2 facilities
during this fiscal year. And we expect to be in a good position
to move on to Tiers 3 and 4.
We have also changed our training effort, and we are
reclassifying a number of positions to ensure that the
personnel and the job requirements are a better match.
The Department, NPPD, and I personally take these
responsibilities seriously, and we are moving forward quickly
to address the challenges before us. We believe that CFATS is
making the Nation safer, and we are dedicated to its success.
We will meet the necessary course corrections and improve the
program to better protect the Nation.
We expect to have gone through almost all of the items in
the plan of action, as it is currently stated, by the end of
the year. But let me be clear: This plan is not a static plan.
This plan is going to be an evolving document. As we get to
solutions with respect to what the action items are now, we
expect that we will have other issues that we will need to deal
with. And we will keep this committee informed fully of our
progress with respect to that plan.
Thank you all very much, and I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Secretary Beers.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.018

CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS: ISCD

Mr. Aderholt. And I thank you for your comments on the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program. And that is
what I want to start out with as my first question.
NPPD recently provided the Subcommittee with the internal
memorandum entitled, ``Challenges Facing ISCD and the Path
Forward,'' which, of course, discusses the challenges that the
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division has encountered as
it implements the CFATS program. These challenges include
hiring a management of staff; delays developing, implementing,
and managing the inspection processes; complications defining
and articulating program missions and goals; and difficulties
with internal processes to minimize the risk, fraud, abuse, and
mismanagement.
The action plan that was included in the memo to address
this problem contains 91 specific actions, none of which are
prioritized. Additionally, there are no timelines, there are no
milestones or specific resources associated with the action
plan.
My question to you is, how can we have confidence that the
resources are being used effectively for the program and that
measurable improvements will occur if there is no priority or
no timeline for the 91 separate actions?
Question: When can you provide the Committee with an action
plan that sets up these priorities, that includes these
milestones and these timelines?
Mr. Beers. Sir, we are working on that specific question,
and we will have something for you--let's see, today is the
first of March--by the end of March, that will be an update.
One of the things I want to be clear, though, as we move
through this action plan--and we want to keep you fully
informed--we also want time, at least some time, to pass so
that we can actually accomplish the improvements that are
necessary.
But with respect to the hiring of the management staff, we
expect that to be completed in April of this year. The
inspection process is being redefined now. We expect that by
the end of March.
So we have some specific timelines. But when we gave you
the plan in early January, we hadn't had an opportunity to put
all of those milestones and timelines into the plan.
Mr. Aderholt. Regarding the challenges, what barriers do
you see in overcoming some of the challenges that are discussed
in the memorandum?
Mr. Beers. Well, let me just give you one--actually, two
specific examples.
One, there was a problem with respect to the training
officials within ISCD being properly trained and qualified for
those positions. This was a result of a problem that existed
throughout the Department, with an expectation that training
would be controlled and run out of headquarters. What we have
done now is broken through that logjam and are in the process
of hiring qualified training people to do that.
Secondly, with respect to ensuring that all of the
positions within ISCD are appropriate to the job that they are
being asked to do so that we can match qualified people with
the skill set required, we have deployed from NPPD headquarters
to ISCD some human capital, people, to help them move through
this as quickly as possible.
So what we are trying to do--and those are two examples of
obstacles that existed before that we are trying to fix so that
ISCD is in a much better position to carry out the mission that
you all have assigned it.
Mr. Aderholt. How can we be assured that this type of
mismanagement and dysfunction is isolated in the CFATS program
and not an issue that affects the other organizations?
Mr. Beers. So, as a result of the discovery within the ISCD
program, we have had town-halls and training sessions and
discussions with all of the Senior Executive Service members of
NPPD to talk about this problem and the need to look at it.
In particular, as a result of the discovery last summer
that the tiering process had been done incorrectly and that it
appears that people knew about it earlier and didn't inform
senior management of the problem, we have also, on a repeated
basis, said that we do not want to be shielded from bad news.
We would rather hear the bad news sooner so that we can deal
with the problems. And don't assume that you can spend time
fixing it and then tell us that you have identified a problem
but you have also fixed it. Let us help you fix those problems,
because sometimes we have access to different resources and
different perspectives at senior management levels that might
help you to do that job more quickly, but you have to tell us.
So I have said that throughout my leadership, but this was
a teaching moment that I have taken advantage of within the
organization to remind people how serious it is when you don't
tell people of problems that might be fixed.
Mr. Aderholt. In December, after reviewing the internal
memo, the Subcommittee requested that GAO examine the
memorandum and the NPPD's efforts to address the problems
identified. Can the Subcommittee anticipate your organization's
full cooperation, including complete and timely access to
documents and access to officials involved in addressing these
problems?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir, without question.
And as I mentioned to you last night, the other thing we
want to try to do is, because another committee of this body
had requested an IG inspection that appeared to overlap, we
have asked the two investigative organizations, GAO and DHS's
IG, to talk to one another so that we can support both of them
but preferably not doing exactly the same thing.
We will do whatever we have to do. But I just want you to
be aware and the committee to be aware in this session that
there are two investigations that, on the surface, might look
like they are duplicative. I don't think that will be the case,
but I just want you to know it. But whatever we do, you and
others will have our full support.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. We are working with GAO on that to make
sure that that is not the case.
Mr. Price.

CYBERSECURITY: CONTINUOUS MONITORING PROGRAM

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Beers, I would like to switch to cybersecurity. Before
the morning is out, I want to ask you to walk through with us
the way this interagency effort is going to work exactly, how
this $202 million that you have requested will be deployed, and
why you have chosen this model, this kind of setup for
administering those funds. I do think we need to have a better
understanding of that.
But, first, I would like to take advantage of the fact that
we are in a classified setting here to take a few steps back
and ask for your assessment of the kind of threat we are facing
and the shape of that threat. Recent reports about intrusions--
we have our own list, of course. There have been well
publicized cyber attacks at several Federal agencies--Justice,
Commerce, Census in the last 30 days alone. In the private
sector, hackers breached data last summer in over 100 million
Sony music and gaming accounts, shut down those systems for
days. We have seen recent breaches at Epsilion, Citibank,
Boeing, Google. We have seen attacks from authenticated users
at Lockheed Martin and RSA. Those, of course, are much more
difficult to detect and stop, since it appears to be legitimate
users that are accessing areas that they typically don't need
to be into.
So we would be interested in any current information you
have that would augment this list. But beyond that, what do you
make of this pattern? These attacks obviously are becoming more
commonplace.
I know you have been brought in with other Federal agencies
to secure their system. You were brought into that Justice
Department attack as it was ongoing. What about Commerce, what
about the Census attacks? Can you say a little bit more about
the kind of efforts you have under way with those agencies or
others to secure their networks?
And then, also, if you would address the private sector.
You are not always notified of cyber attacks in the private
sector. Are you satisfied that you are learning about most of
them? And, of course, private-sector firms may not want to make
others aware of their vulnerabilities. That is an obstacle I am
sure you have to overcome. What do you think you can do to
encourage the private sector to inform you fully so that you
can be fully informed as we attempt to develop a defensive
strategy?
Mr. Beers. Wow. That is a pretty broad question. Let me----
Mr. Price. I am not attempting to script this. I am just
trying to lay the predicate for letting you economize a bit in
bringing us forward on these matters.
Mr. Beers. I understand.
So, as I mentioned briefly in my remarks, we have three
sets of actors that we deal with now: Nation-states, their
efforts seem primarily to be what we would call reconnaissance
as opposed to actually attacking and taking down systems.
We have criminals who seem to be primarily interested in
going after information that will allow them to suck money out
of financial institutions or individual bank accounts.
And we have hackers. As a general proposition, I would say
that the preponderance of the stuff that you read about in the
newspaper, particularly the denial-of-service attacks, have
tended to come from the hacker community, including Anonymous,
which has been particularly troublesome to both the government
and to private-sector entities.
You are right, I think, to focus in particular on the RSA
breach and the fact that that allowed certificates to be stolen
and used--perhaps to be used. We had another incident that we
participated in that occurred in the Netherlands to a firm
called DigiNotar where we helped them deal with that particular
problem.
In addition, there is this curious overlap between what I
would call nation-state activity and private criminal activity
in terms of the theft of intellectual property. In some cases,
it is intellectual property that is very clearly associated
with national security, as the plans for the Joint Strike
Fighter. In other cases, it it intellectual property that may,
in fact, be stolen for economic purposes, whether it is for a
nation-state or for an individual private entity.
Because what we see here clearly is that the line between
nation-state and criminal activity is not a clear dividing
line. There is overlap. [REDACT] But at least some of that
apparent criminal activity is, in fact, guided by nation-
states.
So, in terms of the problem you pointed out about the
access to knowing whether or not there has been a breach, that
is a serious problem. Part of our desire with the $202 million
is to erect a system that would allow us better to know what
might be happening within the Federal Government networks so
that we can deal with that.
The private sector is, in fact, a different problem. They
in some cases come to us and tell us; in other cases, we don't
know. And we literally don't know what we don't know in this
particular area. We do believe that the legislative proposal
for information-sharing that the Senate and the House are both
working on represents an opportunity to have that kind of
information-sharing without holding the firms up to possible
liability. It represents an opportunity to try to close the
information gap. But that is going to be one of the major
things that we are going to be working on.
Greg, do you want to add anything to that?
Mr. Aderholt. Time is up right now. Maybe we can come back
to that.
Mr. Beers. Okay.
Mr. Price. Mr. Chairman, this is an informal briefing. And
I really think if we could cut him a little slack and get a
little fuller account here of the answer to a multifaceted
question, that would be good.
Mr. Aderholt. Greg? Or Mr. Frelinghuysen?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, you are the chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, the only reason I am doing that is I
know we have a call for votes and I know some people won't be
coming back, and that is why I was--but if Mr. Frelinghuysen--
is fine, then, yeah, go ahead.
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. Thank you.
The only additions I would layer on is that what we are
seeing from a trend perspective is a focus on aggregators. So
where you saw----
Mr. Dicks. What is an aggregator?
Mr. Schaffer. An aggregator is an entity that has access to
the data of many different individuals as opposed to the
endpoints, which is what we would have seen in the past.
So if there are attacks to get identities stolen from
individuals, we are now seeing a trend to go after people who
have lots of accounts, so data warehouses where accounts are
stored or a place like [REDACT] which is a company that
provides the security certificates. It is like what is stored
on your PIV card. It is the data that is used to decide whether
or not you are allowed into a certain Web site. If you can
steal all of the information that allows you to use everybody's
card as opposed to trying to steal an individual card, you are
in a much better position to take advantage across a wide array
of individuals.
The hack into RSA was similarly an attack against an
aggregator. It was someone that provided security for many,
many companies in many different sectors, and it could
potentially facilitate attacks not just against one entity but
against many entities.
That trend is troubling because it means that the
sophistication of the threat actors is increasing and their
interest in being able to broadly get at many in government,
industry, and the financial assets spaces is growing. And so
that trend is certainly something that we see quite a bit.
In terms of the private-sector engagement with us, I think
it has improved dramatically over the last several years, but
we still have significant progress to make. Those who are
engaged with us are very engaged, but it is a percentage of the
larger population.
So we have many actors who are very much involved with us.
We are growing the number of players who are even putting
resources on the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration watch floor. But that is not all of critical
infrastructure; that is a subset of players who are interested
in participating. And if we are really going to secure the
entirety of critical infrastructure, we need to have all of the
players participating and playing a significant role.

CYBERSECURITY: DHS COLLABORATION

Mr. Aderhott. Mr. Frelinghuysen.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Beers, you have had a pretty amazing
career since you graduated from Dartmouth: a Marine and Foreign
Service, served several Presidents.
I am not quite sure where you fit in the overall scheme of
things. Do you report to Napolitano? I am a little bit
concerned. I see a lot of acronyms here. I see references to,
you know, Department of Defense. I don't see any reference--I
don't know where you fit under the--are you under the DNI? Is
there any relationship?
I am a little bit confused as to where you--I know you are
doing good work, but, briefly, where do you fit in the overall
scheme of things here? We have a lot of people doing a lot of
great things here, but I am not quite sure where you fit in.
Mr. Beers. Sir, as an Under Secretary in the Department of
Homeland Security, I report directly to the Secretary of
Homeland Security. We have, obviously, cooperative
relationships with other parts and pieces of the U.S.
Government and we have outreach to the private sector, but I
work for Secretary Napolitano.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So how do we get any assurances that
what you are doing isn't potentially being done by somebody
else?
Mr. Beers. That is why we have the relationships with other
parts and pieces of the U.S. Government. For example, we have a
relationship with the National Security Agency, where we have
people who are actually resident in Fort Meade and they have
people who are resident in our cybersecurity function within
DHS, within NPPD, people who are on the watch floor or are
adjacent to the watch floor.
So we have knit both with people and with systems the
ability to exchange information on a realtime basis. We are
definitely moving to ensure that our effort and the efforts of
our partners at NSA are in sync with one another. We have a
memorandum of understanding with them.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Dicks and I serve on Defense. We
also serve on Intel. And I must say, there is nothing wrong
with redundancy, but it is a little unclear as to exactly who
is doing what.
Just in the issue of cybersecurity, do you have a piece of
that action? I mean, I----
Mr. Beers. Sir, we are----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I read in the newspaper the other day,
you know, that General Alexander was sort of upbraided, you
know, on some issues that he--some comments he made before some
sort of a group, that the Department of Justice sort of weighed
in and suggested that perhaps, you know, he couldn't make such
statements.
Are you guided by all sorts of Presidential directives and
authorities that limit your ability to operate in certain areas
and then those other areas and targets are turned over to other
agencies? Or how would you clarify exactly where you are in the
overall cyber mission?
Mr. Beers. All right. So the dividing line between
ourselves and NSA with respect to the Federal Government is
that the National Security Agency is responsible for protecting
what we refer to as the dot-mil domain----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah.
Mr. Beers [continuing]. And we are responsible for what is
described as the dot-gov domain, which is the Federal civilian
part of our government.

CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS (CFATS): TIERING ISSUES

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Yeah, I ask that respectfully. I will
give you an example. I will ask you a question. We had Steve
Chu in the other day. We had Tom D'Agostino, who heads up NNSA
and has responsibility for a whole slew of national
laboratories, some dealing with nuclear issues and some dealing
with, shall we say, traditional R&D.
Do you grade those laboratories in the Department of Energy
as to what the hell they are doing in terms of some of the
issues that you have within your portfolio?
Mr. Beers. The short answer to that is ``yes.'' What we do
with respect to our responsibilities under the Federal
Information Security Management Act is to look at each of the
departments and agencies which are within the dot-gov domain--
--
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Which would be the Department of Energy,
for example.
Mr. Beers. Which would include the Department of Energy.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Do they have a grade? Have you given
them a grade?
Mr. Beers. We have----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are they Tier 1 or Tier 2? You referred
to something. I would think they would be Tier 1 because----
Mr. Beers. You mean in terms of priority?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, the nuclear stockpile is a
priority.
Mr. Beers. Yes. Well, as a priority----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Have they been graded by you?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir. I am looking at my chart here.
As with most of the Federal Government at this point in
time, distinguishing between red, green, and yellow--that is
the Federal Government----
Mr. Aderholt. Can we see a copy of the chart?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir.
[REDACT]
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So the significance of the colors----
Mr. Beers. Is a rough----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. But just for our purposes, since I have
about 1 second, are they in the good, the high--have they done
a good job doing what they are doing for your purposes, or are
they down in the ``yet to be decided'' category?
Mr. Beers. Greg.
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. There are a series of criteria that
we use to judge----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So, to answer my question, where is the
Department of Energy?
Mr. Schaffer. They are making progress----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I want you to tell me. I don't want to
look at that list.
Mr. Schaffer. No, understood. They are making progress.
Like all of the departments and agencies, there are certain
things that they have not gotten to yet, and there are certain
things that we are trying to help them to expedite.
That is a big part of what we are asking for with respect
to the funding increase, so that we are in a better position to
know what they truly have. Right now, what we can tell you is
what they have reported to us. We would like to be in----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, I hope you have an audit of what
they report to you.
Mr. Schaffer. Well, we would like to be in a position to
have continuous monitoring, which is a visibility into their
networks on a continuing basis. It would give us the ability to
know what is happening on their networks and to adjust----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Are they Tier 1?
Mr. Schaffer. They are definitely at the top of----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. So they will be one of the ones
that are getting the constant scrutiny.
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
And, certainly, looking at your career, it gives me great
confidence that perhaps we are a little safer than some of us
think we are. And we thank you for your service.
Before I get to my question, I just want to make a point on
the last question. I was pleased to see increased funding
levels for cybersecurity in the fiscal year 2013 budget.
As we all know, there is a great deal of concern about
Anonymous, the hacking collaborative that attacked the Tel Aviv
Stock Exchange, threatened to launch a cyber attack on the New
York Stock Exchange. As a New Yorker representing New York, we
know that the Nation's economy depends on the health of our
financial system and the free flow of credit and capital, and a
successful cyber attack on America's financial systems could
have devastating effects on our economy.
I will save those questions because you did quite a
thorough job. And I have a feeling, Mr. Price, we are going to
continue this discussion at some point.
But I have been concerned about the interoperability in the
Office of Emergency Communications. The NPPD has jurisdiction
over the Office of Emergency Communications, which I would like
to say I helped to establish. And the fiscal year 2013 budget
request includes $38.7 million for the OEC, an 11 percent
decrease from fiscal year 2012.
As you well know, OEC supports communications between
emergency responders during manmade natural disasters. Quite
frankly, the work of the OEC is too important to face such
severe cuts, in my judgment. If you could, first of all,
address the funding for this important program and how will the
needs of emergency responders be met without the assistance of
the OEC.
And, additionally, I was dismayed to learn that the
administration's fiscal year 2012 budget requested the
elimination of dedicated funding for this mission by merging
the interoperability grant program into the State Homeland
Security Program within FEMA, and this dedicated funding stream
has been zeroed out.
Could you discuss with us, how would limited resources on
the State and local level by reducing funding for the
Interoperability Grant Program impact your ability to ensure
that localities are building networks to the necessary
technical specifications?
It seems to me, your work is absolutely critical. But we
want to be sure that down on the local level, we have the
resources to do the job. So if you can share with me your
concerns or non-concerns and give me confidence that that cut
isn't going to make a difference.
Mr. Beers. Yes, ma'am. So the principal reason for the cut
is that we have, in cooperation with you and as part of an
ongoing program to be as efficient as possible, created or
found some efficiencies in terms of our technical assistance
contracting. And so some of this is simply a straight
efficiency that we should do under any circumstances but
particularly in this austere fiscal environment.
We also had a $4.8 million--we had a--part of this
reduction is based on a historical carryover from the preceding
fiscal year that we are using in this year's budget to make
sure that we can effectively obligate the funds that you all
have appropriated to us.
But the main point I want to make here is, we have found
some efficiencies in the way we are doing our technical
contracting, and that is really the basis for doing that. It is
in no way an indication of a lack of commitment to the Office
of Emergency Communications. In fact, as a result of the
deliberations of the Congress in the creation of the broadband
for public safety effort, we are going to have more work to do,
and we are going to step up to do it, in combination with our
National Communications System and our Office of Emergency
Communications.
Mrs. Lowey. I will save the other question because I know
we are running out of time and my colleagues may want to ask
some quick questions. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.

CFATS: PERSONNEL SURETY

Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Beers, good to be with you this morning.
I want to kind of change subjects here to go to the
personnel surety issue. This keeps coming up within the CFATS
program, as you know--personnel surety. And this requires
industry to submit names of folks who work with chemicals to
DHS to make sure they are not on watchlists.
It is my understanding that a final rule or a policy is
with the OMB. Industry experts on the ground who have committed
time and money toward meeting CFATS deadlines continue to
express to me concern over the path the Department is pursuing
on this whole issue. Specifically, they are concerned that they
will not be notified if a person is listed on the terrorist
screening database. Additionally, some have suggested CFATS use
TWIC cards. But instead, the administration is proposing to
create an entirely new system that is going to cost a lot of
money.
Secretary Beers, if industry submits a name to DHS and that
name appears on the terrorist screening database, how are you
going to notify them? Because, as I understand it, the draft
policy is for DHS not to notify industry, which means that
someone with intent to cause harm may be allowed to work in a
chemical facility. So how would you notify them?
Mr. Beers. So, as a general proposition, sir, the
notification process here involves work that is being done by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which has the
responsibility for conducting investigations against
terrorists, not DHS. And it is their view that, in order not to
disrupt an investigation by notification outside the boundaries
of the investigation, that information will be preserved by the
FBI until it is appropriate to tell the firm.
This puts a great deal of responsibility on the Bureau.
Let's be clear about that. But rather than giving up the
investigation by the notification, they don't want to do that.
In some cases, we will get to that point, and in some cases,
there will be a notification. But that is the challenge or the
problem in association with that.
On the TWIC card, sir, we want to use the TWIC card.
Mr. Dent. Well, that is good. That is encouraging.
Mr. Beers. The issue here that we need to resolve is that
the TWIC card was created for transportation workers, and not
everybody who is within the boundaries of a chemical facility
qualifies as a transportation worker. We are looking at a
possibility--obviously, it will require a legislative process
in order for the administration to make such a recommendation.
Mr. Dent. Well, I would love to work with you on the
legislative side, because I think TWIC has been pretty
effective.
Mr. Beers. So do we.
Mr. Dent. And I think----
Mr. Dicks. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Dent. I would be happy to yield to my friend.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you.
We understand that the TWIC cards are not looked at. All
they do is they show the TWIC card, it doesn't go into the
machine, and you don't get a reading on the history of the
people. So I think that is--I can't believe that. Why is that?
Mr. Beers. Sir, it has----
Mr. Dicks. I mean, that is outrageous.
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir. It has to do with the requirements for
the capability of the card reader in an austere, particularly
here, a maritime port environment, so the water, the saltwater,
the corrosive effect of that. And we, quite frankly, have
struggled with this issue.
Mr. Dicks. There is----
Mr. Beers. You are right, it is disturbing.
There are obviously readers that are available, but the
government has to certify a reader as being the appropriate
reader. And that is the challenge that we are engaged with
right now, sir.
This is not my area of responsibility, but I am aware and
troubled, as you are.
Mr. Dent. If I could reclaim my time.
Mr. Dicks. Sure.
Mr. Dent. It just seems to me right now that industry is
not going to be notified if somebody is working in a plant who
has a problem. And it is on the FBI, you are right. And there
are liability issues to the operator of that chemical plant. I
just thought this TWIC personnel surety issue might help us get
to a better place. And I would be happy to work with you on
that point, because I think it is really very important that we
give some guidance and some certainty to people who are trying
to comply.
And with respect to CFATS, I know the chairman has already
gone into some of those issues. But, you know, you have talked
a little bit about that memo. And it is quite clear to me that,
you know, we just haven't--I guess we have had over 4,000 of
those site plans submitted, and none have been approved or
reviewed, I guess.
When was that memo prepared? And to what extent were senior
officials at NPPD aware of potential problems before you
requested that memo?
Mr. Beers. The two individuals who prepared the memo--David
Wulf, who is here and is the Deputy Director of that office;
and Penny Anderson, who is the Director--came onboard in July.
We had had several indications of problems within the
program dealing with: an administrative issue about whether or
not individuals were paid appropriate to the locality in which
they were operating; a problem with the authorization of the
site security plans; and then, finally, a problem with the
tiering, where we had run programs and put companies in
particular tiers when the data in the program was not the
correct data to establish that.
And so, with those three issues, we knew that we needed a
thorough look. We had already commissioned a review of
administrative practices within the CFATS program as a result
of the issue with respect to locality pay. That all came
together in the report that they prepared, including the review
that we had done with our Office of Compliance and Security to
look at administrative practices.
So we knew that there were problems. This was a look that
indicated that they were deeper than we had anticipated in the
report but, fortunately, with a good plan of action to resolve
them.
Mr. Dent. Well, I mean, I guess the issue--I mean, I keep
hearing stories about inadequate training and inappropriate
transitions for new hires, that people aren't capable of doing
these types of assessments, and I am just--I think we all want
CFATS to work, and there was a lot of talk around this building
about using inherently safer technologies. I did not think
anybody over there was able to deal with that issue, and that
is not part of this process, but, you know, are we committed to
CFATS, making this work, because I know a lot of people spent
time and money to comply and submit their plans.
Mr. Beers. Sir, NPPD and ISCD are fully committed to making
this program work. We have made a lot of progress. We have a
lot of challenges ahead, but we do not think they are
insurmountable.
Mr. Dent. I would like to work with you on this TWIC issue
at the proper time.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dicks.

CYBERSECURITY: PRIVATE SECTOR COLLABORATION

Mr. Dicks. Again, our staff just says that this process on
the TWIC reader has been going on for 5 years and that they
have just finally figured this out. I would just tell you,
there is technology out there, I know it for a fact, that can
read these things in a port environment, and I am surprised
that it has taken 5 years to get this done.
Now, tell me, you talked about the cybersecurity threat,
and your responsibility for the rest of the government, and you
have given us a chart here, but also you have responsibility
for the private sector, and there is a lot of concern. Now, I
understand that the administration is supporting the Lieberman
legislation in the Senate. Can you tell us why, what additional
things that legislation will give to you?
Mr. Beers. There are two major things that I want to
emphasize, and there are a lot of other parts, but the two
major ones I think are germane to this conversation. The first
one, which I had mentioned earlier, is the ability of the
private sector to share information about breaches and other
issues with the Federal Government in a way that it is both
protected and they are given some liability protection for
providing that information, so that will reduce the number of
unknown unknowns that we have to deal with right now.
Mr. Dicks. Is this voluntary?
Mr. Beers. In terms of the provision of that information,
there is an aspect of it that is required, and that is related
to the second part that I want to mention, which is the
requirement for a light form of regulation that is embedded in
that bill. Basically what it means is that the Federal
Government, working with industry, would identify those
companies or networks which are critical to our cybersecurity.
We and industry would then set up some standards against which
to measure cybersecurity protections. Those companies would
then put together security plans which would be looked at not
by the Federal Government but by accredited auditors in the
private sector who would make the judgment as to whether or not
those plans are acceptable. We would have the opportunity to
review them, but they would be the certifiers of those plans.
Mr. Dicks. Do those people exist today? Are they out there?
Mr. Beers. There is a vibrant consulting industry out
there, sir, that knows a whole lot about cybersecurity, and we
certainly think that they will have a major role in this
process. Then if there is a breach, those entities are required
to report those breaches to us, so that----
Mr. Dicks. Required?
Mr. Beers. Required to report those breaches.
Mr. Dicks. Because some people do not even know they have
been breached.
Mr. Beers. Well, that is part of what we would do in terms
of the cybersecurity plans that would be developed, so that
they would have a higher level of awareness of the breach. But
I also have to be candid, sir, this is not something where you
can say tomorrow when you turn a switch that you are going to
have 100 percent awareness of things that are happening on your
networks. That is part of the challenges that we all face and
part of the effort that is involved in what we at US-CERT do
and what we do in conjunction with our law enforcement
partners, Secret Service and ICE, within DHS and FBI and with
NSA.
Mr. Dicks. Well, what about utilities? That is the one that
worries me a great deal, our electrical power utilities, if
they get shut down that could cause a tremendous impact to our
financial institutions. You know, a lot of people out there
say, you know, we as an industry or as a group of companies,
whatever, have to come up with a plan, and then that plan is
reviewed and goes to FERC or whatever. How do you see that?
Mr. Beers. [REDACT] The interdependency here is huge, so
the financial sector depends upon electricity, electricity
depends upon water, and so on. We have to deal with these
things and be careful not to say this is the most important or
that is the most important, but, yes, sir, electricity is a
very serious problem, and we have seen some efforts on the part
of adversaries to look at industrial control systems that are
associated with the electrical sector. Our Industrial Control
System Cyber Emergency Response Team is working with the
private sector on these issues and looking a solutions that
will enhance this, but, quite frankly, the industrial control
system set of controls were not envisioned originally as
requiring the kind of security when they were built. They are
systems which last for 20 or more years. The replacement of
these or the patching of these is going to be a major issue
that we are going to have to deal with.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. What I would like to do is come back for
another round after the vote, so we will suspend for a few
minutes for votes, and we will be back in probably around about
30 minutes. Thank you.
[Recess.]

CYBERSECURITY: CONTINUOUS MONITORING PROGRAM

Mr. Aderholt. Okay, I think we are finished with votes for
the day, believe it or not, so we may have some more Members
that will be joining us here in a few minutes because the votes
just ended 3 or 4 minutes ago. Let me turn to an issue that has
already been asked about but from a little bit of a different
angle.
I discussed in my opening statement, Secretary Beers, about
the budget including an unprecedented $202 million for the new
cyber initiative to help reduce other departments and agencies'
cyber risk levels. While I understand and support efforts that
allow DHS to quickly address gaps in the government cyber
posture, we do have grave concerns about the precedent that
this would create. Over the last few weeks we have asked
repeatedly how you will execute the program, but thus far no
plan or schedule has been provided. In today's fiscal climate
Congress cannot provide funds based on vague sentences, we need
a plan that shows us how you are going to spend these funds and
why these funds need to be in the overall budget, and not
within the budgets of the departments that are at risk. Without
this type of in-depth information, quite honestly this proposal
appears to be a last minute idea that may look great on paper
but could lack the rigor and proper structure to be successful.
Secretary Beers, what are your specific plans for executing
the program and is this simply an attempt to move forward in
lieu of the authorizers that you have previously requested but
have not yet addressed by Congress?
Mr. Beers. Sir, first of all, let me say yes, this was a
late-developing effort on the part of the administration, and
we certainly do owe you a plan for how it will be spent. I
think we are pretty clear on why it needs to be spent and have
talked today and yesterday about this. As you saw from the
chart that we passed out earlier on in terms of the areas of
concern in the departments and agencies, this particular chart
and that scoring is self-reporting on the part of departments
and agencies. We are in the process independent of a set of
software and hardware to have real time continuous monitoring,
requiring that this reporting be done on a more frequent than
annual basis in order to get the clearest indication about how
departments and agencies are addressing their own security
within their own networks.
The basis here of this particular $202 million program is
to allow us to have fidelity in what departments and agencies
are doing to protect their own cybersecurity and to have it in
real time. This gives us an opportunity to do two things. One,
it gives us an opportunity to be able, as a general guidance
matter, to direct them to deal with the priority issues that
are embedded within that chart; and, in terms of incident
response, it gives us a better ability to help them produce the
kinds of mitigation measures that would be necessary in the
event of a serious attack. How we execute that, as you say, is
what we owe you.
Mr. Aderholt. Are there some other methods that you have
considered that would achieve the goal of reducing our risk,
and position DHS as the appropriate accountable cybersecurity
manager for the civilian government, that do not require new
programs?
Mr. Beers. Sir, the legislative proposal that is before the
Congress that we put forward and included in some of the bills
that have been put forward give DHS, which is at this
particular point one among equals in Cabinet, responsibility
for supervising the activities of other departments and
agencies within the U.S. Government. While there is a
presidential directive that makes this our responsibility, this
legislative proposal would make it stronger and give DHS much
clearer authority to direct departments and agencies to take
actions with respect to cybersecurity.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay, we may have some follow-up on that. Let
me go ahead to Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Well, let me follow up on the Chairman's line of
questioning and just give you a chance to elaborate a bit. The
Chairman said this is in some ways operating in lieu of a full
authorization. That is true. I mean, the OMB has made a certain
call here, and you are tasked with setting this up with DHS in
the role that you have described.
There are alternative models. These funds could be
appropriated directly to the agencies involved, presumably with
less coordination, less oversight, less standardization
perhaps. I do not know the full range of possibilities that you
considered, but I understand here that we do not have clear
authorizing language, and we are dealing in an area of high
national priority. This is very important to get ahold of this
and to improvise ways that give us the maximum ability to
detect and to respond.
I understand that this $202 million transfer is not a
conventional proposal. I understand that there was a good deal
of internal discussion before you put it forward, but I would
like to take advantage of this hearing to have you flesh this
out further in ways that would anticipate the fuller plan that
the Chairman is asking for.
What does this case look like for proceeding in this
fashion? You have talked about a three-legged stool in this
cybersecurity area, the US-CERT operation, the successive
Einstein plans, and now this. This is new capacity. This deals
with intrusions in another dimension, so give us the rationale.
Mr. Beers. All right, sir. Let me start and ask my
colleague, Mr. Schaffer, to continue. The first thing I want to
say is, as we have begun to articulate what this proposal
entails, I want to make sure that you understand that we want
to create a system that allows DHS, in its responsibilities for
cybersecurity for the civilian side of the Federal Government,
to, in fact, be able to execute on that, and being able to
execute on that requires us to have continuous monitoring. So
that is sort of the general proposition.
Now, let me analogize for a moment. As we have deployed
Einstein 2 and as we envision employing Einstein 3, we have
continuous monitoring on the incoming, on the threats. What we
want, in parallel with that, is continuous monitoring on what
departments and agencies are doing within their own networks so
that we can match the ability to see the threats with the
ability to see the vulnerabilities and to make judgments and
provide guidance and direction, including the need to focus
funding on a particular area of vulnerability in their budgets
with their resources. This will give us that ability as we play
this out. That is what we are trying to do. So it is not, it is
not us spending money in their budgets. It is us having a
system to monitor them. They get a benefit out of it, and there
is no question about that. They will see their own systems
better as well. But it is for us to manage the entire
enterprise, not for any individual department and agency to
have the ancillary benefit of having a better visibility into
their own systems.
Greg, what would you add to that?
Mr. Schaffer. I think the Under Secretary has given you the
flavor of where we are trying to go with this. Our
responsibility is to do risk management across the Federal
enterprise. Right now we have limited data with which to make
good decisions about what we should be asking departments and
agencies to prioritize. We have one piece of the puzzle, as the
Under Secretary said. We, through the Einstein solution, can
see what is being thrown at these departments and agencies. It
is like having cameras on the outside of a physical facility, I
can see what is coming to the fence line. What I have no idea
about in the current arrangement is what is actually deployed
within the fence line to deal with something if it gets inside,
and the continuous monitoring piece really advances DHS's
mission to understand what the risks and vulnerabilities are to
the Federal enterprise and then to make recommendations or make
requirements for Federal departments and agencies to augment
what they are currently doing using their own budgets. So while
this will help them to know their own networks better, its
primary goal is to help us prioritize their activities, and so
it really is in our mission space and advancing the
responsibilities of DHS that this $202 million is focused.
The challenge with respect to getting continuous monitoring
deployed is that, as a technology, it is not like the Einstein
solution. Intrusion detection sits on the outside of someone's
network, all the traffic goes through it, and you can
understand what is being focused on that entity from this piece
that sits outside their domain. Continuous monitoring requires
you to get information from each desktop computer, each server,
each router. You need to actually have information flowing from
many, many devices inside their network. You need to know how
many devices they have, you need to know where these need to be
deployed, and there is different types of technology that has
to be there. So it needs to be a partnership between DHS and
the departments and agencies in figuring out how to get this
done in an effective way in order to advance DHS's mission. We
will not be buying the solutions for them like antivirus, but
we will know through this solution whether or not they have
antivirus deployed and turned on within their networks.
Mr. Price. Help us get our mind around what this is going
to look like in practice. I understand the distinction you are
making between the Einstein function and this internal
function. What do these dollars buy? Explain this very
concretely. What would you expect this operation to look like?
Maybe take a given department and walk us through what kind of
capacity they are going to have. To what extent is this a
matter of new technology, to what extent is it a matter of new
personnel, to what extent is it a matter of explicitly setting
up a kind of interagency capacity to monitor and to advise and
to oversee?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir. I suspect--although as the Under
Secretary said, we are in the process of trying to define all
of the details, and we are very anxious to work with you as we
go through that process, but I think there is probably three
pieces to this puzzle. The first piece is a contracting piece,
which is we figure out the best suite of technologies that can
be deployed to meet the needs of continuous monitoring, and
start working with the providers of those capabilities to get
some kind of contract together, as we do with our Information
Systems Security Line of Business set where we put things on
GSA contracts that departments and agencies can buy. So we will
do that researching and start to figure out what the suite of
solutions is.
Mr. Beers. You used an acronym.
Mr. Schaffer. And I would have defined it except I never
remember what this one is. It is the information security line
of business, but there is another S in there. I apologize. It
is a program under FNS, Federal Network Security, that
essentially selects security solutions for departments, and
agencies' use. They put it on a GSA contract, and they get it
into a position where people can buy off a schedule much more
easily, knowing that the suite has been selected by DHS,
vetted, and the contracts provide everything that they would
need. So this would, I think, have a component that would be
similar to that.
The second piece is working with the department and agency,
like we are doing now. We are meeting with the Chief
Information Security Officers, we are meeting with the Chief
Security Officers, with the Chief Information Officers to
figure out what the shape of their network is, what they have
already deployed that can be used for continuous monitoring
purposes, and like most departments and agencies, they will
have different tool sets in different parts of their ecosystem.
We will have to figure out which of these tools that we think
will work fits in that environment, and then you would have to
get a suite of solutions deployed, and then you have to build
the connection between those solutions and what we will be
building at DHS in order to accept that data and to use that
data in an effective way in combination with the data that we
get from the Einstein solution and the data that we generate
from the private sector feeds that we have from the Multi-State
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MSISAC), from others,
the goal being to get to a place where we will see the attacks
coming in, we will know exactly which departments and agencies
are vulnerable to those attacks, where on their network we need
to apply our mitigation strategies and our incident response,
and we will be able to do that in a much more efficient way.
That is the incident response piece of the puzzle.
The other benefit that you get out of this is we will also
be able to see what the vulnerability space looks like and work
with them to prioritize what they need to do on their own
network with their own spending in order to buy down risk, and
right now we are, you know, we are doing that, but we are doing
it without the benefit of actual visibility into their network.
In my experience, private sector, as a consultant at
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, in my role as a Chief Information
Security Officer, and in my role with DHS, most organizations
know only about 70 percent of what their network is. They
literally do not know the full shape and scope of their
network. This helps them to understand that, and it helps us to
then make good risk management recommendations or issue good
risk management requirements so that they can get the risk down
as quickly and effectively and efficiently as possible.
Mr. Price. Well, thank you. That is helpful. Mr. Chairman,
I appreciate your line of questioning. I hope this complements
it because it does seem to me that we are going to need to
evaluate this as a DHS appropriation, and a rather
unconventional one at that, but one that I am open minded about
in terms of how best to get this kind of interagency function
accomplished. It seems to me that if we were looking at simply
doling out funds with even very detailed directives to
individual agencies on how to deal with this, that would have
its own set of problems. That would have its own sets of
questions in terms of coordination and oversight and so forth.
So that is helpful to me, anyway, and we are, of course, going
to need for this to be elaborated and put in a form where we
can assess it more fully, but thank you.

CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS (CFATS) PROGRAM CHALLENGES

Mr. Aderholt. Let me turn back to the CFATS issue again.
Many of the problems identified in your internal memorandum on
CFATS relate to challenges involved in the hiring and
development of staff to implement the program, including how
inspections are conducted and the lack of policies and
procedures to guide staff efforts to do their job.
My question would be, do you agree with this assessment,
and can you describe for us how those have been problem areas
in the CFATS program?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir. Let me respond. The program was
enacted 5 years ago roughly, and we have gone from zero, if you
will, to where we are today through a lot of difficult and
challenging efforts. First of all, who were we regulating, what
were we regulating them about, which is what were the chemicals
that we were concerned about, why were we concerned about them,
what were the facilities that possessed these chemicals that we
were concerned about, how much did they have, and what kind of
security did they have around those?
We have gone from defining the problem to getting an
inventory of those who appeared to fall within the boundaries
of this concern. We have refined our ability to know precisely
that level of holding and our concern, we have had meetings and
seminars and advisory efforts to build all of this to the point
that they then began to produce their site security plans, and
we began to receive them. As we began receiving them, we also
discovered that we did not get as much information as we, in
fact, needed and had to seek more information from all of them.
I am saying this in order to get to today because at each
one of those steps we had to create the ability to execute
either in the development of the tool and in the knowledge of
the inspectors and the entire staff of ISCD of what it was we
were trying to look at and measure, and that has been a growing
process along the way.
So as we look at where we are today and we look at where we
have to go and defining that in the most graphic sense is we
need to be authorizing the site security plans, we need to be
looking at the site to make sure that the plan matches the
physical layout and procedures at that particular site. We then
need to approve those plans where they are appropriate to be
approved, and we need to come back around and do compliance
inspections. We have not done compliance inspections, and we
need to build a workforce that understands how to do that.
We have begun the process of doing the authorization
inspections. They are really in a nascent stage themselves, so
when Penny Anderson and David Wulf laid out this effort, what
they are trying to do is to say we need to have a workforce
that, in fact, knows how to do what it is we have to do, and
they are in the process of defining that. So there is right now
a working group that is going on that is supposed to be
finished by the end of this month with the appropriate
requirements that we will need to train our workforce against
in order to accomplish the last two stages of this process.
That is what we are committed to doing, and we are committed to
turning out the workforce that can do that. They have been
trained to do what they are supposed to do now. We need to
train them to do what they need to do going forward as well,
and that is what we are about right now.
Mr. Aderholt. Let me ask you about the programs and the
staffing problems that were allowed to develop in the first
place, just your thoughts and your observations on how it is
that staffing problem was allowed to get started from the
beginning?
Mr. Beers. Sir, I think that the basis of the problem from
the beginning was that the people who were responsible for this
program in its initial phase did not clearly appreciate or
articulate what it was that the program was supposed to do, and
the most graphic example of that is in the initial stage of
program development and in the initial stage of the training of
the inspectors, there was a thought, presumption, notion that
they might also have to be some kind of first responder in the
case of a catastrophic event at one of the plants.
As we have worked our way through understanding what it is
we need to be doing, that particular requirement turns out not
to have been an appropriate requirement, and so we have stopped
doing that, we have taken the equipment that we purchased in
order to do that and transferred it to another part of NPPD,
the Federal protective service, who in fact has some need of
that equipment. The training that was done in association with
that is not entirely wasted training, but it would not have
been--there was not--we would not do it now, let me put it that
way. So I think it is the learning process that has occurred
along the way of the development of this program from nothing
to where we are today, and our clear understanding of the need
now, with a more mature program, to ensure as we go forward
that the requirements and the training requirements and the
hiring and the matching of positions to qualified people is
done more deliberately and with greater knowledge as we go
forward.
Mr. Aderholt. Give us your thoughts on to what extent the
staffing challenges and lack of program guidance has impeded
progress implementing CFATS and the ammonium nitrate programs.
Mr. Beers. With respect to the implementation of the CFATS
program, I do not want to say that there has been no impact on
the speed with which it was developed, but I think it is fair
to say that all of the steps that we took had to be taken and
all of the learning that we have done had to be learned in this
process, and I think we have built a real foundation going
forward. Almost all of the training that we have done up to
this point in time has been necessary training, and the
individuals who are trained against those requirements will
continue to use that training in their jobs going forward. What
we have to define is the additional training.
Can I ask David Wulf to comment further on that?
Mr. Aderholt. Please, yes.
Mr. Beers. David.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, sir. We are--as the inspector tools working
group, which the Under Secretary referenced, completes its
work, which we are anticipating to happen at the end of this
month, we are going to roll that group's findings into the
training we are going to hold--we are looking at a May/June
time frame--for inspectors, after which we are going to roll
into authorization inspections for the facilities whose SSPs we
have authorized, and that number has gone up in the last 3
months from 10 to 55. Yeah, we are also moving forward in an
effort to more closely align different parts of the
organization. We are involved in a realignment right now, we
are hoping to move through that process in the next couple of
months as well, and looking also to fill many of our leadership
positions. We find ourselves in a position in which all of our
leadership positions except for mine and our director Penny
Anderson's are filled by actors right now, so we are looking to
get some permanent leadership in our branches and to sort of
stabilize the organization in that way.
Mr. Aderholt. Let me go back just briefly before I turn it
back over to Mr. Price. As far as the damage, just your
assessment overall, just what do you think the damage has been
because of the staffing challenges and the lack of program
guidance?
Mr. Beers. As I said, I do not think we can ignore the fact
that we have suffered from not having figured out all these
things in advance, but this process, as I have tried to
indicate, was always going to take a certain amount of time to
proceed through, and I am hard pressed to tell you that we lost
a month here or lost a month there as we have moved through
this process, but I certainly cannot stand here and say we have
not lost any time at all. I just do not have the ability at
this point to do it. But the main thing is, all of these steps
had to be taken, and they had to be taken in the order in which
we took them in order to get to where we are today and in order
to have the foundation to move forward.

CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS (CFATS) HIRING INSPECTORS

Mr. Aderholt. A little bit earlier you mentioned building a
workforce. Do you mean hiring more inspectors?
Mr. Beers. We have additional vacancies for inspectors
within the chemical facilities program, we have a plan for some
inspectors with the ammonium nitrate program whom we have not
hired yet because we are not in a position to hire against that
requirement until we get the final rule. We do not want to
repeat the problems that were manifested in this report with
respect to the hiring of those inspectors until we have defined
precisely what this program is going to look like. The ammonium
nitrate notice of proposed rulemaking has gone out. We have
closed the comment period in December, we have a hundred or a
hundred-plus formal requirements that we are in the process of
adjudicating as well as meetings and discussions more generally
with people in order to proceed forward to the final rule, but
as I am saying, what we do not want to do is begin hiring
inspectors until we know what we are hiring against and we know
what we need to train them in order to do.
Mr. Aderholt. So how many do you expect to hire?
Mr. Beers. What is the number, David?
Mr. Wulf. For ammonium nitrate we have slated 19, 19
additional.
Mr. Aderholt. What about total?
Mr. Wulf. I think total it is a little tough to project. I
think we are going to learn a lot as we get into a more regular
cycle of authorization inspections and as we get down the road
and see what it looks like, you know, with 4,000-plus
facilities hopefully with approved site security plans, we will
be in a regular cycle of actual compliance inspections, doing
authorization inspections for new facilities that come into
play, and working through the universe of ammonium nitrate, I
think it is going to--our understanding of what the full
resource requirement will be on the inspector side will be
evolving.
Mr. Aderholt. I have been too long. Mr. Price.

CYBERSECURITY: DEPLOYING EINSTEIN 2 AND 3

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have one quite
focused set of concluding questions. Back to the three-legged
stool with respect to cybersecurity and the Einstein capacity.
You have referred to this in passing. I just want to make sure
we are clear on how that is unfolding and what kind of timeline
you are working with here. The Einstein 2 intrusion detection
capability, as I understand, is now deployed at 17 of 19
departments and agencies. The remaining two are USDA and
Justice.
Mr. Beers. No, HHS and Justice.
Mr. Price. I am sorry, all right, HHS and Justice. I
understand there are privacy and legal challenges. I just
wonder what it is going to take to surmount those and what kind
of time frame you are anticipating for having 19 out of 19
covered. And then Einstein 3, which is, of course, the
intrusion prevention capability, we are now being told the
timeline on that is probably 2018. That seems like a long time.
Why will it take this long? What vulnerabilities are going to
be there until Einstein 3 is fully deployed, and how can those
be mitigated in the meantime?
Mr. Beers. So with respect to the Einstein 2, we just
signed a memorandum of agreement with the Department of Justice
which I think will mean that this program can move forward. We
are working with HHS on their particular problems. The first
had to do with Justice particularities, and the HHS has to do
with privacy concerns. So we are heavily committed up to and
including the Secretary of Homeland Security pushing these
departments and agencies to get to a ``yes'' arrangement with
respect to that.
[REDACT]
But let me turn to Greg to go into some more detail on
either of those, but in particular on the last point.
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir, thank you. As the Under Secretary
mentioned, I do think that we have made significant progress
with respect to Einstein 2. The only remaining department or
agency that we haven't finalized with is the HHS folks, and
they have a very specific legal issue that they believe may
require a statutory fix, and so what we have talked to them
about, although we haven't finalized with them, is trying to
move forward in other parts of their network, putting to the
side the piece that they have this very specific statutory
issue with.
With respect to Einstein 3, as the Under Secretary
mentioned, the program plan calls for the deployment of,
initial deployment of government-furnished equipment for the
initial sensor capability. Those sensors get deployed into what
we call nests. They are aggregation points within the network
that are built to separate the government traffic from the rest
of the traffic that an Internet service provider has because
unlike Einstein 2, which is deployed at the boundary between
the department or agency's network and the Internet, the
deployments for Einstein 3 are actually deployed in the
Internet service provider's network itself. So they still need
to only apply these to the government traffic, and therefore
they need to separate the government traffic from the rest of
the traffic. So we have already let those contracts to build
the nests for the first, I believe, four of the deployments.
That is the first piece of the puzzle. Then we would deploy in
the plan the government equipment which comes, as the Under
Secretary said, from NSA, but the ultimate goal is to allow the
ISPs to tell us how best to achieve complete coverage within
their networks of government traffic, and they may be able to
do that more efficiently and effectively. Indeed, we think they
will be able to, as do our partners at NSA, and so the goal is
to shift to a managed security service in 2013. We would be
both deploying the government equipment and maintaining four of
the five ultimate deployments of government equipment while
developing with the Internet service providers the managed
security service solution.
Mr. Price. All right, so is----
Mr. Beers. Which should allow us to have more coverage
quicker.
Mr. Price. Well, that is my question. To what extent is
this third phase also going to be a matter of rolling
deployments over several years or to what extent are you
talking about developmental work that is really going to have
to play out before any system is deployed?
Mr. Schaffer. [REDACT] providers will, knowing their
networks better than we do, have a more efficient way to get
this done and may, in fact, be able to do it more quickly than
we could do it by deploying our equipment into their networks.
I cannot give you a sense of how much faster that would be
because we haven't gotten to that point yet, but we are
confident that the Internet service providers will be able to
give us a good sense of what that schedule and timeline would
be, and then we will have to make a decision as to whether we,
in fact, do fully shift or there is some combination of
government equipment and managed security services.
I will point out that not all of the Internet service
providers have the same level of capability with respect to
this kind of solution, and so we just need to do that research
in order to get to clarity.
Mr. Beers. The RFPs and the RFIs that we have out now.
Mr. Schaffer. [REDACT]
Mr. Beers. But our general presumption here, and this is
not us alone, this is us in conjunction with NSA, is we have
collectively come to the conclusion that we are ultimately
going to have to be in a managed security service environment,
that the expansion of traffic is so huge and so growing that we
do not have a government solution. We do not have a government
solution as it exists today that is going to solve this problem
down the road. So. we have to get to a managed security service
solution, and the people who know the most, as Greg said, about
their networks are the telecoms, and they spend $6 trillion on
their networks. That is a lot more money than we can ever bring
to bear on this. And why do they do that? Because that is their
business model. Their business model is to move the traffic.
Mr. Schaffer. [REDACT]
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GREG SCHAFFER'S DEPARTURE AND STATE OF CYBERSECURITY

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Before we end today, I would like
to recognize Greg Schaffer, who of course has been speaking,
but of course he currently serves as the Assistant Secretary
for Cyber Security, and we understand you are going to be
leaving tomorrow?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. We will miss your candid views on
cybersecurity, telling us where we are, where we need to go,
and we do thank you for your service, and we are going to be
entering something in the record for your service, but before
you leave, is there any comment or anything you want to make as
far as your views on cyber that you would like to leave with
us?
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, sir. I really do appreciate that.
What I would say is, I have been in this space for the better
part of 15 years, I have done it as a prosecutor at the
Department of Justice, I have done it as a consultant working
with some of the largest companies in the country, I have done
it as a CISO and a Chief Security Officer and Chief Risk
Officer, and then in this role. We have never been in as good a
place as we are now in terms of the coordinated efforts across
government to address these issues, and yet the problem is also
getting more serious in that the attack space is enormous. We
are attaching more to the Internet than we ever have before.
The control system space in particular needs to be thought
about.
We have made enormous progress in the last 3 years at DHS,
just the size of the program, going from just over 100 people,
119 I think, when I first got here to close to 400. We will
continue to grow. We have got a lot of momentum in the
interagency, with the law enforcement community working hand in
hand with DHS and with the intelligence community. The
relationship between NSA and DHS, while there are always these
moments that I am sure you hear about, it is far better than it
has ever been before, and we are working closely on a whole
range of things. When incidents happen, the capability to bring
a whole of government approach is by far the best I have seen
in any circumstance in the past because you have got someone
that can focus on mitigation and addressing the challenges for
the whole community when something new is discovered in DHS,
you have got a law enforcement community that can go chase the
threat actors in a very serious way, and the resources at the
FBI and the Secret Service and other investigative agencies,
and you have got NSA and the intelligence community and all of
the history and background of technical capability backing up
the resources in both the law enforcement community and
mitigation community. That is the way this should work, and we
need to invest in that tripartite approach, and we need to
bring the private sector as much as possible into that as is
being done at the NCIC through the efforts of the whole
community.
So I think we are in a good place, but this is a moment
where if we do not get this legislation or some legislation,
you know, we have pushed this rock to the top of the hill. We
have been talking about doing something more serious on cyber
as long as I have been in this space, and you all have done the
work with these hearings and with the very serious focus over
the course of the last 3 years. If we do not push this rock
over the top of this hill, it is going to roll back and crush
us all, and I really mean that. We are on the cusp of really
addressing this problem in a serious way, and the problem is on
the cusp of really causing us enormous societal problems, and
we have just got to decide, are we pushing this rock over the
hill or are we letting it go? And I hope that we are pushing it
over the hill.
Mr. Aderholt. We wish you the best. Thank you for those
comments.
And at this time the hearing will be adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.088

Tuesday, March 6, 2012.

U.S. COAST GUARD

WITNESS

ADMIRAL ROBERT J. PAPP, JR., COMMANDANT, U.S. COAST GUARD

Opening Remarks: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. Good morning. The Subcommittee will come to
order.
It is good to have you here, Admiral Papp. Thank you for
being here.
First let me say that we were all made painfully aware last
week that the Coast Guard is inherently dangerous work. We all
mourned the tremendous loss of the brave helicopter crew in
Mobile Bay that occurred last Tuesday.
Lieutenant Commander Dale Taylor, Lieutenant Junior Gray,
John Cameron, Chief Petty Officer Fernando Jorge, and Petty
Officer Andrew Knight, they are far from being forgotten.
And, Admiral, I understand there is a memorial service on
Thursday that you will be attending and please let the family
members know our thoughts and prayers are with them here in
Washington.
But we are not defined by the shadow of this tragedy.
Rather, the Coast Guard best honors the memory of their fallen
brothers by resolutely carrying out its vital mission in
protection of this great Nation.
In fact, last week was visibly bittersweet for the Coast
Guard. Just days after that unexplained loss, the Coast Guard
celebrated the production of its newest class of cutters, the
fast response cutter, a modernized patrol boat that represents
the strength of American craftsmanship and the future of the
world's most capable Coast Guard.
I was joined at that ceremony by some very proud American
shipyard workers, and bold and active-duty service members, and
by a man who is both grieving, yet also proud, Admiral Papp,
who, as I say, is with us today and the Commandant of the
United States Coast Guard.
Admiral, again, we are very sorry for the loss of the
service members and we thank you for being here to discuss the
fiscal year 2013 budget. And, again, our thoughts and prayers
are with all the family members of those that lost their lives
last week.
No one can doubt your dedication to service, Admiral, or
that of the active military and civilians that you command. But
our chore here today is a challenging one. We are trying to
make sense of the Coast Guard's latest budget request, a
proposal that, one, cuts over 1,000 active-duty billets and
decreases the military in strength to just over 41,000,
decommissions two high endurance cutters, decommissions three
110-foot patrol boats, and terminates the high tempo patrol
boat program, largely championed by this Subcommittee.
It delays the acquisition of several key assets and
squanders $30 million in savings by dragging out the
acquisition of two FRCs, fast response cutters, funded by this
Subcommittee last year.
In addition, the Coast Guard continues to assert that its
eight-year-old mission need statement is the basis for
requested investments even though neither the budget for fiscal
year 2013 nor the Coast Guard's funding profile in the out-year
supports the requirements developed back in 2004.
So instead of the Administration's claimed support for
front-line operations or for building capacity towards steady
mission requirements, this budget submission diminishes current
near-term and future capabilities.
To put it mildly, this is a budget that is challenging for
us to accept. We full well understand the difficulty you are
facing balancing a shrinking budget while also trying to take
care of the Coast Guard families, sustaining operations with
aging assets, and recapitalizing for the future.
This is no small task in today's fiscal environment. But
the Congress has never supported a plan that so bluntly guts
operational capabilities. Rather, we have repeatedly funded a
rationalized modernization program that minimizes gaps by
phasing out antiquated cutters and aircraft while at the same
time bringing new assets on line.
I believe what is at stake is no less than the future of
our Coast Guard. You appear to have arrived at a tipping point
between the Coast Guard that you assert is needed and the
agency this Administration is actually willing to support.
In my view, the Coast Guard cannot be short-sighted in its
approach to this challenge. Instead the service must approach
these issues strategically by applying an updated look at
capabilities and requirements within the confines of the budget
proposed and its new realities.
Admiral, we know you have a tough job. This is precisely
why we are relying on you to explain how this budget meets our
Nation's needs for both fiscal discipline and robust security.
Before I turn to the Admiral for his comments this morning
and for his opening statement, first I would like to recognize
the distinguishing ranking member, Mr. Price, for a few remarks
that he may have to make.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.093

Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, want to begin this morning by expressing my
sympathy, the good wishes of this Subcommittee and the Nation
to the Coast Guard and its families for the tragedy suffered
last week in Mobile Bay.
One of the pillars that makes America strong is that we are
blessed by men and women in uniform who volunteer to safeguard
us every day. To the Coast Guard and the men and women of the
Department of Homeland Security, we offer our thoughts and
prayers for the loss of these four individuals and our thanks
for their brave service to the Nation.
Today we are glad to welcome back the Commandant of the
Coast Guard, Admiral Robert Papp, to discuss his agency's
budget request for fiscal year 2013. The Coast Guard is
requesting $8.3 billion. This does not factor in $254 million
in overseas contingency operations that are included as a
permissive transfer in the Navy budget. However, even when you
factor that in, this request is lower than the current fiscal
year.
Like the rest of the Federal Government, you are being
asked to do more with less. Your budget reflects your heavy
reliance on human capital for all your activities. Sixty-five
percent of your request is tied to people and you will be
letting about 1,070 personnel go in 2013.
Admiral, in a recent speech, you stated that about two and
a half billion dollars is required to properly replace the
Coast Guard's aging stock of ships, aircraft, and other
property, yet the budget requests far less than that amount,
$1.43 billion to be precise.
Within this amount, you have had to make some tough
decisions on which assets you need to keep on track by
providing a healthy amount of funding this year, which ones can
be delayed, requiring your personnel to continue to operate on
aging and delapidated vessels or aircraft, and which new
procurements will be added and which acquisitions you are
holding outright. They are not easy choices.
I am pleased to see the Coast Guard beginning the
procurement of a new heavy icebreaker and requesting sufficient
funds to complete the sixth National Security Cutter. But I am
disappointed by a lack of funding for the seventh or eighth
National Security Cutter, the lack of the advanced funding on
those items.
No doubt, you are well aware of the uproar this decision
has caused and I, too, question it. If no additional national
security cutters are procured after number six, we are
effectively halving the Coast Guard's largest cutter fleet at
the same time that you plan to place one of the new national
security cutters in Alaska for up to six months of the year,
meaning you are going to have fewer cutters operating
elsewhere.
This certainly was not the plan when Deep Water was
originally envisioned and a smaller national security cutter
fleet was justified to Congress. So I expect we will want to
delve into this topic today.
Similarly, I have concerns about delays in the Fast
Response Cutter. Your budget essentially overrides
congressional direction. In 2012, it requires you to procure
six of these ships eliminating $30 million in cost savings that
we anticipated.
This change coupled with the decommissionings of three
patrol boats in 2013 will result in approximately 13,000 fewer
patrol boat operating hours next year. This is a troubling
decrease that this Committee must weigh carefully the
implications of, particularly as we see vast amounts of
narcotics coming up through the Carribean and instability in
Mexico as the Calderon administration comes to a close.
Admiral, we value the work of the Coast Guard day in and
day out. Many times we watch in amazement as you complete a
tough rescue operation or an exceedingly difficult operation
such as the break-in by an icebreaker to provide Nome, Alaska
with the fuel they needed to last through the winter.
And our hearts go out to you when we experience a tragic
accident like the one last week. We hold the men and women of
the Coast Guard in the highest regard on this Subcommittee.
Our job here today and through the appropriations process
is to ensure that you have the resources necessary to fulfill
your mission and that taxpayer dollars are allocated wisely.
Admiral, I have no doubt that you share this point of view
and look forward to working with you again this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Admiral Papp, we look forward to your comments.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.095

Opening Statement: Commandant Papp

Admiral Papp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Price.
And I am going to divert from my notes here for just a
moment and give you a sincere thanks for the expressions of
sympathy for the crew of the 6535.
You know, there are times when there is only one person in
the Coast Guard who can take on certain duties. One of those is
when we lose members of our family.
I went over to Mobile on Friday afternoon and I met with
the parents of Lieutenant Commander Taylor and Lieutenant
Junior Grade Cameron, hugged their moms. Everybody shed a few
tears. We chatted a little bit and then I went around and spoke
to the shipmates of Chief Petty Officer Jorge and Petty Officer
Knight as well.
I will return there on Thursday to speak at the memorial
service when I will see Mrs. Taylor and her two sons, age 7 and
4, remainders of the families and other representatives and
also our greater Coast Guard family in the Mobile area.
There is only one person who can do that. There is only
person who is called upon to do that in times of stress and
passion and emotion and that is the Commandant of the Coast
Guard who speaks in those events.
Likewise, there is only one person who can come up here and
tell you what my service needs are and that is the Commandant
as well.
And the emotion and the passion that I feel for my service
is only strengthened by those events of the last week and
redoubles my commitment to come up here and give you candid
assessments of what I can do within the limits of the budget,
what my best advice is for spending every nickel of that budget
to provide the best services possible for our country.
For 222 years, the Coast Guard has faithfully served this
Nation and we have weathered many storms in the past and we
have adapted to operate at times of peace and conflict and
continually respond to meet emerging maritime challenges.
Today is no different. The Coast Guard men and women are
confronting a diverse array of challenges in the maritime
environment, whether it is transnational smuggling, illegal
fishing on the high seas, increasing human activity driven by
economic opportunity of an ice-diminished Arctic Ocean, and
piracy to name a few.
Just over this past weekend, Coast Guard Cutter Northland
was on patrol off South America when its embarked helicopter
sighted a vessel with three outboard engines and numerous bales
visible on deck.
We call that a go fast vessel. It is a smuggling method,
and it refused to stop even after the helicopter fired warning
shots. The helicopter gunner then fired into the go fast
engines to disable it and the cutter Northland's boarding team
went aboard and recovered 1,600 kilos; that is nearly 2 tons,
of pure cocaine worth an estimated street value of $42 million.
If we had not interdicted this cocaine, it would have made
its way into South America and through Mexico and would have
been broken down in much smaller loads for transport and sale.
It makes that significantly harder for land-based law
enforcement to interdict.
And as it travels north through Central America and Mexico,
it creates a cascading wave of destabilization, crime, and
social harm that spills across our southwest border and into
our streets.
[Chart]
Admiral Papp. I placed a paper chart up there that shows
the threat vectors and the maritime trade routes that approach
our country, a maritime Nation that depends upon those trade
routes for 95 percent of our trade, about $700 billion of our
gross national product.
As you can see, illicit trafficking is just one of the many
maritime threats that our Nation is facing. And if we do not
have the tools to confront these threats, they pose a
significant risk to our economic prosperity.
This is why responsibly rebuilding the Coast Guard and
providing our hard-working Coast Guard men and women with the
tools they need to do the job remains my top budget priority.
Now, the good news is that since 9/11, because of your
support, we have undertaken numerous steps to mitigate the risk
in our ports and our inland waterways and along the coast, the
near shore region as I refer to it.
We have heavily invested in new small boats, more capable
aircraft, and the personnel to operate them. We have also
deployed Rescue 21, the distress communications system, through
the continental United States.
We have unified our field commands through the creation of
separate commands to bring together our response and prevention
activities. We have enhanced our regulatory inspection and
compliance programs and we have built out highly effective,
deployable specialized forces that can deploy between the ports
for security.
We have also strengthened our partnerships with many
federal, state, and local agencies that we operate alongside.
In other words, although there is always more work to do,
in my nearly 40 years of service, I am proud to say that our
shore, boat, and patrol forces in our ports and along the coast
are in the best shape that I have ever seen them.
But the last place that we want to confront maritime
threats is in our ports or near our coast. We prefer to push
those threats out in the offshore region, as far off our coast
as possible. There is only one agency within the United States
Government that has the authorities and the capabilities to do
that and that is the United States Coast Guard.
So back to the Cutter Northland, which is an example of
that. The condition of our offshore forces, especially our
major cutter fleet, is a much different story than our shore-
based forces. Despite the best efforts of our crews and the
support of this committee, the state of our major cutter fleet,
most of which is in excess of 40 years of age, is deeply
concerning.
Our legacy high-endurance cutters are only achieving 70
percent of their programmed underway hours and more than 50
percent of the time, they are sailing with debilitating
casualties.
Compounding this challenge is that the United States Navy,
whom we partner with to patrol the offshore regions like the
transit zone, is also reevaluating its fleet size.
Navy ships such as the Perry class frigates have served us
well in the past in the counter-drug mission, but they are
leaving the service. This is also a cause for concern because
the key to interdicting threats offshore is maintaining a
persistent presence with cutters.
If we do not have major cutters that are capable of
operating independently in the transit zone and along the trade
routes, we cannot mount a response. It is that simple.
Last year, more than 700 metric tons of cocaine moved
through the western hemisphere transit zone, but despite having
actionable intelligence, almost once per week, the drugs were
on the water en route to Central America. We lacked an
available major cutter to disrupt and interdict these
smugglers.
Other maritime threats are on the rise. The expanding
global population is placing pressure on our fishing stocks and
increasing the demand for fossil fuels. As a maritime Nation
and an Arctic Nation, we require major cutters to patrol and
ensure the stewardship of these and other deep sea resources.
This is why we must continue to build major cutters such as
the sixth National Security Cutter, which is in this budget, as
quickly as possible. And I am extremely grateful to the
Secretary and the President for giving their support for number
6 in this budget.
Doing this lowers our costs, maintaining momentum that has
allowed us to put National Security Cutters 4 and 5 on contract
for nearly the same price.
There are at least two other reasons why our recent
acquisitions have been very successful: your strong support and
our highly capable acquisition workforce.
Today we are poised to build ships and aircraft like never
before. And many of our acquisition programs are mature. We
have overcome learning curves, taken advantage of
opportunities, and are reaping the benefits of a refined
production process and trained builders.
In order to deliver our new assets as fast and
inexpensively as possible, we must keep these production lines
going.
Beyond major cutters, we have also delivered the first Fast
Response Cutter and we have 11 more on order. We have delivered
13 maritime patrol aircraft. At least two arrived ahead of
schedule. And we have also delivered 83 of our new medium-size
response boats.
The ships and aircraft we are building today will define
the Coast Guard's capability for the next 50 years, the
capability we need to remain true to our motto, Semper Paratus,
always ready, as we enter our third century of service to the
Nation.
So thank you for the opportunity to come up here and
testify this morning and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.099

CAPITAL INVESTMENT PLAN, SUBMISSION OF

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Admiral Papp.
Let me start off with the fiscal year 2012 conference
agreement, which of course, as you know, directed the
submission of the capital investment plan with the submission
of the fiscal year 2012 budget.
However, as we sit here today, almost a month after the
budget was submitted, we still have not seen the Coast Guard's
investment plan. The requirement for the CIP, or the capital
investment plan, was in bill language. That was signed into law
by the President. It was carried in both houses, the House and
the Senate bill, and certainly did not appear just out of thin
air.
The requirements were not new or overly burdensome. They
are, in fact, requirements for information that you as the
Commandant should already have in order to provide the needed
oversight for your acquisition program.
Admiral Papp, I must be honest. The failure is unacceptable
to this Subcommittee.
Why has the Coast Guard failed to comply with the law and
right now this morning, we need to know when we can receive
this report?
Admiral Papp. Sir, I take responsibility for that failure.
You are absolutely right. It is relatively new for us, but that
is not an excuse. I have discovered that it is still within my
headquarters and I commit to you to have it out of Coast Guard
headquarters by the end of the week for review by the
Administration.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. So when do you expect that we can
receive it?
Admiral Papp. Well, we will have to work with the
Administration to see how quickly we can push it through there.
But we will wrap it up in terms of my portion of it and forward
it on within the next week.
Mr. Aderholt. And there is $75 million that is withheld
from the operating account, from your operating account, until
the report is submitted.
So you can assure us your commitment to take the statutory
requirements very seriously and submit the report and also
avoid that something like this would happen in the future?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. That $75 million certainly is a
great incentive for me because we need each and every nickel
that we have in our budgets. And I commit to you to do a better
job on it and get it to you as soon as possible.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Admiral.
The President's budget includes funding for the sixth NSC
which has been referred to earlier, but that does not provide
any funding in the out-years for the NSC number seven and
number eight, nor does the funding profile show the shutdown of
costs associated with the program.
Is the program of record for eight NSCs still a relative
requirement?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. And I have confirmed that with our
Secretary. She has stated that it is still the program of
record.
This year, our acquisition budget, our acquisition portion
of the budget--although our overall budget is reduced by about
4 percent--the 2013 budget represents a 20 percent reduction in
our acquisition monies.
That has caused us to look across our entire portfolio.
And, quite frankly, we are ordering the minimum production
level in almost every project that we have including the
National Security Cutter.
I acknowledge right up front that in the 5-year plan, there
are zeros next to seven and eight, but the Secretary remains
committed. That is the program of record.
And I think given the constraints of the Budget Control
Act, we are going to have to look at each and every asset in
every portfolio in each and every year as we go forward and
work doubly hard to justify whatever we can get to spend on
those projects.

NATIONAL SECURITY CUTTERS: PRODUCTION

Mr. Aderholt. In order to maintain the current production
rate, when does the Coast Guard need funding to begin
construction of the NSC 7?
Admiral Papp. NSC 7 would be within the 2014 budget, which
is what we had programmed in order to keep the flow at the
shipyard in proper sequence and to get the--under the original
construct, if you go back to the 2012 budget submission, we
were looking at year 2014 and 2015 for NSCs 7 and 8 in order to
keep the flow going and also make room in the budget for
starting the Offshore Patrol Cutter.
I would like to add that I am a fairly optimistic guy, so
as I look at the plan, one of the things I have been talking in
many venues about is the need for recapitalizing our icebreaker
fleet as well. So a positive note in looking ahead is that we
are starting to get money now to recapitalize our icebreaker
program.
But there are a lot of portfolios there. There are
diminishing resources in the acquisition fund and in our
budget. And as we go from year to year, I suspect it is going
to be a battle to look at each and every one of those items and
either justify or reprioritize spending within any given budget
year.
Mr. Aderholt. Where would the number seven and number eight
NSCs be located?
Admiral Papp. The hulls themselves?
Mr. Aderholt. Yes.
Admiral Papp. My planned lay-down or at least the plan that
I have approved within Coast Guard headquarters for planning is
NSCs 1 through 4 are going to be in Alameda, California. Let me
correct that. NSCs 1 through 3 are in Alameda, California. Then
we go to 4 and 5 in Charleston, South Carolina. NSC 6 goes back
to Alameda. Then NSCs 7 and 8 go to Honolulu for the lay-down.

NATIONAL SECURITY CUTTERS: OPTIONS IF NOT FUNDED

Mr. Aderholt. I know my time is running out, but let me ask
you one last thing. If you do not get the funds for the NSC 7
and 8, what will that mean for your legacy fleet?
Admiral Papp. Well, we would have to look at all the
options that are available. One option might be keeping some of
the 378-foot, high-endurance cutters on active duty. That
presents a challenge.
Just 2 years ago, I am sorry, 3, 4 years ago now, when I
was the Atlantic Area Commander, I had to shut down both Dallas
and Gallatin, the two ships that are home ported in Charleston.
We found major structural problems in both ships that made them
unsafe to go to sea.
The Commandant at the time and under my recommendation,
decided to reactivate those ships. It took us $20 million and 2
years to get Gallatin back into shape. If I was confronted with
that decision today as Commandant, we would not spend the
money. We would just decommission the ship or lay it up because
it is just unsafe to send people to sea in.
The remainder of the ships that we have in service right
now are rapidly approaching that as well. We only get about $1
million per year in sustainment funds for each one of those
ships. If you spend $20 million on one ship or you spend $2
million on one ship, it comes at the expense of other ships and
other programs, which worsens their condition as well.
So it is a risky proposition going forward trying to keep
the Hamilton class 378-foot, high-endurance cutters in service
because they are just increasingly expensive each year.
But if the NSC program is curtailed, I need to look at what
the options are to keep some of those ships in the budget,
which would push them up into the 50-year range by the time we
probably look at decommissioning them.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Price.

BUDGET CHALLENGES, MEETING

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me continue to ask you a few questions about the
national security cutter and in particular what some of the
budget tradeoffs are that you have been dealing with.
This is a real quandary. You have put the production funds
in for number six. Number seven and eight are deferred. That is
something like $1.6 million that would be required for those
remaining two cutters.
I assume there is a tradeoff here against the procurement
of a heavy icebreaker against the investments in fast response
cutters.
What kind of decisions have you had to make as you consider
these competing needs and then related to that, of course, is
what this does to your missions?
Obviously when you combine the at least temporary halt in
procurement with the decision to operate in Alaska with one
cutter up to six months a year, you are talking about fewer
cutters working and a reduced number of operations.
Are we crossing the line here between the increased
efficiency, of course, that we have been looking for with
really a smaller fleet that is not able to carry out essential
missions?
Admiral Papp. Mr. Price, there is no doubt there are
challenges there. My job, however, is twofold.
First of all, I have looked at the--well, actually, three,
but the second two are sort of combined. My first thing is to
look at our current threats.
And as I said in my opening statement, ``Where are the
current threats?'' We have illegal migration, threats to our
fisheries, illegal drugs, all things that need to be
intercepted and dealt with on the high seas. There is only one
agency in the government that can do that, that has the legal
authorities and the capability to do that. That is the United
States Coast Guard.
In order to do that, you need sturdy ships that can be out
there on a sustained basis. That is why I continue to say that
my highest risk is on the high seas and having major cutters to
be able to deal with that.
The second and third thing is ``What are future threats
going to be?'' That is a little harder to analyze, but I think
that given our 200-year history, if you look back, there are a
lot of the same threats, whether it is piracy, smuggling, or
other things. They are consistent in the maritime environment
and I suspect that for the next 40 years, they will remain that
way, too.
So as you look out for 40 years, what do you give priority
to build out over in the near term that is going to last us for
the next 40 years because I am not building just for the next
budget year? My responsibility as Commandant is to build for
the next 40 years.
Another emerging threat is the Arctic. I have said that in
many venues around town and around the country. We need to
recapitalize our icebreaker program as well.
So as a, once again, relatively optimistic guy, I am
looking at the fact that we have acknowledged that the program
of record is eight national security cutters. We are getting
money for an icebreaker and I think rightly so.
Each and every year, the Secretary and I are going to have
to look at the--next year or this coming year, we are going to
have to look at the 2014 budget and decide what we can do.
And I have not gotten my budget guidance yet, but I will
express my concerns, give her my best professional advice as
the Commandant, and we will work our way forward in future year
budgets.

POLAR ICEBREAKERS: PLAN FOR OPERATIONAL ADDITIONS

Mr. Price. Those arctic priorities obviously loom very
large. Could you spell that out a bit exactly what the
dimensions of that task are, the work we are going to be doing
in the arctic? What is impacting that? What is creating this
situation? What kind of change is underway here in terms of the
way we should assess our arctic mission?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir.
You know, a lot of people think because of whatever your
opinions on global warming are, you know, there is more open
water, but the ice refreezes just as we saw this year. And
actually it makes it a little more dangerous because we are
getting increased human activity up there.
But there is still ice and there will be for the
foreseeable future. Nome is a great example of that. They
waited too long to get the fuel shipment in there and then the
ice started forming. And we needed our only national icebreaker
to break in the fuel tanker to get into Nome.
I find myself, I am sorry--I find our country at risk by
only having one operational icebreaker right now. So we within
the Coast Guard are working as hard as possible to get Polar
Star back on line in 2013, which will give us two operational
icebreakers. And then we have probably a 10-year window to
proceed with starting to recapitalize with a replacement
icebreaker and perhaps another one in the future.
But my responsibility is to meet the immediate threat,
which we have done by keeping Healy operational and restoring
Polar Star. And now I have to be thinking about the future,
which is building a new icebreaker that will last us another 40
years.
Mr. Price. And international presence in the arctic, is
that a factor you are thinking?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. As we look at all the activity up
there, the North Sea Route above Russia is going to become more
useable than the Northwest Passage over the North American
continent sooner rather than later.
There are already Russian ships that are going to be
transiting through the Northern Sea Route coming down through
the Bering Strait.
The Chinese are constructing icebreakers. And if you read
any of their literature, there is an intention on them to
assert that they have some claim up there on behalf of the rest
of the world.
So the United States needs to be able to maintain a
sovereign presence. And I think the Navy would postulate that
they have submarines that can go underneath the ice cap. But at
the end of the day, you need someone on the surface. You need
an icebreaker that can be able to operate up there as we
increase our human activities and respond to challenges and
emergencies that might come up similar to Nome.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Admiral, I thank you for being here. You have got
tough decisions ahead of you to make.
You know, we have a saying in Texas that when it comes to
ham and eggs, the chicken is involved, but the pig, he is
committed.
Admiral Papp. Right.

DRUG INTERDICTION

Mr. Carter. And we are pretty committed to being involved
in what is going on with the border. And, you know, our
governor has put state resources on the border as have many of
the other governors for that matter.
And I have been very involved with the Coast Guard and I am
impressed with the Coast Guard. And I have seen their
operations in drug interdiction down there.
The way I view what is happening on the border, especially
with this cocaine war that you just described for us just a few
minutes ago with those tons of cocaine that come into this
country is that, you know, the border patrol is playing defense
and it is hard, tough defense.
You guys are our offensive weapon that are going down
there. And you are in the field and you are doing a good job at
it.
And I am very concerned about these cuts that we are
talking about that both the chairman and the ranking member
have already brought up, the high-endurance cutter, the
terminating patrol boat, high tempo, high maintenance program.
These things concerns me in that we are losing our offense in
the drug war. We are going to be restricted in our offense in
the drug war.
And I have got some familiarity, thanks to this committee
going to Alaska. We were able to see the top end of this war
that is going on, and what you have to face with these people
that are taking a high-risk doing this Northwest Passage
cruises up there in the north.
And when we were in Alaska, we were told this is dangerous
business. Our cutters were weak. If something happened and one
of the cruise boats got caught in the ice, response would be
almost impossible. We do not have the either air or sea assets
to reach them.
We saw what happened in Nome, which, by the way, you are to
be congratulated on. I think you did a great job pulling that
off.
And I recently was with a Coastguardsman who took my
daughter to the White House Christmas party and several of the
folks from Alaska came up to him and thanked him for what the
Coast Guard accomplished in Nome. So you are to be commended
for that operation. You did a good job in a tough situation.
But reducing these assets like this, to me it is a mistake.
And so let's start with the drug interdiction.
Do you think we have the resources in 2013 and the next few
years to continue our operations at the level we have been
doing it so that we can effectively have an offense against the
enemy, and in my opinion, the most important war we are
fighting?
Admiral Papp. A qualified yes, sir. And I qualify that by
saying, for instance, we are down on the maritime border, both
on the California side and the Texas side where Mexico meets
the United States.
In fact, yesterday, we interdicted two Mexican launches.
The 87-foot patrol boat Albacore stopped two launches. They
were carrying marijuana.
And, frankly, all we are seeing for the most part on the
California side and the Texas side are marijuana shipments by
the maritime. We are not picking up any of these small cocaine
loads.
Where the cocaine is coming across is on the border, on the
land border. In fact, as a stark contrast, I was in El Paso
just a few weeks ago. I went down to the border crossing. And
they were celebrating because they had just stopped a car and
found a brick of cocaine in a rocker panel, a brick of cocaine.
And that was cause for celebration.
Well, we found 54 bales of cocaine, which has about 50
bricks each in this stop by the Northland I was telling you
about.
So what is the more effective way of stopping cocaine
coming into our country? It is pushing it offshore, pushing it
down toward South America when we can intercept the multi-ton
loads before they get broken down into rocker panels inside
cars coming across the border, which is a much harder solution
to stopping the drugs.
We stop somewhere between 100 and 150 tons of pure cocaine
in the maritime transit zone. The entire U.S. law enforcement
establishment across all the lower 48 states picks up about 40
tons in a given year. That is millions of people picking up
about 40 tons, a couple Coast Guard cutters stopping 100 or
more tons.
So our patrol boat hours, I am concerned about them. But to
be truthful, by the end of 2013, we are going to have seven of
our new Fast Response Cutters. We will be back up. We will
close that gap on patrol hours over the course of the year.
But in order to fit within this budget, we have eight FRC
crews onboard already. We have the people already. And in an
ideal budget environment, I would love to have those new crews
while we still have the old crews and then wait until those new
crews are in the boats and actually out there. Then we could
decommission the ship.
I do not have that luxury anymore, so I have to let some of
them go so we can hold the ones we have for the new patrol
boats. And by the end of 2013, we will be back up there.
In fact, as we speak today, we have 114 total patrol boats
out there. By the end of 2013, we will have 118 patrol boats
out there and seven of those will be our new Fast Response
Cutters, which we are going to get 20 percent more underway
opportunities with.
So is it a risk? There is always a risk, but I am
comfortable absorbing that risk in the patrol boat arena. But,
once again, the big risk is the large offshore cutters, which
are becoming increasingly unreliable and which pick up those
multi-ton loads.
Mr. Carter. Well, I for one, as the other gentleman here
explained, I am concerned about this. I have always thought
since I have been on this subcommittee since 2004, that the
Coast Guard was the shining light in the Homeland Security
Department. And I want to keep it that way.
I think we have got to start squeezing this thing and try
to figure out a way to keep our Coast Guard well equipped and
current.
Admiral Papp. And, sir, if I could qualify. I want to say
one of the good things about this Department is the fact that
CBP [U.S. Customs and Border Protection] and the Coast Guard
work together. I am not diminishing what they do at the border.
Mr. Carter. I know you are not.
Admiral Papp. They do a great job at the border, but that
is their challenge. They are more challenged because they get
those loads that come into Mexico and consequently we have it
pretty well covered because if they are not bringing the
cocaine around by the maritime route, they are trying to bring
it across the land border.
Mr. Carter. Well, according to the fiscal year 2013 budget,
the Coast Guard will be at a five-year low for drug
interdiction capability. We have to get that up. That is the
war that 40 to 50 thousand people have lost their lives over
the last ten years in Mexico. Now, they may not be U.S.
citizens, but they are still human beings. And each one of
those lives lost matters to me. They are my neighbors.
And this is a serious fight. And if you can stop it down
close to its source, like you said, it will maybe lighten the
load that we have to carry on the border and hopefully start
saving some lives.
I am for getting as many assets in the hands of the Coast
Guard as we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Papp. And, sir, we are not carrying out this battle
by ourselves either. Yes, I want to have the ships to be able
to do that, but I have met with Admiral Sinez in Mexico to
continue working together and cooperatively.
I am going down to Colombia this month to meet with the
Colombian Navy. I went to London and met with the First Sea
Lord because they provide assets down there.
We are trying to leverage our partners as well as we can,
but all of them are facing budget constraints. England is going
to take their ships out of there. Of course, Colombia and
Mexico are stretched as well and we are losing our Navy assets.
So we may end up being the only ones holding the bag down
there. That is why I am so insistent that we need to
recapitalize our major cutter fleet.
Mr. Carter. I thank you, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent.

TRANSITIONAL WORKER IDENTITY CREDENTIALS: USE AT CHEMICAL FACILITIES

Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Admiral Papp, for being here.
And I have always said, you know, the Coast Guard does
remarkable work given the limited number of assets and
resources it does have. You and everybody certainly in the
Coast Guard really deserve to be commended.
Unlike my colleague from Texas, I do not have any clever
bacon and eggs metaphors today that we are dealing with, cannot
think of one, but, nevertheless, thanks for your service.
I want to talk about TWIC. I am sure you are aware that
some of the chemical industry have advocated the use of TWIC,
Transportion Worker Identification Credential, for their
personnel requirement under the CFATS program.
We have been asking for the Administration's position on
this proposal and I have asked and I have offered to work with
DHS on legislation should it be necessary.
One question we have been asking, though, is how many
employees at these facilities actually have a TWIC card
already. I do not know. And you may not be able to answer that
at this point.
Admiral Papp. I cannot. I am sure we can trace that down. I
know the numbers of facilities. I certainly do not know the
numbers of workers, but we could probably figure that out.
Mr. Dent. If you could find that out, that would be very
helpful for the committee if you could.
Admiral Papp. Certainly.
[The information follows:]

Response: MTSA facilities are statutorily exempt from CFATS and the
Coast Guard does not perform inspections on non-MTSA CFATS-regulated
facilities. The Coast Guard has no means to confirm how many workers
are employed at chemical facilities covered under CFATS and who
currently hold a valid TWIC card. The CFATS program is managed by the
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division in the National Protection
and Programs Directorate's Office of Infrastructure Protection. I've
been advised by NPPD that they do not maintain a registry of the number
of employees at CFATS-regulated facilities who hold a TWIC card. An
extensive data collection effort would be required to gather this
information.

CHEMICAL FACILITIES: OVERLAPPING REGULATIONS

Mr. Dent. But to put some scale on this whole situation, do
you know how many chemical facilities covered under CFATS are
also covered under the Maritime Transportation Security and
Safe Ports Act? Do you have any idea what percentage?
Admiral Papp. I do not. I know there is an overlap and we
are continuously working to diminish that overlap. In fact, the
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division has granted almost
400 exemptions to CFATS facilities that are also MTSA
facilities.
They come to us to gain verification and we are working as
hard as we can to eliminate that redundancy where we can and
just to keep them pure MTSA facilities. So that work is
ongoing.
Mr. Dent. Yeah. I would be curious if your staff could also
follow-up on that.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir.
[The information follows:]

Response: Facilities that are regulated under the Maritime
Transportation Security Act (MTSA) are exempt from the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) regulation. Thus, there are
no facilities where CFATS and MTSA apply to the same footprint of a
facility. In some cases, there may be an area of a chemical facility
that is engaged in maritime activities and that is regulated solely
under MTSA. Some of these facilities, however, may have other non-
maritime areas outside of the MTSA footprint (i.e., that are not
regulated under the MTSA regulations), and that may be regulated under
the CFATS regulations. Through our harmonization work with the
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division in the National Protection
and Programs Directorate's Office of Infrastructure Protection, we
jointly estimate that there may be as many as 400 facilities where some
portion of the facility is regulated under MTSA and another portion of
the facility is covered by CFATS.

TRANSITIONAL WORKER IDENTITY CREDENTIALS: READERS

Mr. Dent. That would be very helpful to the committee as
well.
I also understand that a good number of TWICs are going to
be expiring, meaning that all those maritime employees will
then go back to enrollment sites and enroll as if they are
first-time applicants.
Given that the readers are still not deployed, is the
Administration looking at anything to address that situation?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir, absolutely. Mr. Pistol from TSA
[Transportation Security Administration] approached me probably
about 2 months ago now and we identified the problem. We have
put together a working group.
In the Coast Guard, we are extremely concerned over our
mariners and not creating duplicative, redundant processes for
them, and we are going to try to work toward a solution that
will minimize the impact on those people who have to go in for
the renewals.
Mr. Dent. Understood. And without these readers,
essentially TWIC is--it really is not much more than just a
flash pass and it is a pretty expensive one, too, at that.
Do you have any idea what the time line is for the TWIC
reader rule?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. We just got the reader report and
now we are in the process of coming up with the regulation and
the proposed rules. And that is going to be about a year
process to work that through Coast Guard headquarters and then
through the Administration.
Mr. Dent. Thank you for that.
And the reader pilot started in August of 2008. That was
about a year later. The final rule was supposed to be published
by August 2010.
Can you give us any sense of the timing on that issue?
Admiral Papp. As I said, my most recent read on it is now
that we have the report, we are working through the final rule,
and that process should take about a year to get completed.
Mr. Dent. Port security TWIC reader projects is going to
expire as I understand it. TWICs are expiring. Are we looking
at another five years?
Admiral Papp. For the----
Mr. Dent. For the expiring TWICs.
Admiral Papp. I do not know, sir. We will provide you an
answer for the record on that.
Mr. Dent. And, finally, I guess my time is about up, can
you help us understand some of the challenges to finalizing
this rule and if you can tell us when it is going to be done?
Admiral Papp. Now that we have the reader report, there is
no obstacle for us proceeding forward. It is just the time
involved and writing the final rule and getting that through
the Administration and published.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, and appreciate your service and
everybody in the Coast Guard.
Admiral Papp. Thank you, sir.

MISSION NEED STATEMENT, UPDATE OF

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Admiral, the budget you have presented to us today claims
to support the 2004 mission need statement. This study was
conducted over eight years ago when Deep Water was the plan for
recapitalizing the aging Coast Guard fleet. And program funding
was plentiful.
Since then, many things have changed. Deep Water as a
single program no longer exists and the fiscal reality of
record deficits has forced our Nation to refocus on needs
versus our wants.
Other departments, such as Defense, have taken this to
heart and made an attempt at resetting the future. While we may
not totally agree with what their proposals are, at least they
do have a plan. It is imperative that the Coast Guard do the
same.
Even Secretary Napolitano has stated in front of this
Subcommittee just a few weeks ago that the 2004 mission need
statement needs to be updated.
This is not a call for more studies that detail the mix of
fleet. You have done many of those over the past few years.
This is a new look at the mission's requirement that the
various studies build for.
When do you plan to follow the Department of Defense
example by laying out a new strategy for the future to reflect
today's fiscal realities?
Admiral Papp. Well, we have taken three looks at the fleet
mix over the last couple of years. We have Fleet Mix Analysis
I, which was in an unconstrained environment. We did Fleet Mix
Analysis II, which was a more constrained fiscal environment.
And then we just recently completed the Department of Homeland
Security Cutter Study.
Each and every one of those studies comes back. I would
interpret it to be validating the fleet mix that we designed,
that we came up with in the mission need statement, in other
words, the eight National Security Cutters and the 25 Offshore
Patrol Cutters.
There is nothing that invalidates that. You can look at
different ways of spending different mixes between the ships.
The challenge that I am confronted with right now is when you
look at those different mixes of ships, you are looking at an
Offshore Patrol Cutter that we do not know what it is going to
be right now.
We do not know what the funding will be 5 or 6 or 10 years
from now. We do not know what that ship is going to turn out to
be. We are very hopeful that it will be a very capable ship.
The only thing that we know for sure right now is what the
National Security Cutter is, which is a stable, predictable
project that we have met the learning curve on. We have a
stable price on it and we know that the ship is performing. We
have three of them out there that are doing an outstanding job.
It is an outstanding ship.
So we will continue to work with the Secretary. If we go
back to looking and revising the mission need statement, it has
to be based upon our strategy.
The Secretary recently signed off on a Department of
Homeland Security white paper that talks about the strategy,
talks in broad terms about what the Coast Guard does in terms
of providing layered security.
We have further amplified that with a document that I
signed off on just a couple of weeks ago: our Coast Guard
publication 3.0, which is how we conduct Coast Guard
operations.
Because we build multi-mission units, what we end up doing
is within our strategy. What we have to do is we take those
resources that we are able to get and then we apply them
against the highest need, the highest priority mission on any
given day.
So at the end of the day, it is resources against the
priorities. A for instance is these cutters that I talk about
that are down there interdicting drugs. If we just need them
for interdicting drugs, that would be one thing.
But when we have something like the Haitian earthquake,
humanitarian response, these cutters get diverted to do that as
well. If we have a mass migration from Haiti or from Cuba,
those cutters get diverted and are able to operate there as
well.
So I do not think we have ever been in a state in the Coast
Guard where we have enough resources to do everything that is
called upon within our strategy. What we need to do is balance
those resources that we have asked for within our portfolios
against the highest threats on any given day.
Mr. Aderholt. Does the Coast Guard plan to look at
requirements? Again, the studies did not address requirements
for missions.
Admiral Papp. I am not sure what is meant by that
statement, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. As far as the plan to look at what is
actually required for the long term.
Admiral Papp. Well, I think the 2004 mission need statement
looked at all the mission requirements that we had, the numbers
of hours, number of ships, aircraft time, et cetera, and then
came up with a plan, a balanced plan of fleet production and
mission requirements.
I have nothing that has diminished any mission requirements
that we have, so I would say from my professional view, the
requirements in the mission need statement should still
adequately fulfill those requirements that we have out there.

FLEET INTEROPERATION WITH NAVY

Mr. Aderholt. I think the concern is because of eight
years. Let me go on.
The Secretary in her budget hearing and the budget
justification for the Department of Homeland Security
submitted, suggested that future strategy for the Coast Guard
is dependent upon the Navy's force lay-down which we have
already known includes the decommission of all the frigates.
If this is truly part of the Coast Guard's plan, how are
you engaging the Navy on Coast Guard requirements and how many
of these decisions impact the future of Coast Guard
acquisitions?
Admiral Papp. Going back even further, we have a national
fleet plan. The successive Commandants and Chiefs of Naval
Operation have looked at our ship building programs.
At a time when budgets were rising, it was a little easier
to look at that and now I think both the Chief of Naval
Operations and I have to take a strong look.
I think what the Secretary has suggested is a good
stewardship issue. Under Title 14, she and I both share a
responsibility to make sure that the Coast Guard fleet is
adequately prepared to interoperate with the Navy when called
upon.
So it is right for her to go to Secretary Panetta and
Secretary Mabus, for me to meet with the Chief of Naval
Operations and make sure that we are not building ships or
other assets that are duplicated by the Navy.
Now, I meet regularly with the Chief of Naval Operations,
sometimes a couple times a week, and we also have Navy/Coast
Guard staff talks that look at these things.
The Navy provides us support on each and every one of those
ships. I think it is something, to the tune of about $50
million per National Security Cutter, that they provide
equipment on those ships that helps to make us interoperable
with the Navy and they provide annual funding to us for the
support and maintenance of that equipment as well, as well as
updates as the ship ages.
So this is an ongoing discussion that we have had with
regularity in the past. It is becoming more important now as we
are facing constrained budgets. And I applaud the secretary for
wanting to step forward and meet with the Navy and with the
Secretary of Defense to make sure that as both of us expend our
funds, we are spending it on the right resources.
Mr. Aderholt. My time has expired.
Mr. Price.

AVIATION SAFETY ASSESSMENT ACTION PLAN

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commandant, I would like to turn to the area of aviation
and safety, obviously an area that you have given very intense
attention to since you became the commandant.
Between 2008, 2010, the Coast Guard had a series of
accidents resulting in a loss of 14 aviators and marine safety
and security team members. That was a high and unprecedented
accident rate.
You have focused on this very sharply when you came on
board. You required an aviation stand-down to review safety
operations and you have implemented recommendations from these
assessments.
For a year and a half, the Coast Guard did not have major
mishaps. However, we are all aware that last week we had
another tragic incident in Mobile Bay with four aviators
perishing.
I wonder if you could review for us this morning briefly
the findings from the aviation safety assessment you completed
in 2010 and tell us what progress to date you have made in
implementing these recommendations and also based on your
initial reviews what you can tell us about the crash last week.
Was the cause in any way similar to what you had found in
earlier crashes when you conducted the stand-downs? How does
this incident compare with those to which you have been
attending?
Admiral Papp. Thank you, Mr. Price, and let me address the
Aviation Safety Assessment Action Plan, the ASAAP as we call
it.
And I commissioned that just shortly after becoming
Commandant and put two of our most senior aviators in charge of
that, people that I trust without a doubt.
And what we found was that each one of the accidents that
occurred, and we lost 14 people over 2 years in five
accidents--each accident was different, but there were some
consistent themes. And a lot of it went to the heart of our
aviation community.
The differences over the last 10 years as opposed to the
history of our aviation program is that we went in our aircraft
because we started getting a lot of money post 9/11; we started
upgrading our aircraft. We went from a basic H65. We are up
to--alpha, bravo, charley. We are now up to a delta model and
the H60, we are up to tango model.
So there were rapid changes in technology that our pilots
were adapting to. There were rapid additions of mission sets.
In other words, we did not do as much airborne use of force,
rotary wing air intercept.
In the past, before 9/11, all they did was search and
rescue for the most part: go out, hover, rescue swimmers, bring
back. We increased their mission set as well.
And I think because of the high tempo--what I have
interpreted the report to say, because of the high tempo of
operations, our pilots tended to get complacent during routine
operations.
If you look at the consistencies between a lot of our
accidents, it is in transits. It was either during training,
which perhaps it took a little bit of an edge off because it
was not a real-world crisis, search-and-rescue case or moving a
helicopter from point A to point B.
That is very troubling to develop complacency. And that all
leads you back to a question of leadership, involvement by the
commanding officers at the air stations, involvement by the
senior aviators in terms of mentoring the newer aviators, and
also crew resource management within the aircraft when they are
in flight.
And we are confident that those were the issues and we have
gone through an education process, sending out our senior
leaders to each and every air station, and promulgating new
guidance for our leadership in terms of what we are looking for
in our leaders and our commanding officers and their
responsibilities and holding people accountable for those
actions as well.
And as you note and as I am very pleased, it has actually
been closer to 19 months since our last accident and I am
grateful for that because we never want an accident in any way,
shape, or form.
As far as the CG-6535 accident of last week, it would be
premature of me to comment at this point because we simply do
not know.
We had one of our most experienced instructor pilots from
the training center at Mobile flying that night. He was
training a new pilot, but the new pilot was at the end of his
syllabus, was doing his last test flight before transitioning
to this aircraft.
We do not know whether it might be mechanical, whether it
was pilot error. We just do not know at this point. There is a
full range of possibilities, but it would be unfair for me to
make a judgment on what it was in this particular case.
Suffice it to say we are looking at this very, very
closely. We first of all want to make sure that there is no
mechanical issue that might be fleet wide that we would be
concerned about.
But we have a great team of experts down there who have
been put together to analyze this completely. We will
reconstruct the aircraft. We have recovered about 90 percent of
it right now. But our most urgent mission right now is finding
the fourth member of the crew, Petty Officer Knight, who is
still missing down there.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

POLAR ICEBREAKERS: ADDRESSING NEEDS WITH SMALL FLEET

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, as I said, I had the pleasure of going up and
being with the Coast Guard in Alaska. And we discussed this
icebreaker situation and that we currently have one operational
icebreaker.
And from what I understand, the presence that we need to
have in the Arctic Ocean is an important presence to the
national security of this country, but it also has implications
because a lot of people believe there are an awful lot of
petroleum assets up there in the north.
And the competition between the Russians, potentially the
Chinese, and others to try to lay claim to the whole Arctic by
their presence is part of international law. As I understand
it, if it is undefined, you can claim it by presence.
And the Russians are putting a lot of presence right now up
in the Arctic Ocean; isn't that right?
Admiral Papp. Well, sir, that would be true under what we
used to call customary international law, which is what we all
operated under one time. But since the enactment of the Law of
the Sea Treaty, which we have not acceded to, all the other
countries have acceded, all the other maritime countries in the
world have acceded and signed on to this treaty. So what Russia
is doing up there is they are operating under the concepts of
that treaty, and they are doing bottom surveys and other things
so they can lay claim, under the treaty, to extended outer
continental shelf claims.
Now, we're doing similar things right now. In fact, that
was what Healy was doing up there last summer, along with the
Canadian icebreaker, Louis St-Laurent. They were surveying the
bottom, and mapping it out so that at such time as we accede to
the treaty and we have proper venue to be able to lay a claim,
we can establish our claim for the outer continental shelf, as
well.
But what Russia's doing right now is in compliance with the
Law of the Sea Treaty,----
Mr. Carter. Oh, I understand that. But, I guess the
question is, they're up there with adequate icebreaker
capacity. We actually had to call on them for assistance, as I
understand it, and along with the Swedes from time to time, to
get icebreaker capacity up in the Arctic. They're not the most
reliable partners in the world. Is relying on foreign nations
for polar icebreakers a good policy, in your opinion?
Admiral Papp. Well, I don't want to point fingers at
anybody. It would be easy to, but some of the fingers would
come back to the Coast Guard, as well. The deplorable state
that we find our icebreaker fleet in is a combination of
things, some of which was transferring the operational money
for the icebreakers out of the Coast Guard to the National
Science Foundation, and the National Science Foundation thought
that their money was better spent leasing foreign icebreakers.
The first year they leased a Russian icebreaker and it
broke down. We had to send Polar Star, one of our polar
icebreakers, down to break it out. Consequently, our two major
polar icebreakers have atrophied. They are inactive right now,
inoperable. Polar Star is being restored, but it will take us
still a number of months before she's ready.
This year, they went to lease an icebreaker from Sweden
called the Oden, and they were going to use that to break out
McMurdo, down at the South Pole. At the last moment, Sweden
came through and said,``No, we need Oden for our own duties
back home,'' and they were left without an icebreaker.
The National Science Foundation came to me and asked for
Healy. I refused because Healy is the only icebreaker that we
have that's operational, and she's actually in pretty good
shape, and was committed to operations in the Arctic. And I
wanted to make sure if something came up, I didn't know if Nome
was going to come up at the time, but if something came up we
would have our one operational icebreaker available. I was just
lucky on that particular one.
So, Healy's okay. She's been up there for almost 8 months
now, and is going to need a good yard period to get her back
into shape. She'll be back up there next summer. Then Polar
Star will be ready in 2013, and that will give us a bridging
strategy for the next 10 years.
So, that's why I'm encouraged that we see funding coming up
for an icebreaker, but I'd like to make the case, and this is
Papp's opinion, that an icebreaker ought to be a shared cost
across the government. The National Science Foundation needs
it. The Department of Defense, from time to time, needs it.
Yes, the Coast Guard needs it, but this is something that
really begs for an across-government response and I would say
sharing, as well. Maybe even industry needs it, which gains the
benefit of having those icebreakers up there to provide
security and sovereignty.
Mr. Carter. That's a pretty good concept. I'd like to
explore that a little bit because we can't operate if we get
any emergencies up there that we can't respond to, and just the
fact that people are, we just had two, two cruise ship
disasters in the last month and a half, two months. One of
them, all of the electricity went out. That wasn't as near as
bad as the one that flipped over on the side.
But, those people are driving those cruise ships through
that Northwest Passage now.
Admiral Papp. Oh, yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. And that's an awful lot of people. We could
have in an awful lot of trouble.
Admiral Papp. Yeah. We focused on icebreakers. But to be
truthful, sir, I'm more concerned about the short sight
infrastructure. I've been up to Barrow twice now. I actually
stayed in Barrow overnight last year. There's no infrastructure
there. We couldn't find; I had a travel party of 12. We
couldn't find hotel rooms. We stayed in a dormitory, that old
dew line station up there that the Air Force runs.
Plus, if you want to do search and rescue, you've got to
position some helicopters up there. There's no hangar space for
my helicopters right now. There's no VHF communications, no
distress monitoring system up there. People who go up there
don't understand how little there is in terms of infrastructure
to support them.
Now, next summer Shell is going to be up there with about
600 people on 33 ships and two drilling rigs. That's going to
be an increase of 600 people and 33 ships over what was up
there last summer. That creates challenges for me: search and
rescue, potential for pollution, the potential for security.
There are environmentalist groups that will seek to disrupt
Shell's operation. These are all mission sets for the United
States Coast Guard. There's no other agency that can do it, and
we don't have any shore infrastructure up there.
So, if you don't have shore infrastructure, what do we do?
Just like I said. You send a major cutter to Haiti for the
earthquake. You're going to send a major cutter up there, which
gives us a mobile command and control platform, a flight deck
that can launch helicopters, and a stern ramp that can launch
boats. And we have what amounts to a Coast Guard sector right
there, except it's afloat.
Mr. Carter. We've got a lot of work to do.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Admiral.

NATIONAL SECURITY CUTTERS: FY 2013 BUDGET

Mr. Aderholt. It is obvious that you have no intention to
fully fund the NSC. The budget cuts, the planned buy for the
FRC from the six that was appropriated in FY 12, to just four,
which actually squanders $30 million in savings. The FY 13
budget only requests two cutters, again, delaying the
capability and the squandering of savings.
The question to you, Admiral, is how do you justify losing
the savings, and delaying the Navy capacity, when you're also
decommissioning patrol boats and plan to terminate the high
tempo high maintenance program?
Admiral Papp. The only way I can explain it, sir, is just
like my wife and I have a budget and we've got to live within
it, the Coast Guard's got a budget and we have to find a way to
live within it. I'm using my best judgment on each and every
one of those projects on how to keep them going.
Now, as I said, I don't characterize it as canceling others
in order to build the National Security Cutter. We need the
National Security Cutter, as well, and if we push that off--one
estimate we did last year, if you push it off as much as a
year--you increase that by about $50 million on that ship if
you push it off.
So, I'm intent on getting number 6 in the 2013 budget. What
that requires is to go to minimum ordering in each one of the
approved acquisition projects that we have, including the
National Security Cutter, and that's the best I can do. That's
my best recommendation on how to keep our acquisition projects
going within the constraints that we find ourselves.

POLAR ICEBREAKERS: FY 2013 BUDGET

Mr. Aderholt. It was mentioned, and it has been mentioned
several times here this morning, but the FY 13 budget includes
$8 million to initiate the acquisition of the polar icebreaker.
What does the $8 million fund? What is the acquisition
strategy?
Admiral Papp. The $8 million will be basically the start. I
mean, we have no staff on board right now devoted to designing,
building, and acquiring an icebreaker. So the first thing you
have to do is you have to bring on, I mean, we have program
staff. In other words, the people who develop policy can't
start developing the requirements that we have. But then you
have to have an acquisition staff that starts setting up and
complying with all the many, many Federal acquisition rules
there are in order to get this project going, and that's the up
front money to start the project.

OFFSHORE PATROL CUTTERS: PROJECTED OPERATION DATE

Mr. Aderholt. The budget again delays the Offshore Patrol
Cutter, OPC, with estimates that we will not have an OPC
operational until 2020, 2022, which is, of course, years after
they started initial planning back in 2004.
Is there any way to accelerate this program to allow for a
faster recapitalization of our 18 cutter fleet?
Admiral Papp. I'd be reluctant to do that, sir, and I've
talked to my people and I think our projected date now is
having that ship in the water in 2020. Now, I mean, we may be
quibbling over terms, whether it's fully ready for operations
or whatever else. But I'm projecting 2020 for having it in the
water and we're looking at going into production in 2017, which
is reflected in the Capital Investment Plan.
When I came in as Commandant, I realized that this was the
most expensive project that the Coast Guard has ever taken on
in history. These 25 ships are a significant investment, and I
also understood looking out at the horizon and seeing in the
storm clouds that restricted budget is coming up that we needed
to build a ship that was affordable. We rescrubbed the
requirements. We have battled ourselves within the Coast Guard
to make sure we're asking for just exactly what we need.
Nothing more, nothing less. And I have said three things to my
staff as we've gone forward: affordable, affordable,
affordable.
And I'm very pleased to say that just last week the
Department reviewed, and we passed a major milestone with
acquisition decision event number 2, which validated our
requirements for the type of cutter that we're looking for, and
we are ready to go toward preliminary and contract design work
this next year.

AIRCRAFT, 21 C-27J: TRANSFER FROM AIR FORCE

Mr. Aderholt. The Air Force has announced plans that it is
retiring the brand new fleet of 21 C-27J aircraft, which may
provide the Coast Guard with affordable options for additional
medium rights to fly that aircraft.
Is the Coast Guard reviewing this as another option for our
maritime surveillance, and are you currently talking to the Air
Force about a potential transfer?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. I've already started that. I talked
to General Schwartz, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, just
within the last week.
This is intriguing for me and as soon as I heard that, our
staff started taking a look at a business case analysis on
this. Now, historically, the C27 was one of the aircraft that
Integrated Coast Guard Systems looked at when we started the
Deepwater project as our medium-range aircraft solution. It, I
believe, was one of the finalists. It was at the time a
Lockheed product, and Lockheed was one of the lead system
integrators. But the solution they came up with was that the
cost of the aircraft. The HC144, which we bought, actually has
lower life cycle costs and that's what drove us to buy the
CASA.
However, like I told you, my sense of optimism--Sometimes
things fall in your laps and if we can get free aircraft,
basically free from the Air Force, we might be able to come up
with a plan that will allow us a mix of the CASAs, a mix of the
C27s, and oh, by the way, that might put some extra money in
our budget that we can devote to some of these other projects.
So this is very attractive to me, but we're just in the
preliminary stages right now. The C27 uses the same engines as
the C130J, so we already have a logistics systems for the
engines for that aircraft. So there's potential. I'm
optimistic, and we're going to continue the discussions and I
have a briefing that's working its way up to me, I think within
the next week or so, which will present the business case
analysis.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Mr. Price.

AIR STATION CLOSURES, IMPACT OF

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, your 2013
budget proposal would close two seasonal air stations, in
Muskegon, Michigan, and Waukegan, Illinois. As I understand it,
to compensate for these closures you are proposing to transfer
three H60 helicopters to Traverse City. Two from Air Station
Clearwater, and one from Air Station Elizabeth City.
You've indicated that with the larger helicopters in
Traverse City you'll be able to respond to all searches and
rescues in western Michigan and in the Chicago area. I'd like
to have you elaborate on that. If a critical search and rescue
event occurs in the Chicago area after you close these two
nearby seasonal air stations, how quickly can you respond from
Traverse City, which is something like 224 flight miles away?
Admiral Papp. Thank you, Mr. Price. I speak on this subject
with personal experience. I was the Ninth District Commander,
which is our Great Lakes command, and I was continuously
challenged year-round by the inability of Air Station Traverse
City to respond to a lot of the cases that we had to do,
because it's not just Lake Michigan, it's also Lake Superior.
They have to fly all the way down to Duluth, and I've flown in
those small helicopters up there. You have to stop and refuel
midway before you can get down into lower Lake Superior. In
fact, when you fly from Traverse City or the Air FACS down to
southern Lake Michigan, oftentimes you have to refuel because
they're small helicopters with limited endurance.
The other challenge is in a major portion of the year,
you've got icing conditions up there, and the H65, the current
helicopter, is not designed to deal with icing conditions. The
H60 is a much more substantial helicopter. It more than doubles
the search time. It has more on-station time. It can go
further, and it has deicing to protect my people and to be able
to respond better operationally. The H60 is a better aircraft
for Air Station Traverse City, I am convinced.
The only way you can support that is by eliminating what
are really redundant Air FACS that are only open for about 3
months of the year. We used to have Air Station Chicago. It was
decommissioned because the Navy closed down the field that was
down there. We chose to set up an air facility at Muskegon, and
then we were required to open up one at Waukegan as well.
They're redundant.
The other thing I would add there is people isolate looking
at the aircraft response. We also have four Coast Guard boat
stations in southern Lake Michigan, and we have recapitalized
them with three quarter of a million dollar boats. Six of them,
which have very fast response times, can deal with heavy
weather. In any search-and-rescue case you have a combination
of surface assets and air assets. So when I look at the lay
down of the increased capable boats that are down there, plus
the H60s, I'm comfortable that we can still provide proper
response time for search-and-rescue cases in southern Lake
Michigan.
Mr. Price. So there are variables involved here apart from
the simple response time?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir.
Mr. Price. What is that simple response time, though? What
are we talking about in Traverse City?
Admiral Papp. Our search-and-rescue manual requires us to
have a helicopter on scene within 2 hours. We can continue to
meet that. The H60 is a faster aircraft in terms of having
longer endurance time, and we can continue to meet that
requirement down in southern Lake Michigan.
Plus, there are times when you have aircraft in the air
already that can be diverted for cases, as well. We frequently
have aircraft out there that are on other missions, and can be
diverted for search and rescue. We also have the boats that can
get out there even quicker than the aircraft can from the
stations.
Mr. Price. What's the impact, by the way, on Elizabeth City
to lose one H60? What kind of fleet does that leave there?
Admiral Papp. It will leave three H60s there, which is its
basic allocation of aircraft. The extra aircraft that was
there, the fourth one, was positioned there by my predecessor
to serve the Maritime Security Response Team. It's their
offshore team that we used to take down non-compliant vessels,
and the H60 is not an adequate aircraft for that, nor do we
have the training in place to be able to do vertical insertion
with that particular helicopter. So that one helicopter that
was used solely for training is part of what will go up to
Traverse City.
Meanwhile, for the MSRT, I'm talking to the Chief of Staff
of the Air Force and also General Dapse and the National Guard
to come up with dedicated Department of Defense resources that
are trained at vertical insertion and will be able to work with
that team to take them offshore. We are also developing--As a
follow along to this document, we're developing the doctrine
for how we do advanced interdiction at sea.
Mr. Price. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

POLAR ICEBREAKERS: FUNDING INCREASES

Mr. Aderholt. We mentioned extensively the polar
icebreaker, and the funding profile shows $120 million in FY 14
which is a significant increase from the $8 million you
requested in FY 13. The funding profile then continues to
climb, totaling over $800 million through FY 17.
Does that include incremental funding?
Admiral Papp. For the construction of the ship itself?
Mr. Aderholt. Right.
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. Absolutely.
Mr. Aderholt. Does the Coast Guard intend to fund the
developmental program or get the data from, through the data
rights from a foreign source?
Admiral Papp. That will be up to our acquisition folks in
terms of how we approach this particular project. One of the
things that we have found recently that works for us is going
to proven designs that are out there. The Finns are, I think,
the leaders in the world in terms of ice breaking right now.
The last icebreaker that we built, which was the Mackinaw,
up on the Great Lakes, was basically a Finnish design that was
adapted by Marinette Marine, and I suspect any shipyard in this
country that will build one will be looking toward designs that
are overseas right now, rather than going to the drawing board
coming up with a brand new design.

AIRCRAFT, 21 C-27J: BUSINESS CASE ANALYSIS

Mr. Aderholt. Going back to the C-27J aircraft, can you
provide the Committee with a business case analysis for the C-
27J?
Admiral Papp. Yes, sir. As I said, it has not been
presented to me yet so I would be reluctant to commit to you
when I could provide that, and of course, I would have to brief
the Department on that, as well. But we would be happy to
provide that as we go forward and send people up here to do
some briefings on it.

OFFSHORE PATROL CUTTERS: CAPABILITY

Mr. Aderholt. Okay, and there has been discussion as to the
capability of the OPC with the objective design being more
capable than threshold capacity.
What is the current planned capacity of the OPC, and what
capability tradeoffs are you considering?
Admiral Papp. The driving one, as I said, is affordability.
But having said that, and I'm not trying to be funny here, but
the sea-keeping capability, being able to operate in sea state
5, is probably most important to us right now, because with
fewer National Security Cutters--at least fewer than the High
Endurance Cutter that we have right now--None of our Medium
Endurance Cutters, the 210-foot and 270-foot cutters that we
have, can operate in the Gulf of Alaska and the Bering Sea, and
they do not have the long legs to be able to send them out on
some of the longer deployments that we do in the Pacific.
So it has to be able to launch aircraft and boats in sea
State 5, which is standard ops up in the Bering Sea, and also
have endurance that will be able to keep it out there on
station. I believe it was 45 days we were looking for, without
refueling.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Mr. Price.

PERSONNEL CUTS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, let me ask you
about your personnel reductions that are involved in this
budget proposal. As I understand, you would be losing about
1,070 personnel, almost all by attrition if the 2013 budget
request was passed as is. I know a large portion of those
attritions are due to the decommissioning of aging assets. That
leaves uncertain, at least in my mind, about these replacement
assets coming on the line and how the personnel transfers would
occur. Also, the reduction eliminates a high tempo crewing
strategy for the patrol boats, which would result in a dip in
patrol ladders next year.
That seems particularly concerning as you redeploy large
cutter assets to the Arctic and reduce small cutter hours in
the source of transit zones.
So, I wanted to ask you a couple of questions about this
personnel issue. I believe the estimate is that about 500 of
these reductions would occur as assets are being
decommissioned. That's the number of Coast Guardsmen that would
be let go as their assets are being decommissioned. What is the
potential for redeploying this, these personnel to other assets
so that we don't have a steep drop in operating hours?
Secondly, can you address the patrol boat high tempo
operations? How would eliminating those affect your
counternarcotics operations in the Caribbean and Pacific,
because we're seeing lots of drugs still coming in there. In
fact, an influx of drugs is increasing in some areas, and it
would seem particularly problematic as the Calderon
administration nears the end of its tenure in Mexico.
Admiral Papp. The 1,000-person figure is a little bit of a
red herring. As I said earlier, actually my count is about 700
people are lost because of the decommissioning of various
assets. But on the other hand, as I also stated, we have
brought on many replacement crews to crew the new assets that
are coming on. For instance, we only have three National
Security Cutters right now. But we actually have four crews
already on the books. That fourth crew, it takes a while to put
them through industry training, new equipment, everything else,
to prepare them so that when the ship is delivered they are
trained up and ready to go. So you ideally like to have those
crews on in advance.
We only have one Fast Response Cutter that's actually in
the water and ready to be commissioned. But we have 10 crews
already paid for that are awaiting their ships to be able to
crew them.
Aircraft, I think we have, of our HC144 aircraft, we have,
I think, 14 or 16 crews already purchased that are on budget.
So, we have in advance bought the crews for the new assets that
are coming on. As I said earlier, as well, ideally in an
unconstrained budget environment, you'd love to keep all the
old crews and their assets until you absolutely have that new
ship and that new crew, or that new aircraft and that crew on
line and ready to go before you decommission the old ones.
As a part of the budget constraints that I have right now,
I no longer have that luxury and I have to let those older
crews go now, because I already am paying for new crews that
are on the books that are going to be on those new assets.
In the FY 2013 budget, yes, we are losing the high tempo,
high ops patrol boats. We're decommissioning three of the
patrol boats, and we will have a short-term loss in hours over
the course of that year. But by the end of the year we'll have
seven FRCs on line that will take advantage of those crews that
we've already bought, and they give us an increase of about 20
percent in terms of underway hours, and we will close some of
that gap by the end of FY 2013.
I'm willing to take that risk in the near shore environment
where the patrol boats operate because I'm not seeing the
threat there. We're stopping the threat much further offshore
in terms of migrants and drugs, and so I am comfortable with
our coverage in the near shore region. Plus, we produced 73
patrol boats in the last 10 years, our 87-foot patrol boats. It
wasn't too many years ago that we only had about 75 patrol
boats total in the Coast Guard and now we're up where we have
114 patrol boats on hand right now. When we build out the FRC
fleet ultimately we'll end up with 131 very capable patrol
boats.
So once again, where I see the risk is in the offshore. Our
older, major cutters are out there stopping the threats in the
offshore, but they're getting increasingly expensive to
maintain. So that's why I favor devoting my budget authority,
what head room I have, to continuing the purchase of those
major cutters.
Mr. Price. As you describe the situation I realize I'm not
entirely clear about how the overlap works between these crews
that have been at work for a long period of time, these assets
that are being decommissioned and the training of the new
crews, and how do you achieve at a minimum of personnel loss
and training loss as you make these transitions? I suppose it's
obviously desirable that there be a seamless transition to the
new assets coming on board. But when that isn't the case,
what's, what kind of approach do you take?
Admiral Papp. Well, we have personnel policies and controls
in place that help us deal with that, and I'm confident that
most of the 1,000 people that we're talking about in terms of
this reduction, which ultimately will not leave until we're
into fiscal year 2013, we can deal with through attrition and
modifying our recruiting in terms of bringing people on.
So we're not going to kick 1,000 people out on the street.
This is something that's going to be managed that we will, you
know--We will reduce the numbers of people who are coming into
our training center at Cape May, at the Coast Guard Academy,
and that is reflected also as well as we've cut back on some of
our recruiting billets, simply because we've got people lined
up, waiting, wanting to come into the Coast Guard. We can
afford to accept a couple of year reduction in terms of our
recruiting billets.
Now there's 220 positions in there that effectively are
empty, right now. We put a hiring freeze on at Coast Guard
headquarters because I want Coast Guard headquarters to feel
some of this pain if we're going to lose people. But the
reality is many of these are billets that went unfilled for a
year or more and were not hired into, and we placed a hiring
freeze in. So we're trimming off what I consider to be some
excess that we had at Coast Guard headquarters.
So, this is manageable, this 1,000. Would I love to keep
the 1,000? Sure, I would. Any Service Chief wants to keep as
many people and as much money as they want. But, I'm trying to
live reasonably and responsibly within the budget I've been
given, and we can manage this.
Mr. Price. Finally, let me just ask you quickly. There are
other staffing reductions in other areas as you're beginning to
tell us. Intelligence staff to the tune of maybe 57 positions.
Armed use of force missions, air station personnel. Are any of
those categories that are worthy of special honor that give you
particular----
Admiral Papp. Not particularly. Once again, as I said, I'm
a Service Chief. I'll take anything that anybody gives me and
will make it work. But, what I've been given is a top line that
I've got to live within, and we've got 10 years of experience
since 9/11 right now. Although we built up a lot of areas over
that 10 years, now is our time to start refining and seeing
where we have a little put, some puts and takes, whether it's
intelligent airborne use of force. We've found that we've
devoted a lot of money and people and resources to that, and
we're not finding the utility of it in all locations.
So what we're doing is we're identifying a couple of
locations where we will train them so that we have them
available, but we don't need to train every air station to do
airborne use of force.
Going back to our discussions on aviation safety, we don't
want to overburden our aviators with multiple missions that
we're not getting a return on investment on. So I think it's
good, after 10 years, since 9/11, to be taking a look at things
and seeing what we can afford to do, what are the most
important things for us to be doing, and making those
responsible decisions.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price, and again, thank you,
Admiral, for being here today, and for your testimony. Again,
our thoughts and prayers are with the families that lost their
loved ones last week in Mobile Bay, and we would ask that you
extend our condolences to them on Thursday.
So with nothing further on the agenda, we will stand
adjourned.
Admiral Papp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.114

Wednesday, March 7, 2012.

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

WITNESSES

CRAIG FUGATE, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
ROSS ASHLEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL FUSION CENTER ASSOCIATION
JEFF CAYNON, PRESIDENT, HOUSTON, TX, PROFESSIONAL FIREFIGHTERS
ASSOCIATION (IAFF LOCAL 341), REPRESENTING THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS
JOHN M. HOLMES, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PORT OF LOS ANGELES,
REPRESENTING THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PORT AUTHORITIES
JIM MULLEN, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGERS ASSOCIATION,
DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT,
REPRESENTING NATIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGERS ASSOCIATION (NEMA)
MICHAEL DEPALLO, DIRECTOR AND GENERAL MANAGER, PORT AUTHORITY TRANS-
HUDSON (PATH) CORPORATION, REPRESENTING THE AMERICAN PUBLIC TRANSIT
ASSOCIATION

Opening Remarks: Chairman Aderholt

Mr. Aderholt. The hearing is called to order.
Good morning. Today we welcome the Administrator of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA, Craig Fugate, to
discuss his agency's budget request for fiscal year 2013.
After the conclusion of discussion with Administrator
Fugate, we will convene an additional panel of stakeholder
organizations.
I want to make a brief opening statement in order to allow
more time for Members to ask questions and to proceed with our
second panel as well.
Administrator Fugate, first of all, thank you for the work
that you do and the hundreds of FEMA personnel who were
deployed in my home State of Alabama last April and beyond
following the devastating tornadoes that impacted us. They are
still there helping our communities pick up the pieces today,
and we very much appreciate all the work that FEMA and your
agency has done.
As recently as this past weekend, we again saw devastation
that was brought by severe weather. And, once again, we looked
to FEMA to assist our state and local responders as it is
needed.
We thank you, the dedicated folks who are on the ground and
for all their hard work.
Before we begin, I want to touch briefly on several issues
which we will discuss at length a little bit later in the
hearing.
With respect to disaster funding, we want to know--will the
disaster relief fund be solvent through the remainder of this
year and the next, and will FEMA complete all recovery projects
for disasters that happened last year before the end of fiscal
year 2013?
Grant reform, we want to know--how will grant reform work
and how will FEMA allocate funding under the new framework?
Will you provide funding to high-risk urban areas, port
authorities, and transit agencies as you have in the past or
will it be provided solely to states for distribution?
Furthermore, if allocations are dependent upon a State's
threat and risk assessment, will you provide guidance on the
process that you announced over a year ago?
These questions and others must be answered as your
proposal is considered. And as you continue to engage Congress
on this matter, I strongly encourage you to reach out to State
and local stakeholders that will be impacted by these proposed
changes.
Mr. Fugate, these are some issues with which you are very
familiar. You have seen these issues from the local, State, and
now Federal level. I look forward to your thoughts on these
problems and what progress you have made in the last year, as
well as the challenges that remain.
As your written testimony will be placed in the record, I
ask you to take five minutes or so to summarize it for the
Committee. But before you begin, I would like to call upon the
Ranking Member, Mr. Price, for his opening comments.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.117

Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Fugate, I am glad to welcome you back to our
Subcommittee today. The work that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency does is critical to helping our country
prepare for, mitigate against, and recover from disasters. In
2011 alone, we had 99 major disasters, so that is a heavy job
and one you have performed admirably.
When you arrived at FEMA, the agency was in a rebuilding
mode trying to recover not just lost capacity but the lost
confidence of the American people. Your leadership in this
critical government function has brought us full circle.
The contrast between the nearly universal acclaim that FEMA
has received in the wake of Hurricane Irene and the
heartbreaking images of Americans left stranded in the wake of
Hurricane Katrina could not be more striking. This confirms
that much of the lost capacity we witnessed following Hurricane
Katrina has been rebuilt and I commend you for these efforts.
At the same time, FEMA was spread thinly, responding to a
record number of extreme disasters, and your agency was and is
facing significant financial challenges. Your chief financial
officer should be complimented for his efforts to recover money
from closed-out disasters and to better track expenditures to
keep the disaster relief fund in the black throughout the end
of fiscal 2011. As we both know, this was touch and go right up
until the end. Hopefully with the new disaster funding
mechanism Congress passed as part of the Budget Control Act, we
will now have more long-term stability to fund critical
disaster relief needs.
Principally we are here today to discuss your 2013 budget.
The request for FEMA is $10.2 billion of which $6.1 billion is
for the disaster relief fund. That request is five percent less
than 2012, largely reflecting a $1 billion reduction in the
disaster relief fund based on your reduced estimate of
catastrophic and non-catastrophic needs for 2013.
Within your budget request, I am pleased to note
significant increases for FEMA grants, albeit against a base
which has been significantly reduced in the last two years.
This funding is tied to a significant reorganization of the
State and Local Grant Program. Your new national preparedness
grant proposal has raised many questions as to how it will
work, how you will award funds to maintain core capabilities
nationwide, while also bolstering security investments to buy
down risk and who may be left out. Today I hope you will be
able to provide more clarity on how you envision this block
grant to work if approved.
It also worries me that your request substantially reduces
funding for the Emergency Food and Shelter Program when states
and localities remain on shaky financial footing.
Your request continues to lowball funding in my view for
the flood hazard mapping and Risk Analysis Program which if
adopted would cut funding for this program by 60 percent in two
years when we all know that flooding is the most frequent and
costly natural hazard in the United States.
And it eliminates funding for pre-disaster mitigation
efforts even when this program continues to receive far more
requests for funding and meritorious requests than has been
appropriated.
So, Mr. Chairman, I hope we can work together to address
these problems as we develop our 2013 funding recommendations.
And, Administrator Fugate, I want to thank you for your
service to our country. I look forward to a productive
discussion today and to continuing to work together to build a
more resilient Nation.
Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Mr. Fugate, we look forward to your comments and, again,
thank you for being here.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.119

Opening Statement: Administrator Fugate

Mr. Fugate. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Price, Members.
First, you know, I think this is the fourth time now I have
presented the budget for FEMA and on the basis of the work that
was done in the Budget Stabilization Act, we are requesting the
funding for the DRF [Disaster Relief Fund] on the basis of what
we estimate our total costs will be including the previous
catastrophic disasters as well as the activity that we would
expect in fiscal year 2013.
The overall budget request again is a reduction. Part of
that is reflected in what we have looked at to reduce costs of
the fiscal year 2013 response. That does not do much. We see
that many of the costs expended in the last year for 2011 on
the large-scale disasters are those expenses that we expect
will be paid out in this year, and, therefore, there will be
further reductions based upon the long-term rebuilding.
So we are prorating this out on the basis of what permanent
work we expect to continue in these open catastrophic disasters
as well as factoring in the cost for the responses that we
would expect.
Again, the caveat is that in future catastrophic disasters,
there may be requirements for additional funds, but this is
based upon the known universe of open disasters as well as the
expected reoccurring workload that we would see in a typical
year.
So those are rather significant milestones in that area.
The other part of our budget does show reductions including
reductions in our base budget, which is actually reflected more
in the efficiencies that we have been striving to achieve.
We had to make decisions about programs to reduce or
eliminate. We took an approach that said that, rather than
taking percentage cuts across all programs, we would look at
those programs that would either be eliminated in its entirety
or significantly reduced while keeping other programs funded to
accomplish their mission.
And this will result in some people saying that their
programs got cut. But an example is pre-disaster mitigation,
which we have recommended not to fund this year, we currently
have a backlog of $174 million in open projects that are still
yet to be completed.
That does not count the dollars that are out there in
mitigation on disasters in Section 404, which is also a rather
significant investment in mitigation.
So it was not an easy choice to make. But in looking at
those areas that we felt that we had the need to make
reductions, given that much of the activities are still moving
forward on that backlog as well as the 404 dollars that are out
there, we made that recommendation.
As far as the consolidation of grants, Mr. Chairman, I am
not going to spend a lot of time here because I know we want to
do this as Q and A. We are recommending an increase in that
from last year, but we are looking at consolidating those
grants and looking at more flexibility.
I think we are trying to move a program that oftentimes was
put into various identified areas of funding that did not
always necessarily coordinate well or look at what were the
needs as a Nation.
And because of the President's issuance of the presidential
policy directive on a national preparedness in establishing a
goal, we are looking at how do we fund, not just jurisdiction
by jurisdiction and the threats they face, but how do we build
capability to serve the Nation, how do we build capability that
is a shared responsibility at all levels of government to
respond to catastrophic incidents.
And we have seen examples in the recent tornadoes this year
and last year that show much of that response was contributed
to by previous investments in Homeland Security, which meant
that teams available closer to their neighbors could respond to
their mutual aid--urban search and rescue teams, communication
vehicles, incident management teams that previously had to come
from the Federal Government or further away. This both speeds
up the response but also leaves national resources available
for the next catastrophic disaster.
So our strategy here is to change the dialogue from funding
each jurisdiction on the basis of threats to each State,
threats to urban security areas, and threats ongoing. We
recognized that, but how does that contribute to national
capability because we can look at various scenarios that were
overwhelmed?
Even in the best prepared state, the best prepared city,
where is that help coming from and are we making investment
strategies targeted toward national preparedness goals and
those areas that our capabilities that we see as necessary to
be in a position to prevent an event, or in the event something
happens, to rapidly stabilize it?
And so by combining the grants and putting more emphasis on
the outcomes and using threat-based and hazard-based
recommendations to look at what capabilities we have and where
gaps occur and the best strategy to fund that, it does not lend
itself to each jurisdiction trying to determine itself.
We need to really look at this more collectively and go
``How do we build that capability among our shared resources
and utilize the tools that state governments already have and
many local jurisdictions participate in, which is the emergency
management system's contact between states as well as in-state
mutual aid?''
So this change is really, I think, starting that dialogue
of how we build against a national picture versus jurisdiction
by jurisdiction and then doing that by consolidating the
grants, putting more emphasis on the outcomes and the measures
to support those investment strategies that would be more
directed by a national preparedness goal.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will stop because I know we have
a lot of questions and I want to make sure we have the time as
you requested.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.131

DISASTER RELIEF FUND

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
I will start out talking a little bit about the disaster
relief fund. Your fiscal year 2013 budget includes, as has
already been mentioned, $6.1 billion for disasters including
over $3 billion for the cost of disasters that have already
occurred such as the tornadoes that struck my home State of
Alabama just this past April.
I was thinking back just a few minutes ago. Little did we
know a year ago when you were before this Subcommittee that we
would be in store for such a difficult year, not only for many
Members on this Subcommittee but for many other Members as
well, considering the devastation that occurred. So we actually
saw each other a good bit after that hearing and talked on the
phone many times.
But before we turn to the fiscal year 2013, are you
sufficiently funded for fiscal year 2012 to complete the year,
without implementing funding restrictions that limit funding to
immediate needs?
Mr. Fugate. Mr. Chairman, on the basis of what we know,
and, again, the caveat will always be future disasters, on the
basis of our planned recoveries of about $1.2 billion and what
we estimate will be expended in the previous disasters, we are
still projecting to end the fiscal year on September 30th at
approximately $200 million.
Now, this again means that we have to still continue to be
aggressive in recoveries and close out older disasters, which
when I got here in 2009 was something that was impressed upon
me: that we had a lot of open disasters, and we were not
closing them out.
So since I have been there, we did about $4.7 billion in
recoveries from open disasters. We are projecting our budget at
$1.2 billion in recoveries this year from older disasters.
Obviously if we can find more, we will do that.
The other thing we are doing is driving the cost of
response. In many cases, we are finding that by using
techniques such as not establishing physical presence but using
virtual presence and working closer with the states, we are
driving down the cost of the administration of the disaster.
And all these are pressures on the grant itself, so we look
at and are holding ourselves accountable not only in the
recoveries but also in reduction of the cost of administering
the disasters and finding ways that we can perform the same
level of performance with our state and local partners without
the overhead that we may have incurred previously.
Mr. Aderholt. Also, included in the budget justification
for fiscal year 2013 is an estimate for anticipated costs in
the out-years for catastrophic events--which show that you
anticipate no additional costs for any of the fiscal year 2011
disasters beyond the end of fiscal year 2013. Is that correct?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Will FEMA have fully funded the Stafford Act
required recovery efforts in Alabama and Missouri due to the
tornadoes, in the Midwest due to flooding, and the Northeast
due to Hurricane Irene by the end of fiscal year 2013?
Mr. Fugate. I would say, sir, we will work toward that.
There are some based upon my experience and writing project
worksheets. As soon as we have the projects and are obligated,
I think that is the real milestone. The work will not
necessarily have been done, but we have obligated the funds. We
have the projects, and those are defined.
Where we may not make that mark is if we have issues about
insurance and have to reconcile that when we get into certain
environmental and historical reviews, which may take time to
get those projects moving.
So when we look at the obligations occurring when we sign
off and the state and the local sub-grantees sign off on the
project worksheets as obligated funds, that may not mean the
work has been done, but it means the funds have been obligated.
But knowing that in some of the more technical, more complex
projects, we may not be completely written because we are still
working.
And, again, we have the appeals process when we disagree.
So not knowing what may be appealed, our goal is to get these
projects written as quickly as we can to begin the work.
So I would say that we would have the bulk of them done,
but experience tells me there may be projects either because of
the technicality of them or because we are in disagreement.
Maybe appeals may not be getting written, but our goal would be
to get those funds obligated so work can start back.
As you know, I put an emphasis on speed because I feel that
the quicker we get construction back, the better communities
are. The faster we get communities back on their feet reduces
our overall costs and recovery.
So my goal is to get them written, but there are sometimes
those outliers that will take longer to get done.

DEBRIS REMOVAL: COST

Mr. Aderholt. Moving on to debris removal costs, as you
know, part of the cost of responding to disasters is the cost
of cleaning up the debris. FEMA provides two methods of
cleanup, as you are well aware. Communities can select the
Corps of Engineer process of selecting a contractor, or a local
authority can bid out the process to local and regional
contractors.
Recently there has been concerns regarding the cost of
using the Corps when compared to other private options.
We included in the fiscal year 2012 conference report
directions that a report be submitted that requires FEMA in
conjunction with the Corps of Engineers to explain the
disparity and the cost factors between the Corps and the
private option communities have for debris removal.
I just wanted to check--what is the status of that report?
Mr. Fugate. It is in process, sir. We are working on that.
I will tell you what my personal observations are.
When we have jurisdictions that have the capability to do
the debris, they have their contracts, and particularly if they
follow the steps required, it is generally faster and lower
cost.
Where the Corps provides a significant advantage, though,
is in those communities that do not have that capability or
that have not had those contractors, or when the event is
bigger than their capabilities to provide the management and
bring in resources across the Nation.
So as this report comes up, I think you are going to see
that, in many cases, we would support local jurisdictions that
have that capability to manage debris because it is more cost
effective. We actually get local hires, and we put money back
in the economy. It is faster.
But we also recognize there are going to be those events
where the Corps still provides a service when it exceeds that
capability or that was not in place prior to the disaster.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. My time is expired.
Mr. Price.

URBAN SECURITY AREA AND STATE HOMELAND SECURITY GRANTS

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator, I want to focus on the new national
preparedness grants proposal. Let me lay out just a few
questions that I hope in the course of walking us through this
proposal you can address.
A feature of your budget is the streamlining of these 16
separate preparedness grant programs into this new single newly
titled National Preparedness Grant Program. This excludes the
emergency management performance grants and the firefighter
grants but not much else. I mean, you have 16 programs
consolidated here.
You also lay down a couple of criteria which will govern
your grant making. One is the utilization of a competitive
risk-based model for making funding decisions. You are also
requiring grantees to develop and sustain core capabilities and
those criteria just on the face of it raise certain issues, I
think, because you are consolidating programs here that have
had somewhat different rationales and certainly different
criteria for funding decisions. The two largest are the State
Homeland Security Grant Program and the Urban Area Security
Initiative. These are two very different programs. One is
intended to build core capacity across the country. The other
is intended to protect the most at-risk areas of the country.
So I wonder if you could indicate up front your estimate of
how much money will go towards those two basic programs and
then how are some of the current guidelines likely to apply.
Are you going to still provide, as the 9/11 Act requires, a
minimum level of funding to each State? Are you going to follow
the current guidelines? How is that going to work? And then
after you have allocated funds for these minimums, what is your
next priority? I presume it is increasing capabilities in high-
risk areas. But how do these two objectives coexist?
And then finally when we are looking at some of the other
programs, how are you going to graft on to this the use of a
competitive risk-based model that has applied to programs like
the transit and port grants? For example, how would FEMA
compare a port project to a transit project in a major urban
area? What criteria would you use to evaluate across these
areas which previously would have been considered separately
with a very targeted purpose?
Mr. Fugate. And probably the shortest answer is to caveat
that, because there were a lot of questions there, we will
respond in writing in more detail than I think I could probably
cover in the time allotted.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.133

Mr. Price. That is right. But at the same time, we have a
process underway this year. You can perhaps answer on the basis
of the extent to which that pattern would continue.
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir. Let's talk about the urban area
security and the State Homeland Security grants. Other than how
they are being identified and designated, the activities are
not that different as to what is eligible.
And, again, what we found was in looking at requests and
consolidating down, we are not looking to say that we are not
going to fund urban area security. But in funding urban area
security and State Homeland Security, are we getting the
synergy, and are the investments matching up to what the
overall needs are?
And also recognizing that in 16 areas of these different
funds, which we are putting into one grant with the
eligibility, the question that we are trying to get to is, when
we look at jurisdiction by jurisdiction, program by program,
what are the overlaps?
And if you actually start breaking it down, what are the
things you are actually doing? People like to start with the
money, but I asked, ``What are you actually doing with it? Are
we building urban search and rescue teams? Are we enhancing
bomb squads? Are we building fusion centers and maintaining
those?''
You find that this money is actually coming back into a lot
of these areas from different pots of money to achieve that.
So we asked, ``Would it make more sense to put those grants
together with those criteria and then administer that as a
single grant versus what we find a lot of times, which is local
and states are actually taking different pots of monies to
build capability because they can take money from here and
here?''
So as we started that process, it came back to us looking
jurisdiction by jurisdiction, literally at a transit grant, a
port grant, an urban security area, a state, a metropolitan
medical response team, a citizen core grant.
And we asked, ``If we are looking at national preparedness
and we identify gaps, how do we get funds to address those if
we are so bifurcated in how we are identifying how the money is
being spent in different programs, which again oftentimes local
jurisdictions, state jurisdictions are hopefully working
together already to address these issues?''
So as we look at fiscal year 2012, we are still funding the
State Homeland Security grants and the urban security grants,
and are doing competitive grants for transit and port, which is
being addressed with our partners at Coast Guard and TSA
[Transportation Security Administration] for prioritization on
those grants.
And as we look at combining those grants, we would see a
similar process within the overall grant structure but would
identify in that grant application process the priorities for
the urban areas and the priorities for those things as a
national priority, but we would not necessarily put them into
separate pots of money or identify separate funding streams and
give more flexibility to the states and their partners to
address how they would fund that within those jurisdictions.
Mr. Price. Thank you. I will pick this up on the next
round.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
We will now recognize the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Can you hear me okay?
Mr. Aderholt. Yes, sir.

MAJOR DISASTER DECLARATIONS

Mr. Rogers. Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me this
time. I apologize for being late, but I had another testimony
to give at another committee.
But I wanted to be here to plead for a firm commitment from
the Administrator to help my district and my State given our
most recent and terrifying few days last weekend.
As you well know, Kentucky was devastated by very crippling
storms last weekend, hurricane force winds, flooding, multiple
tornadoes including one which left a 90-mile trail of
destruction in Kentucky and West Virginia. Really rare for the
hills and mountains to have a tornado at all, but certainly at
this time of year have left many communities in my region
completely ravaged.
The towns of West Liberty and East Burnside have simply
been destroyed, every building destroyed. Martin County, Laurel
County, Lawrence County, Morgan County, and other counties
still counting damages all over my district, but there are
other counties around the State outside of my district also.
Massive loss of life and injury, some families have lost
everything, cars, homes, possessions, pictures, family bibles
gone. And then on top of that, a two-inch snow. My people are
really hurting.
And as you can see from the photographs that I think we
provided, homes have been demolished, businesses torn apart,
families displaced across the countryside with no
communication.
The governor said it looked like a bomb went off. I agree
with him.
While the response of Kentucky Emergency Management and the
Kentucky National Guard and Red Cross, firefighters, police
groups, church groups, countless volunteers from all over the
country have been both timely and valued, the damage brought by
these storms far exceeds the capacity of our local government
and state emergency response teams to address.
In fact, in West Liberty, the courthouse and the seat of
the government was practically destroyed.
We are trying. I have heard countless of reports of
volunteers from all over coordinated and alone driving hours to
help cut trees, remove debris, deliver water, take in a
homeless family or the like. Work is now being done still on
the ground.
I want to thank you at the outset here by saying that the
FEMA personnel were there immediately and helping coordinate
efforts all along even before a request from the governor or a
declaration.
The numbers are staggering. Twenty-three people lost their
lives including 18 in just my district. And it is not over yet
probably. Two hundred and 22 are in the hospital with injuries.
Forty-eight counties were affected by the storms. Twenty-nine
have been declared disaster areas by the governor. Fifteen
hundred are still without power, 260 without any water service.
Almost 400 guardsmen have been deployed to secure the areas
hardest hit and to clear routes for emergency responders.
As I said, in West Liberty, nearly every building in this
county seat has been destroyed or damaged including the
courthouse and City Hall.
There is no police department at City Hall. There will be a
set of trailers for the foreseeable future. And while my people
are resilient, and they are, they are clearly in need and are
overwhelmed.
On Monday, as you know, I requested the President to
approve a request by our governor for a federal emergency
declaration. It seems that FEMA is working diligently to
evaluate the info at its disposal. And the President made a
disaster declaration last night, thank goodness, to provide
individual assistance to seven counties around the region. And
I want to thank you for that.
However, there are a number of countries, notably Magoffin
and Martin, which remain in dire need of both individual
assistance and public assistance because the devastation has
torn up the roads, schools, courthouses beyond recognition.
Can you, Mr. Director, give us any indication on when a
decision might be made about the remaining counties designated
by the governor?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir, Chairman Rogers. As soon as the
President declared--and I have done this in several states and
it bears explaining--rather than waiting until we had all the
information, as soon as we saw that we had sufficient damages
that would recommend in the counties we were in, we were able
to get that to the President.
The federal coordinating officer who was appointed by the
President will be able to add counties for individual
assistance without that going back to the President.
So as soon as we can say there is damages warranting it,
the federal coordinating officer working with the state
coordinating officer will be able to start adding those
counties. And we expect that to be a rapid process of not weeks
but literally within a day or so as we get the information
supported.
But we also made a conscious decision with the local
officials that our priority would be to get the individual
assistance turned on first, and then we will do a count for
public assistance because many of those individuals are still
responding, as you pointed out.
So trying to go back and find out about insurance and get
the cost really for that, we are working with the State on
getting back in there to do public assistance. And as soon as
we have those numbers, we will process that request as well.
But we put a premium on the individuals because we know
right now there is going to be an issue about housing and their
immediate needs.
Because we are working closely with the State--and this is
the good news story, as you pointed out, and I think this goes
back to some of the investment strategies and Homeland Security
dollars--there is a lot more capabilities at the state and
local level than we have had before.
Friday afternoon I was sitting literally in the FEMA's
watch as the tornadoes were hitting, and we knew what was going
on as far as the initial impacts. And we were in contact with
states and going we are standing by. If you need it, ask for
it.
And, again, it pointed out the resiliency that states do
have these days that they did not have in the past. They made
it very clear and said, ``You know, we got what we need. We are
going to need you for recovery, but we do not have any direct
federal assistance for the response.'' And that was a testament
to the local officials, to the volunteers, to the national
guard.
So we focused on the individual assistance. The federal
coordinating officer now will add on those counties where we
have damages based upon the request of the State. And as we get
the public assistance done, we will process that. We will work
quickly so we can identify that.
And, Mr. Chairman, that may also be where we will turn on
some counties. We may still have counties we are still counting
in, but we have already seen the State's threshold. But rather
than wait until they are all done, we will turn on what we have
and we will keep counting until we get all the damages
identified.
Mr. Rogers. Good. Good. Well, I cannot say anything but
praise so far on the effort that FEMA has done. It is an
extremely difficult situation because there is no
communications. The storms took out the towers for
communications, telephones and the internet. And so it is
difficult to even contact the county executive or the mayors.
And besides that, the roads are so clobbered with trees and
limbs and damage, it has been a remarkable thing that we have
come this far this quick. But it a devastating time.
And I really appreciate your commitment and your rapid
decision making because that is all important given the time of
year it is down there and wintertime.
With devastation as widespread as it is and the human
factor is altogether important here, these people are hurting
severely. And I appreciate the rapid response that FEMA has
devoted to this. And I look forward to working with you further
as we go on down the pike.
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Ms. Lowey.

NUCLEAR POWER PLANT ACCIDENTS: CLEANUP/EVACUATION

Mrs. Lowey. Thank you.
And I, too, want to join my colleagues, Administrator
Fugate, in thanking you for your service and your important
contributions.
Before I get on to another topic, I must tell you you were
talking about the block grant with a continuing focus on UASI
does not make any sense to me at all. And I am very concerned
that efforts such as including UASI under a larger block grant
could result in a decrease in federal funds while the risk of
terror events still remains high.
And I do not understand. And maybe we can have a continuing
discussion at another time how UASI which is supposed to go to
the areas most at risk can be protected. There are other funds
for other areas. Everybody needs it. But putting it all in a
block grant sends a message to me cut and decrease the
emphasis.
So let me turn to Indian Point. I am also troubled by
reports that the Environmental Protection Agency, the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency have engaged in ongoing discussions to determine which
agency and with what funds would be responsible for a large-
scale event at a nuclear power plant.
I have to tell you that sounds like a cartoon which is just
too serious to be real. While things are going on and
everything exploding, all these agencies are still deciding
about who is in charge.
As you may know, the Indian Point Energy Center is a nearly
40-year-old nuclear reactor located within 30 miles of Times
Square. Evacuating 17 million people within 50 miles is
impossible. The government's response to a possible event at
Indian Point should be planned, practiced, and ready for
implementation.
So who would be responsible for a large-scale evacuation? I
hope, God forbid it ever happens, you are still not debating
it. And are discussions over the best practices for a federal
response to a nuclear cleanup being discussed between FEMA and
other government agencies?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, ma'am. The evacuation would be state and
local supported by the Federal Government. That is the
direction of the nuclear regs that the local and state
officials have the authority to order their evacuations, and we
would support that.
The discussions we are having----
Mrs. Lowey. So wait a minute. The reports that the EPA,
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency are incorrect that they are talking about who
would be responsible?
Mr. Fugate. I have not seen those reports.
Mrs. Lowey. Okay.
Mr. Fugate. The discussions that I have been involved in,
and we have done this as some exercises with the national
security staff, looking at some of the issues in a post event
of what would happen to materials to be cleaned up and the fact
that there are different standards out there for what would
determine what was permanently cleaned up--you have regulations
from EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] for Super Fund
sites, and you have protective criteria that was issued for
evacuation decisions. We were working on what would be the
level of cleanup required before people could resume normal and
permanent activities.
We were also looking at what levels would be set for those
that may have to go back and work in critical facilities if a
cleanup had not been completed.
We had in the exercise determined that because different
programs had different standards for cleanup, we wanted to have
a consistent approach in a post event and for deciding what
would be determined as cleaned up versus what the evacuation
criteria was.
There is also an undergoing review by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission based upon the reviews of what happened
in Japan, but also facilities here, to look at what additional
actions and protective measures may be required.
But not having seen the reports, I do know that those were
discussions we have engaged in to make sure that criteria such
as Super Fund were also applied in nuclear power plant
accidents in a cleanup phase and how we would apply that
uniformly so we would not have different standards, one for
evacuation and one for cleanup, which may be confusing or lead
to issues in trying to make decisions about reentry.
Mrs. Lowey. Well, I thank you for that thoughtful response.
I hope we do not have to face that decision.
But how long is this evaluation and decision making process
going on?
Mr. Fugate. Well, this was actually an event prior to what
happened in Japan and where we picked the criteria that we were
going to use uniformly across the agencies, and that actually,
I think, is pretty close to going through the concurrent
process on which all the agencies are signing off.

NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

I would have to defer to the NRC about where they are at in
their review process. That is an ongoing process that they have
instituted after the events there to look at other threats that
we face from nuclear power plants.
Our role at FEMA as part of that is the area outside of the
power plant working with state and local governments on
protective measures, evacuations, and exercise programs based
upon the criteria that are developed by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
Mrs. Lowey. Well, let me just follow up with two other
quick--oh, is my time up? Sorry.
Mr. Aderholt. We will go back around.
Mrs. Lowey. Okay.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Latham.

PRE-DISASTER MITIGATION PROGRAM

Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Mr. Administrator. Thank you for what you do
for a lot of people who have been experiencing real disasters
out there, one of which was last summer, as you are keenly
aware.
The Missouri River flooding in Iowa for months and months--
people were subjected to that. We usually think of a flood as a
one-time event, but this went on and on for months, as we all
know. Folks in Iowa are very concerned about your proposal to
eliminate the Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program.
Your statement notes that the most costly and frequent
natural disaster is flooding and that you are going to maximize
the use of your flood grant portfolio to assist in managing
risks.
Could you clarify or translate this into a statement in a
way that tells the residents of my flood-stricken state and its
responders and local officials what this actually means, the
risk managing initiative? How is this going to unfold? What
does it mean to them?
Mr. Fugate. Well, we still have programs in the Flood
Insurance Program such as the Buy-Out Program for repetitive
loss properties, which is one of the things that is oftentimes
used to address residential issues after repeated flooding. It
is oftentimes better to buy out rather than repair.
And so we also have in that program the ability to fund for
elevation as well as continuing with the mapping and updates
there.
So those specific pieces to that are actually targeted
toward homeowners and either mitigation of the risks by buying
out or, in the case of floods, elevating.
In addition, for those who were impacted by the floods, the
State has under the Stafford Act additional funds, not just the
funds they are using for repair, but under Section 404, they
get additional mitigation dollars to look at these types of
risks in the State as well.
The decision to cut pre-disaster mitigation was not an easy
decision, but it was also reflected across all of our programs
in looking at where we had other programs that are addressing
similar issues.
The fact that we still have about $174 million in
backlogged projects to be spent, and, again, everybody wants to
protect their part of the budget, my responsibility was to
provide recommendations on what we could do with our budget to
achieve the goals we had.
And we looked at pre-disaster mitigation. It is a good
program, but at the cost, can we continue to afford that and
look at priority funding for other programs?
Mr. Latham. It seems to me that pre-disaster mitigation is
cheaper than paying the damages afterwards.
There is a school of thought among a lot of very
knowledgeable disaster management officials that says that the
Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program is on the chopping block
because it has been ineffectively administered and that there
is a lot of money left lying around, not because of a lack of
good projects, but rather the process was very cumbersome,
oftentimes misguided and that limited the projects that were
available.
I do know you would not say to those people that it is a
more of a management problem than it is a program problem.
Mr. Fugate. Again, no cut is easy.
Mr. Latham. Have you ever heard those complaints before?
Mr. Fugate. I have heard a lot of concerns about pre-
disaster mitigation, how the funds are allocated, the
difficulties oftentimes in administering the program. And if
that was the only reason, then I would not have supported that.
We looked across the programs and said we are going to have
to make cuts. Do we cut everything a percentage or do we take
whole programs and cut them and keep other things funded at the
level they need to operate?
We looked at what we do in our other programs, in pre-
disaster mitigation with flood and the Flood Insurance Program.
We looked at the remaining balances in the Pre-Disaster
Mitigation Program.
We also looked at the amount of money out there in Section
404 and said of all the areas, not saying that mitigation is
not important nor that the investment strategy of pre-disaster
mitigation is not also important, it was an area where we had
other programs doing similar work.
And so we made the decision that this would be a program,
versus cutting a lot of different things, we would zero out. It
is not a popular decision. It is not one that I necessarily
would like to say was something I want to do.
It is something that on the basis of being pragmatic about
my budget and making investment decisions, do we cut everything
a certain percentage or do we make decisions about programs to
eliminate where other programs provide some if not all of the
capabilities that we are looking at in support of the overall
programs?
Mr. Latham. Is there any way to determine what you save
avoiding a future disaster? Any kind of cost-benefit analysis?
Mr. Fugate. I have heard people use $4 to $7 for every
dollar invested, but that means it gets hit. The problem is
there is not enough money and would never be enough money in
pre-disaster mitigation to actually significantly reduce the
Nation's risk.
You have got a better chance of getting states to adopt
building codes and enforce them. That would really save money
versus a project-by-project strategy that for that project does
good, but nationally you are not moving the needle. You cannot
mitigate building by building. You have to look more
systemically.
This program, I think, did a lot to get people interested
in mitigation. It got a lot of people to look at things they
could do in their communities for disasters. But when you look
at what we are funding, very good intentions.
What is the bottom line? Unless that structure is hit, you
are not going to see the savings. We are not spending and not
doing enough projects for all those projects to add up. You may
get one or two here.
You want to make big changes? We need to look at how do we
reduce the risk not through paying for it but by building
better and appropriately so that we reduce those costs on the
front end.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard.

WORKING WITH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, OTHERS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Mr. Fugate, first of all, let me begin
by complimenting you on your leadership in establishing a new
partnership with the Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities to develop course work for Latino students to
promote educational opportunities with FEMA in the field of
emergency management. I think you are setting a very, very
positive example.
Recognizing the budget constraints and everything that you
said in response to some of the other questions, I want to
raise my concerns about the National Security Grant Program,
particularly as it pertains to the ports.
Already ports, security funding is down by 57 percent in
this current fiscal year. And without a dedicated stream, as
has been stated, they would have to compete for funding with
transit system for these states and there is a possibility that
they would not get the attention that they need.
And study after study has shown that any kind of a terror
attack on the ports would be disastrous not only to Los Angeles
but to the entire country.
For example, a study called Risk Analysis that was done in
2007 says that even if the harbor, referring to LA Long Beach,
were closed for only 15 days, the authors concluded that cost
to the port would spiral to $150 million while the wider
economic consequences would be in the billions.
So this is something, an area that we may not want to leave
to chance and to state and local governments. Having served in
local government, there is belief and it could be argued that
maritime security is really a federal issue, not a local or
state issue, and the focus has always been from the perspective
of state government is to deal with state and local
jurisdictions.
So there is also the concern that state governments lack
the personnel and the expertise to evaluate maritime risk or
determine how ports should be prioritized against other
Homeland Security priorities.
So in the event, giving a worst case scenario, that it
plays and that ports do not receive the attention that they
need through these grants, do not get that money, given the
importance of securing the ports, what would be the backup plan
to make sure that they are protected against a terrorist
attack?
Mr. Fugate. Well, I will make myself real popular with a
lot of folks when I say this. You know, I keep hearing that we
cannot trust state and local governments and ports and transit
to work as a team. Yet, in a disaster, that is exactly what is
going to have to happen.
But we cannot trust them to work as a team to come up with
funding strategies. I can assure you that Secretary Napolitano
is going to make ports a key part of this funding. It is part
of our global strategy on trade.
And coming from the State of Florida, we looked at the
ports as one of our most key transportation assets. The
question is, if we allocate the money on the basis of each one
of these groups, are we building national preparedness or are
we doing things in a singular fashion that do not add up to
national preparedness?
And, again, I have seen a lot of arguments back and forth.
I have seen a lot of money spent. I am not sure the investment
strategies always led to national preparedness, and I am not so
sure that it is always going toward those things that we are
saying it is going to.
Now, I am not going to single out and say this is in one
particular area, but quite honestly you saw the articles and I
have to deal with it. We are buying ice machines, all right, in
these programs. Is that a national investment strategy?
So my question is: If we do not trust States and local
governments and ports and transit and citizen corps and
everybody else to work together, yet in a disaster that failure
will be exploited by the terrorists, if giving the funding out
individually is what has to happen because we cannot work
together, then I am kind of concerned that if we do work in a
more leveraged, central fashion by bringing people together to
work these together, are we really building national
preparedness or have we merely funded a grant program specific
to that concern?
But, again, it is troubling to me, and I understand the
pressures from everybody looking as though they do not trust
each other. You just said it. They do not trust local
officials. They do not trust the state to make it a priority.
Yet, in a disaster as a Nation and a catastrophic event, if
we are all getting our grants separately, we are all planning
separately, and we are all writing our program separately, yet
we are all dependent upon each other to be successful, can we
drive that through a grant process to make people work as a
team and make those prioritizations?
But I have been on the other side, and I know the power
arguments. I know people are looking to protect their
interests, and I am not saying that there may not be a better
way.
But I am very concerned when the first thing that comes out
is we may not be a priority with the State. We may not get the
attention we need. We may not be able to do what we were doing
if the funding goes together because we may not be able to
articulate, compete, or get the issue across.
Yet, if that disaster occurs and that port is damaged, who
is going to respond? All the folks who got the separate pots of
money and were planning separately, trying to build a national
capability. So I understand the concerns.
And, Ranking Member Price, I know that, you know, this is
not something that goes over well, but you guys pay me, the
public pays me to tell you what I think, not what people want
to hear. And I have looked at this and looked at this and been
on the bottom of the beginning of this process.
And I keep coming back to we do not trust each other, so we
have got to have our own separate pots of money. We cannot
depend upon us to prioritize in a way that says these are the
investment strategies of the Nation. And we have to have the
separate money, yet in a disaster, we expect all this will come
together magically and we will work well as a Nation.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Administrator, welcome. A lot of things you have
to say about hard decisions are things that I agree with. I
have a question that I am trying to figure out the answer.
The DHS budget seeks to fundamentally reform FEMA grant
structure. I strongly support competition in procurement
process. And the direction you take in the training grant
programs concern me in that it negates the significant
investment Congress has already made in international domestic
preparedness consortium.
It seems to me this new direction would create duplicative
programs rather than bolstering the existing programs. I have
been told that the current backlog in first responder training
through the existing program is over 20,000.
How does this newly proposed structure for training
partnership grants and your request for $60 million to seek to
add this backlog and how does it better meet the demands of our
first responders?
And in considering, in awarding the funds to this new
program, participants will have to go through curriculum
approval as well as undergo significant costs and time
investments in which to stand up the new program. Won't this
create a lag in the available training opportunities that we
have in place at this time?
Mr. Fugate. I will ask staff to give you the full report in
writing because a lot of your questions get technical, but here
is the philosophical question.
How many Homeland Security institutes can we afford and are
the programs they are offering, again going back to national
preparedness, those that we need and are they interchangeable
with other programs?
And so part of this was coming back and going we fund a lot
of centers of excellence. There are so many centers of
excellence out there that I am not sure what excellence is
anymore.
And I am not berating anybody. I am just saying how do we
make sure that we are investing in institutions providing
necessary training in a way that we get the return on the
investment. It is based upon what we see as a Nation we need,
and that we have the ability to measure what each one of these
institutions does compared to other ones.
So this was our attempt to come back and go we recognize
Congress's authority to specifically say these are things we
want to do. We came back and said there has been a lot of
growth here. How do we sustain it, make it more competitive,
and put more emphasis on it providing what we have identified
across the enterprise as the training we need for the various
disciplines?
Mr. Carter. I get your argument.
Mr. Fugate. So that is the thing. I know the details, sir,
and that is what I want to respond in writing.
[The information follows:]

Response: Currently, National Domestic Preparedness Consortium
(NDPC) grants and Continuing Training Grants are being used to train
and educate first responders and homeland security officials to
prevent, protect, mitigate, respond and recover from disasters. These
grants are awarded by FEMA's National Training and Education Division.
As part of the Department's ongoing effort to streamline grants and
maximize the effectiveness of the available grant dollars, NDPC grants
and Continuing Training Grants are being replaced by Training
Partnership Grants. These grants will continue to be used to train and
educate first responders and homeland security officials. However,
under the proposed Training Partnership Grants, funding will be awarded
competitively to entities (e.g., State, local, tribal, and territorial
governments; universities and higher education institutions; and
nonprofits) that have demonstrable expertise and can develop/deliver
training and education curriculum relevant to the core capabilities in
the National Preparedness Goal. Other grant recipients (including
former recipients under the NDPC grants and Continuing Training Grants)
will be able to compete for the Training Partnership Grants. Facility-
based training and education centers will be awarded multi-year grants
in order to ensure year-to-year stability in the delivery of training
and education. As a condition of the award, the grantee will develop or
offer a training program that is self-sustaining in the outyears. This
means that the grant funding received will address program start-up
costs and curriculum development in year one, while over time recurring
training costs will be reimbursed via training attendees (i.e.,
Federal, State, local jurisdictions will utilize their respective
program or grant funding to attend the training).
By incorporating competition and cost reimbursement into the
training programs in FY 2013, FEMA hopes to encourage greater
efficiencies as well as new ideas and innovation. FEMA recognizes there
are hundreds of institutions ready, willing and able to provide
education opportunities to homeland security and emergency management
officials.

Mr. Carter. But as you make that evaluation, more
importantly the question would have to be is somebody making
the evaluations of how these centers are meeting the criteria?
And if I understand this program, the $60 million is to
allow others to create new centers of excellence, if you want
to call it that way, and how do you cull out the bad ones when
you are creating the good ones and how do you know the new guys
that are seeking these grants are going to do better than the
people that are failing in their mission if they are failing?
I certainly have one of the centers in my State and I will
put it up against anything. We were doing it before FEMA came
there and we are doing it since. And I feel very confident that
the center that we have at Texas A&M University is meeting
their criteria and then some.
And I would like that evaluation to be looked at and why
are we spending other money to create new places until we
evaluated the old places.
Mr. Fugate. I think the aggies are going to do well. One of
the things the aggies did for us is they have been a leader in
our Storm Shelter Program, the engineering and design of that.
So I think that there are those programs that are of such
prestige and are established programs that this is not going to
be as dramatic as they think.
But we do need to look at if we are targeting the right
types of training we need based upon what the skill sets are. I
will give you an example.
There are a lot of folks my age in my profession who are
going to be leaving these professions soon. Do we have the new
capability to train all the new folks coming up? I mean, think
about all the training we have done in the last 10 years. And
we are going to have to make sure that we have the
institutions, the higher level, and also the disciplines to
continue to train that.
So this is not an attempt to take those facilities and
institutions that have done a great job, but it is really to
kind of come back and go, ``Are we identifying what the
priorities are, are we investing in the training and the types
of training, are we identifying needs for training?''
Look at cyber security. So we know there may be areas where
we need to develop new centers, but we also have to make sure
what we have been investing in is giving us that return and it
is looking at what those needs are as the next generations come
up. We look at our national preparedness goals and say, ``Hey,
we are doing pretty good in this area, but we still have lots
of needs in these areas. Are we getting that funding and the
right institutions engaged?''
Mr. Carter. And I agree with that concept.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think my time is up.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Dent.

NATIONAL PREPAREDNESS SYSTEM

Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fugate, great to be with you today. In November, FEMA
submitted the national preparedness system----
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Dent, could you turn your mike on?
Mr. Dent. Let me move over here. Yeah. As I mentioned, in
November, FEMA submitted the national preparedness system
description to the President as required by presidential policy
directive 8.
And in it, you describe the various components and how
the--and quote, the various components, quote, and how they
interact to build, sustain, and deliver core capabilities in
order to achieve the national preparedness goal, close quote.
The report describes how these components help us
understand risk and inform our current and future budget year
planning and decisions and inform resource allocation plans and
aid in understanding the progress of the Nation.
Some of these components already exist, as I understand it,
and some will have to be developed. What are some of the
existing programs that will be incorporated in the national
preparedness system and what gaps do you see out there?
Mr. Fugate. Well, the most significant one, which was a
requirement Congress has, is to develop a recovery framework
for catastrophic disasters. As part of that, we had prepared
and we are rolling out the national recovery framework, which,
with the evolution of the presidential directive to develop
these frameworks, we were able to take and actually move it in
and roll it out as one of the first frameworks.
We also have the national response framework, which is
undergoing review and updating. And then we have preparedness
mitigation prevention frameworks to build as part of that.
So we have been working very hard through both our
interagency but also our partners. In fact, we just placed on
our Website several of these documents for review by our
partners and to provide us comments that we can adjudicate.
So we are on target to meet those goals that the President
has laid out for us including the national preparedness report,
which is concurrent, which is another product that I owe
Congress that will be coming forward.
So these are moving, and they are again building upon the
national response framework and the national disaster recovery
framework, and then building three additional frameworks to
support the overall national preparedness plan.
Mr. Dent. How do you see this system informing your budget
decisions and resource allocations?
Mr. Fugate. Well, it probably is best to give an example
because when you try to talk about generalities, you end up
just saying, ``Well, we are going to do this, this, and this.''
Let's take urban search and rescue teams. We know that in
the types of events we face with the building collapses, bomb
blasts, tornadoes, and other things, response is key. How long
does it take to get a team there? Just having a team responding
does not change an outcome.
So we start with what is the outcome we are trying to
change? Injured people do not have time. So we start with this
idea that across the Nation looking at where communities are,
concentrations of populations. We look at the urban areas, so
that is where we are based, and we also look at travel times
going, ``Do we have enough teams?'' ``Where are they?'' and
``Should we make that a priority in funding for more teams,
sustaining teams, or training of those teams?''
Now, until you know how many teams and what area you are
covering and what your response times are, you do not know if
you have enough. How do you maintain that?
But once we are able to do our threat and hazard reductions
and say this should be the response time across the country,
this is how many teams would be required in these events, and
this is the current capability, we may say, ``You know what, we
are pretty good in search and rescue teams.'' Maybe we ought to
put more emphasis over here on the prevention side or maybe we
ought to put more emphasis on the port side.
But until you know what that number is and you say this is
what we need as a Nation to respond to these types of events,
you are not really able to say where you are at.
So just one example of how these frameworks, as they start
going through the process, will define not just how we are
going to respond but for how long it takes to get something
there. How much capacity is necessary? And this is again why it
is very difficult to do this jurisdiction by jurisdiction,
because what if you get the outlier?
Mr. Dent. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fugate. Are we just not going to respond because we do
not have enough stuff or we did not have a plan? And so we are
looking at very large meta size events, and going there is very
basic things that have to be done in the first 72 hours, the
first weeks, the first months to be successful, and then going
back and going, ``How much of that have we built? How much more
do we need to build?''
And, again, we are not necessarily looking at this is going
to require--that we are going to spend our way out of this. A
lot of times, it is looking at the private sector, looking at
volunteers, looking at what the military provides and the fact
that Congress gave us the authority for the Secretary of
Defense to call out the reserves now and we have dual status
commanders to support uniformed, coordinated efforts. What are
we planning against? What is our target? And where should we be
investing to get to that?
Mr. Dent. Well, that is a very comprehensive answer. I
thank you for that.
Also, on PPD8, I just want to focus for a second on that
all Nation approach to disaster preparedness. Specifically, you
know, what will have to change to fully develop integration
between Federal Government and state and local government?
Mr. Fugate. Stop looking at it as state, local, and federal
and start looking at it as one team. You know, the public could
really care less who we are as long as somebody shows up.
Mr. Dent. Right.
Mr. Fugate. And I think, too, we sometimes focus so much on
what the Federal Government is going to do that we step all
over our local and state partners.
And, again, I have to point this out. In all these
disasters in the last year and a half, the initial response was
not even the first responders. It was neighbor helping neighbor
and then the local responders, then mutual aid and the
governors and national guard.
We were able to almost exclusively focus on recovery
because we have built so much capacity since 9/11 that we
really shifted the capabilities not in the Federal Government
but to the local government and state government, which works
faster and is actually easier and better to maintain.
So, again, as we look at this, the whole community is not
just government stopping to break ourselves into little pieces.
It is like, ``Who feeds us every day in our communities?'' It
is not government. It is the private sector. Yet, we look at
the private sector as something that you deal with later
instead of going, ``Why can't we work together and not
duplicate what each of us does best?''
Mr. Dent. How do you incorporate private sector?
Mr. Fugate. You bring them to the table and you give them a
seat and you make them part of the team. We do not have a
contractual relationship. They are part of the team.
If you can get a grocery store open, and you can get a
hardware store open, you can get a drugstore open, they can
meet needs. We focus where they are not. But if we try to
duplicate that in large-scale disasters, we do not help
anybody.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.

DEBRIS REMOVAL: ALABAMA

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
We are going to try to get a second round here before we
ask for the next panel. But in order to do that, I would like
to be abbreviated no more than three minutes, just so that
everyone can have a chance to ask a second round before the
second panel comes up.
Let me go back, Administrator, to the debris removal issue
that I had asked about a little earlier.
One of the main questions I have after meeting with a lot
of my constituents after the April 27th tornadoes, and given
what happened with the contracting with debris removal and with
the Corps, I come back to you and ask--are you concerned with
the cost to the taxpayers of cleanup when you mission assign
the task to the Corps? With limited funds, how can you justify
the disparity in cost between the reported costs charged by the
Corps of Engineers and lower costs that communities have
incurred signing their own contracts for removal? Have you
provided written criteria and check lists of work that Mayors
know what they are receiving from the Corps and what they can
show to other contractors if they choose to do a private option
for the work?
Mr. Fugate. Mr. Chairman, first things first. We did
something in Alabama we had never done previously and that was
we looked at the debris mission as a housing mission. We
normally would not go in and take debris wholesale off private
property and lots. We were not going to do businesses but in
the homes.
Because this was relatively new to us, we looked to the
Corps to help manage that because previously under most of the
debris, management rules. Local jurisdictions would not have
been able to go on private property and remove a lot of that
debris. It would have been almost a case-by-case basis.
So we were looking at one thing. We knew that housing was
going to be our biggest issue. The faster we got debris off
those lots, the quicker people could rebuild. It was a new
approach. It had not been done before. We had the authorities
under the Stafford Act, and we used the Corps to help manage
that.
Did it cost more? Yes, sir. Have we learned from that? Yes,
sir. Are we looking at how to reduce that cost in the future?
Absolutely.
But we put a premium on speed of that because our primary
concern in that disaster, as you knew, was we had so many homes
destroyed that we did not think the way we have traditionally
done debris would have been fast enough, so we wanted to do
something faster. It was new, and we utilized the Corps to help
us manage that.
Mr. Aderholt. There are numerous communities in Alabama
right now that are waiting for reimbursement. Are there ways to
in some way simplify the process while still allowing for
oversight of the funds? If you could briefly answer that and
then anything else you want to add for the record than that, we
will proceed that way.
Mr. Fugate. Mr. Chairman, it is always case by case. We are
trying to move this as fast as we can. Again, I want to get
money in the communities and get rebuilding going. And I will
go back and see.
And, again, if your staff could pass on specifics of where
we are getting hung up, I can go to my staff and say, ``Where
are we at on this?'' and ``Why is this?'' We are looking at,
within the authority of the Stafford Act, what steps would it
take to streamline the process to maintain accountability but
increase the speed of recovery.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. And we will be happy to work with
you and get you that information.
Mr. Price.

GRANT FUND ALLOCATIONS

Mr. Price. Administrator, I want to return to your national
preparedness grant proposal and make very clear that I share
your point of view, your desire for a more efficient, more
targeted, more risk-based way of making these grants available,
of allocating these funds.
Now, in the State Program, we do have an allocation formula
which aims at a certain minimum level of preparedness across
these jurisdictions and that, too, is a legitimate objective.
But you are suggesting that a fair amount of special
pleading might be going on here. Some special pleading might
have a good warrant and others might not. There are objectives
we need to make sure are going to be addressed.
So I want to ask you how you proceed here? And, of course,
you can elaborate this for the record, but just in terms of
these two major pots of money, will there be an initial
determination of how much goes to each and then do the usual
formulas apply, especially in the State Grant case?
And then let me just add one other quick question to the
mix. You are trying to deal here with the backlog and with the
difficulty of getting some of this money out the door. And your
way of doing that is that you are going to require grantees to
complete projects within a shorter designated period of
performance.
So what is going to be the practical effect of that? Are
you going to be, by shortening this time frame, are you going
to be in effect eliminating certain capital projects, certain
longer-term projects such as tunnel hardening? There, too, you
might want to give us some more detailed answer for the record.
But my main concern here in this open setting is just to
get a sense of how this is going to work, how your agency is
going to proceed to take these formerly disparate funding
streams and to administer them as one.
Mr. Fugate. Well, Congressman, let me work backward. On the
$8 billion that is currently outstanding that has not been
drawn down in disaster grants, I am not sure that we are saying
we are not going to be granting more extensions. Part of that
is the authority to grant those extensions and also I found
that as much as people hate deadlines, it gets stuff done.
But we also recognize that in giving them the mission to
get those monies drawn down--and much of this work is already
under way; it is just getting it drawn down. We looked at what
was eligible for funding, and where we had inconsistencies, we
were actually able to go back and provide additional
eligibility so they can get those funds drawn down on the basis
of expanding what was eligible in that scope of work.
So we are doing two things there. One has been working
really hard to make sure people knew where they were at, what
their timelines were on those grants, and also looking at--and
this is based upon their request for more flexibility--we were
able to go back, and the Secretary authorized us to provide
that flexibility so that they have more ability to get those
grants drawn down quicker on that work, but no extensions.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Latham.

FLOOD MAP MODERNIZATION

Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As FEMA has moved along with its flood map modernization
efforts, there have been some complaints, of which I am sure
you are well aware, about the process and the cost to the
localities to try and meet the standards, especially for the
levees. And this is a big deal, again, obviously with the
flooding.
Can you tell us what some of the complaints are on the
accreditation? Obviously, the cost is part of it. And tell me
any suggestions you have or that you have discussed within the
agency about ways to improve the levee accreditation process
and lighten the financial burden for these small towns. Some of
them are being asked to do studies that cost hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of dollars. And they simply--if you get a
town of 200 people they do not have the money. How do you
address that?
Mr. Fugate. Well currently under our rules, we would only
recognize a levy that was certified by the standards that the
U.S. Corps of Engineers set. And we would not recognize
anything else. So when we did our mapping, we would actually
zero out anything that was there if it was not an accredited
levy. We know in many cases those levies may not be accredited
but still serve and defend these communities against floods,
and we never gave them any value in our mapping.
We are, at the direction and request of many folks here on
the Hill in the rulemaking process, to adjust our rules to
incorporate levies as built versus those that are accredited.
We have received thousands of comments in that rulemaking
process we are adjudicating. It is our goal, though, that when
we publish this rule, it will recognize levies as built and the
level of protection they offer, even if it is not optimal, in
mapping out those communities.
But you do raise one point, though. Where communities are
having to demonstrate that those levies are certified, and do
not have the funds, and this is, you know, this is----
Mr. Latham. It is a huge problem.
Mr. Fugate. It is a huge problem. It goes back to--part of
our challenges with this is managing risk. Where is our
investment strategy in mapping this and determining the risk?
And where do we fund the improvements? And as part of this, I
think we will address through the levies as built. We will
actually get a better idea of mapping the levies as they are
there, not necessarily being accredited levies, and see what
that problem looks like. And that may give us a better idea of
where we need to invest.
Some communities may find that, as built, the protection
there is already adequate. It does not significantly change
things to move to an accredited levy. Others may find it is a
very significant difference and that would be targeted where
they need to invest.
Mr. Latham. But the problem is they have got to do the
study to find out, and they do not have the money to do the
studies.
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir. And that is why we go with the levy
as built, we will take it as it is. Not having it necessarily
accredited. And then you can map and look at what the risk is.
In some cases, because it may not have enough elevation. In
some cases, it may be because of design. But all of those would
be factored in. And we would actually look at the risk then
versus them having to look at bringing it up to an accredited
levy.
Mr. Latham. Okay. I look forward to working with you. Thank
you.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard.

CATASTROPHIC PLANNING: LOS ANGELES SHELTERS

Ms. Roybal-Allard. Mr. Fugate, as you know Los Angeles is
one of the vulnerable cities for an earthquake. And in a 2010
Red Cross report it said that if a 7.2 magnitude earthquake
were to strike L.A. approximately 564,000 people would need to
be sheltered, an additional 2.5 million would require food and
water. And unfortunately the L.A. metro area has only 341
shelter facilities with only 84,000 beds. And you were talking
earlier about working with local jurisdictions to respond. Can
you tell me what kind of progress has been made since that 2010
report?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, ma'am. Working with Jim Featherstone, who
is the emergency manager for the city, our Region 9 works with
the State of California. You point out again, if L.A. has this
earthquake, they are not going to have enough shelters. And the
question would be, ``Are those shelters even survivable in the
earthquake?'' So we know we are going to have to depend upon
surrounding non-impacted communities to shelter that
population. So we work very closely with California Emergency
Management Agency on its plans and our ability to support
literally having to get people to shelters outside of that area
versus what we can bring in to provide temporary shelters.
So the plan is always about life safety first and life-
sustaining activities, and then, looking at the temporary
housing, try to stabilize the population and get them back in.
But this is a very good example of why only looking at what the
City of Los Angeles gets for funding does not really tell the
story. Because they could not shelter, if they end up with that
many people who are homeless, looking for a place to stay, we
are not going to be able to shelter them in that area with that
impact. We are going to have to move them to surrounding
communities. We are also going to have to bring a lot of
resources from outside that area in to support that response.
And this goes back to national preparedness.
There are scenarios that are so big that for any
jurisdiction to try to be prepared for it is impossible. You
have to look at how to leverage those capabilities across, not
just within a state, but across state lines and in some cases
nationally. So there we work with Cali EMA out of our Region 9
office and look at that type of catastrophic planning with a
focus on how we get to folks, life safety, looking at shelter
needs, and the fact that we are going to probably have to use a
lot of capability outside the immediate area. And then we look
at what it would take to stabilize to even set the stage for
getting people back in and repopulating.
It is a very complex event. This is part of why we went to
these frameworks, to really build that type of capability. This
is not about responding to our day-to-day emergency. It is
literally about those type of catastrophic events that can
happen, from earthquakes, hurricanes, or terrorist attacks.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you. I will submit the rest of my
questions.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Carter.

TEXAS AIR NATIONAL GUARD'S MOVE: IMPACT ON GULF COAST DISASTER RESPONSE

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fugate, I have a
letter here I asked to be made a part of this record, from the
governors of five states, Texas, Mississippi, Florida,
Louisiana, and Alabama, expressing grave concern about the
decision of the United States Air Force to move the Texas Air
National Guard's 136th Air Lift Wing of eight C-130s currently
located in Fort Worth to the State of Montana. This Air Lift
Wing, I understand, is the only domestic emergency air lift
capability in the Gulf region.
According to this letter the Texas Air National Guard C-
130s have flown 423 storm response sorties in Texas, Louisiana,
and Mississippi carrying 3,143 passengers and delivering 939
tons of emergency supplies. Under current arrangements the
Texas governor can mobilize these C-130s in a matter of hours.
However, it is my understanding that requesting federal support
in emergencies like these could take days due to federal
bureaucracy. How then does this relocation of these C-130s from
Fort Worth, Texas to Montana affect the ability to provide
disaster relief to the Gulf region in times of emergency? Was
FEMA a part of the decision making process to move these as it
impacts the emergency response assets in the Gulf region? And
should this move happen? What is FEMA's plan to ensure
appropriate resources are dedicated to the Gulf area to ensure
timely disaster response?
Mr. Fugate. Well again, I think Secretary Panetta has a
more unenviable position than I have, looking at how he is
having to make his budget decisions. There are several avenues
where we have worked on this. This is not something
specifically, but we are a participant with the Secretary of
Homeland Security on the Council of Governors, which actually
has 10 governors, not necessarily these governors, but 10
governors representing the National Governors Association
working with Secretary Panetta, the branches of the military,
and the National Guard Bureau, as well as their adjutant
generals.
The issue, as we draw down, is what are these impacts and
how do we look at those responses? I think part of this has
been Congress recognizing that the National Guard is now able
to have dual status commands for Title X and State Guard, and
well as bringing up the Reserves under a Secretary's call up
not requiring a presidential mobilization in disasters. But I
would defer to Secretary Panetta and his folks as to this. But
I would also state that through the Council of Governors, which
I am honored to be part of under Secretary Napolitano's
leadership, these are the issues that are being discussed with
Secretary Panetta and on behalf of the adjutant generals of
what the impacts are to domestic response.
Mr. Carter. This is not a draw down. This is actually going
to cost money to move them to Montana, is going to have to
build up the capacity to house 130s in Montana because they are
an F-15 base right now. So it is not part of the draw down that
we are trying to do to save money in all of the departments. It
is a very confusing decision that has been made. Is there any
kind of reporting as to what these governors' decisions are
going to be as they talk to Panetta?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir. They report back to the National
Governors Association. The ten are, as the Council of
Governors, which Congress directed the President to appoint and
to work with the Secretary of Defense on National Guard issues
particularly. Both from the standpoint of domestic response but
also the ongoing care and needs that states have, particularly
looking at their Guard. So I would defer to that body. I do
know this issue, not this specific, but the overall issues of
how these are affecting governors and the ability to do that,
and also the work that is being done at NORTHCOM to support
states if we do require federal assistance.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.

EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PREPAREDNESS GRANTS

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Carter. Before we end this
first panel session, I have one quick question to follow up
from the conversation that you and I had yesterday, Mr. Fugate,
regarding the EMPG fiscal year 2012 guidance. We are very
concerned with the new inclusion of additional agencies that
would be eligible. Do we have your commitment to address this
issue?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Mr. Fugate. It is not our intention to have expanded that
beyond those that the states have already done before. It was
more to create a more uniform language and it was not the
intended consequences to suddenly open up to brand new
applicants for funds under the Emergency Management
Preparedness Grants.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you very much. We appreciate
again your attendance this morning, and for answering some of
the questions that I know this Committee has had. Questions
about your agency that touch everyone on this panel, this
Committee, and I would say every Member of Congress.
Before we turn to our second panel I do want to recognize
Norman Dong, who is CFO for FEMA. He is with us this morning,
and it is my understanding he is going to be leaving to go to
OMB. We will truly miss his knowledge and working with him. But
we do thank him for his service, and we do wish you the best as
you move over to your new job at OMB.
At this time we will turn to the second panel. Thank you
again, Mr. Fugate, for being here.
As I mentioned earlier we are convening a panel of homeland
security stakeholder organizations to discuss homeland security
grants and related issues. I would like to introduce the panel.
Mr. Ross Ashley is with us this morning. He is Executive
Director of the National Fusion Center Association and he is
representing the National Fusion Center Association this
morning. Mr. Jeff Caynon, he is President of the Houston, Texas
Professional Fire Fighters Association and is representing the
International Association of Fire Fighters. Captain John
Holmes, Deputy Executive Director for the Port of Los Angeles
and representing the American Association of Port Authorities.
Jim Mullen, who is the current President of the National
Emergency Managers Association and also the Director of the
Washington Department of Emergency Management. And he is
representing the National Emergency Managers Association. And
last but certainly not least, Mr. Michael DePallo, who is the
Director and General Manager of the Port Authority Trans-Hudson
Corporation, representing the American Public Transit
Association.
Thank each of you for being here this morning. And we look
forward to hearing from each of you as you give us your
thoughts and opinions on the grant reforms that have been
introduced. This builds on effort by this Committee last year.
But we recognize that there are challenges and we believe that
it is also time for reform.
If you could, I ask you to keep your comments to two or
three minutes and summarize it for the Committee. But bear in
mind that your written testimony will be placed in the record.
So before you begin, let me recognize Mr. Price, our
distinguished Ranking Member for his opening remarks.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to join
with you in welcoming this panel. It is particularly important,
I think, to hear from this panel this morning. We are
interested in the current grant programs, how they are working,
and how they can be improved. But we are of course especially
focused on this new proposal for the National Preparedness
Grant Program. We have discussed this with the Administrator.
We want to discuss that with you because we value your
perspectives. The Chairman has introduced each of our
panelists. I will not go through that again except to welcome
you and say with limited time I think we had better get on with
the testimony. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Mr. Caynon, we will start with you.
Mr. Caynon. Good morning, Chairman Aderholt, Ranking Member
Price, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today. My name is
Jeff Caynon and I serve as an engineer operator in the Houston,
Texas Fire Department, and I am the current President of the
Houston Professional Fire Fighters Association.
I am pleased to appear before you today on behalf of the
IAFF and our General President Harold Schaitberger, and the
nearly 300,000 professional fire fighters and emergency medical
personnel of the International Association of Fire Fighters.
The most fundamental purpose of government is to protect
the public safety. And despite rising deficits the federal
government cannot afford to cut spending on homeland security
funds to state and local governments. As the first line of
defense in protecting our homeland the federal government has
an inherent responsibility to help ensure the local departments
can effectively protect the public.
Among the most effective Federal programs to assist local
communities in protecting the homeland are SAFER and FIRE grant
programs. A study by the NFPA recently found that fire
department capabilities have improved in a variety of areas
funded by SAFER and FIRE. There have been significant increases
in the numbers of fire departments that are able to provide
their fire fighters with vital equipment, such as radios,
protective clothing, and turnout gear. And thanks to FIRE
grants more fire departments today are able to train their fire
fighters in basic structural fire fighting, HAZMAT response,
and emergency medical care.
The needs assessment also found similar improvements in
staffing. All of this translates into improved public safety. I
know first hand the value of these programs. Following the
tragic death of two fire fighters at a fast food restaurant in
Houston, the Houston Fire Department applied for and received a
$2 million FIRE grant to fund an innovative fire ground
survivability program that provided training for survival
skills and mayday prevention.
Although SAFER and FIRE have been traditionally well
funded, efforts to reduce the deficit have caused a reduction
in funding for the programs over the last two fiscal years. For
fiscal years 2010 and 2011, the programs were funded at a total
of $810 million. For fiscal year 2012, however, funding was
reduced to $675 million. The administration's budget proposal
further reduces funding for SAFER and FIRE to $670 million.
Reversing recent funding cuts to SAFER and FIRE will help
ensure that communities have the resources they need to protect
the homeland. We therefore recommend that the Subcommittee
provide $810 million evenly divided for the two programs in
fiscal year 2013.
In addition to SAFER and FIRE grants, the Urban Search and
Rescue system is crucial to our nation's homeland security. The
US&R system comprises 28 national task forces consisting of
highly trained, equipped, and exercised emergency response
personnel capable of responding to both natural and manmade
disasters. The State of Texas is the proud sponsor of one such
force, Texas Task Force 1. Congress has in recent years
provided modest increases to US&R, and funding the program at
$41.25 million in fiscal year 2012. Unfortunately, the
Administration's budget reverses this trend and cuts the
funding by $13.7 million. The average cost to maintain a US&R
team exceeds $2 million, leaving local governments which would
sponsor the task force to fill the gap. With many localities
facing budget shortfalls themselves, sponsor US&R teams has
become a burden they struggle to afford, significantly
straining task force capability and readiness.
For a minor investment Congress can significantly enhance
the nation's preparedness to respond appropriately. We
encourage the Subcommittee to increase the funding to US&R over
the 2012 appropriation.
Lastly, we wish to express our reservations regarding the
administration's proposal to consolidate 16 Homeland Security
Grant Programs into the new National Preparedness Grant
Program. Each of the Homeland Security Grants was established
in order to serve a specific and important public safety need.
Given limited Federal funding, merging these distinct homeland
security priorities into a single block grant could cause such
priorities to go unserved.
As a major metropolitan area in a border State, containing
a port, significant rail and road freight, and replete with
hazardous industry, Houston faces significant risk from
terrorist attack and other large scale disaster and these
targeted grant programs have contributed to a more complete
level of preparedness. We are also concerned that the National
Preparedness Grant would be administered solely by the States
without adequate input from local emergency managers and first
responders who often have the best knowledge of homeland
security threats and needs. We urge the Subcommittee to
carefully consider any grant consolidation proposal and seek
the input of all stakeholders, especially State and local
government representatives and first responders, before making
major changes to current Homeland Security Grants.
Again, I would like to thank the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to testify here today, and I am happy to answer any
of your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.139

Mr. Aderholt. Captain Holmes.
Mr. Caynon. Pass the mike.
Captain Holmes. Pass the mike. Mr. Chairman and members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am
Captain John Holmes, Director of Operations for the Port of Los
Angeles. My testimony focuses on the experience of the Port of
Los Angeles and AAPA's U.S. members. My written testimony has
been submitted for the record. I will summarize it briefly
before I answer any questions.
In the decades since 9/11 a key component of our nation's
effort to harden the security of seaports has been the Port
Security Grant Program. Under the Safe Port Act the Port
Security Grant Program is authorized at $400 million.
Unfortunately, in the last few years the funding for this
program has decreased dramatically.
There were other adverse changes to the fiscal year 2012
grants as well. First, the term of performance has been changed
from three years to two years. Although we appreciate the need
to execute projects, we are concerned that such a move will
shift the focus to buying stuff rather than developing
solutions. The past period of performance made it difficult to
execute these solutions. The current period will make it nearly
impossible.
Cost share requirements have also been an obstacle.
Although I appreciate that it is effective for a grantee to
have skin in the game, it is often overlooked that the skin
that the ports provide is the ongoing operations and
maintenance costs of the grant funded equipment or systems.
This is particularly true with technology solutions where the
annual operating costs can be as high as 10 percent of the
project cost.
Another hurdle is the environmental and historic
preservation review. While other FEMA programs must go through
these reviews there is not the threat of a loss of funds
because there is no time table associated with these programs.
While EHP has streamlined some of these reviews they still are
a major reason why many of the grant projects require an
extension.
The fiscal year 2012 grant announcement also includes
improvements to the program, like expanding the use of funds
for maintenance and allowing the limited use of grants for
personnel. We are also pleased to see that despite the funding
cuts all ports continue to be eligible. Restricting funding to
the highest risk ports would leave a soft underbelly of
unprotected ports for terrorists to exploit.
We appreciate the willingness of DHS to work with the ports
on grant issues. Positive changes have been made and we hope
that these changes will continue. We feel that over the time
the pile on effect of new requirements has had a significant
negative impact on the program. For fiscal year 2013 and beyond
we strongly urge the Committee to restore port security
funding, keep the funding separate, maintain federal control,
provide a uniform cost share waiver, and establish a joint DHS
port group to streamline the process.
In order to continue to be effective the grant process must
evolve in conjunction with port needs and vulnerabilities.
Working with DHS efforts have been made to keep pace with this
evolution. We fear that if ports are lumped into the larger
Homeland Security equation efforts to date will be marginalized
and the focus on ports will be lost. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.145

Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Ashley.
Mr. Ashley. Chairman Aderholt, Ranking Member Price,
members of the Subcommittee, on behalf of the National Fusion
Center Association, thank you for inviting me.
A lot has changed since I was here as the Assistant
Administrator of the Grant Programs Directorate. The
administration's intent to streamline the grant programs,
allocate funding based on risk, and measure the impact, is
exactly the right way to go given funding reductions that have
occurred. But there are a lot of unanswered questions. Absent
reauthorization of the Preparedness Grant programs the
President's proposal should be considered under the current
construct of law. We would do a disservice to the progress made
by creating a new patchwork program without authorization.
After nearly five years, Congress should reauthorize as soon as
possible or make it clearer to the department that the current
construct of law should be followed.
Congress should also continue to ensure that DHS measure
the effect these programs have on preparedness. Until DHS fully
implements a planning, programming, and budgeting system that
assess all impacts of federal investment, we cannot determine
whether 100 new Border Patrol Agents, or another $10 million in
Operation Stonegarden funding provides the best return on
investment.
The fiscal year 2012 funding allocations and grant guidance
continue to head in the right direction. The NFCA urges this
subcommittee to continue to support the Secretary's efforts to
focus funding on programs that support the analysis and sharing
of homeland security threat information. That includes the
sustainment of a strong national network of fusion centers.
Fusion centers have helped transform the way Federal,
State, and local, and tribal governments share intelligence
information to protect the Homeland, just as envisioned by the
9/11 Commission and the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism
Prevention Act of 2004. Fusion centers analyze national threat
information in a local context, pass critical State and local
information up to Federal partners in the intelligence
community, and disseminate relevant actual information to State
and local decision makers. And all of this is done by
protecting privacy, civil liberties, and civil rights.
Fusion centers are owned and operated and budgeted at the
State and local level. A sustainment model that works in Boston
may not work in my hometown of Montgomery. For example, the
Alabama Fusion Center budget was $800,000 in fiscal year 2011.
Forty percent of that came from the State general fund, and 60
percent from DHS preparedness grants. North Carolina
Information Analysis Center budget was $683,000 in fiscal year
2011. Seventy-seven percent of that came from DHS Preparedness
Grants and 23 percent from DOJ grants.
Flexibility of State or urban areas to determine how a
center is supported is an essential element of the national
network. Simply put, the decentralized effort of fusion centers
is a national asset. And it is the same as a shared
responsibility among all levels of government. There is no
other mechanism for leveraging more than 2 million public
safety practitioners in the private sector in every corner of
the country to protect the homeland.
Let me conclude with a story that shows the value of the
national network. Recently a local police officer in Alabama
made a traffic stop. Based on plain sight observations the
officer asked to see the contents of a duffel bag in the
backseat. Inside the duffel bag were four police uniforms and
four police badges. When interviewed each of the occupants
stated they were headed to a location in Colorado and the
occupants were allowed on their way. What happens next shows
how far we have come in taking proactive measures to protect
the Homeland.
The officer completed a report and clicked the SAR button
in the Alabama reporting system. That suspicious activity
report went immediately to the Alabama Fusion Center, which
analyzed the information and contacted the Colorado Fusion
Center. The FBI has a presence in both of those centers. The
matter is still being considered. Whether this situation has to
do with terrorism, or some other criminal activity, the key
point is that within hours Federal, State, and local officials
who can act to prevent criminal activity were aware of the
situation.
This goes far beyond information sharing. This is deep
collaboration that makes our country safer and the fusion
centers enable it. Thank you, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.153

Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Mullen.
Mr. Mullen. Thank you, Chairman Aderholt, Ranking Member
Price, and members of the Subcommittee so much for the
opportunity to provide some brief comments this morning on our
submitted statement for the record.
NEMA was very pleased to see the progress made by the
administration in their 2013 budget proposal. We should be,
because since June of last year in direct response to Congress'
call for reform NEMA has worked on developing a new
comprehensive preparedness grant system.
The current grant structure is complex and contradictory
often, creating too many opportunities for uncoordinated
efforts. As many on this committee have stated before, the
current fiscal condition of this nation requires us to invest
every dollar more wisely than ever. We appreciate your
continued support over the years of the Emergency Management
Performance Grant, or EMPG. NEMA remains committed to
demonstrating to you the return on your investment in this
program and recently released our second annual report on EMPG.
NEMA believes we can gain efficiencies in the grant system
to increase the effectiveness of our mission. We can achieve
increased flexibility while gaining much needed accountability,
but changes must be made to the structure under which we
operate.
First, a skilled cadre is necessary in order to effectively
complete the Threat Hazard Identification Risk Assessment, or
THIRA, and a comprehensive planning process outlined in our
proposal. We propose keeping EMPG as is and begin a similarly
structure grant for homeland security professionals allowing a
State and local focus on preventing terrorist acts to continue.
Once the THIRA is completed a comprehensive planning process is
required. Current planning efforts seem driven more by funding
levels than on the capabilities we need to confront threats and
hazards. We recommended turning this process upside down and
allocate funding based on the THIRA and the development of
capabilities to address gaps, buy down risk, and most
importantly build performance measurement into each project.
The THIRA and subsequent plan feed intelligent investments
in national aspects. We like aspects of the proposed National
Preparedness Grant Program of the President's 2013 budget but
suggest it be project based. Applications should be evaluated
by a multidisciplinary and multijurisdictional committee prior
to review by the state administrative agency. Local governments
should be encouraged to ban together and apply directly when
they share a common threat or hazard.
This opportunity for combinations of local governments to
participate specifically addresses the UASI question. Due to
their size and inherent threat tier one UASI cities should
continue to be directly funded. By allowing other combinations
of local governments to apply directly those remaining UASI
jurisdictions can continue participating in the process and
receive funding without that annual fear of falling off the
list.
Overall this process is about building and sustaining
capabilities across the country; encouraging innovation, self-
organization, and regionalization where local decision makers
wish to do so; empowering local governments to decide which
projects they want to fund; providing visibility to all levels
of government and helping remove politics from preparedness
decisions; recognizing the interdependencies across this
country; and most importantly it is flexibility with
accountability.
One tenet of the NEMA proposal stands above all others. As
Chairman Rogers reminded last year President Eisenhower stated
our nation deserves security, but we also deserve solvency. In
these budget constrained times NEMA remains committed to
working with you and achieving both of these goals.
Through this process we wanted to initiate a dialogue with
all stakeholders and we thank you for this forum to do just
that. I appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
hearing and I look forward to any questions you may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.163

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Mr. DePallo.
Mr. DePallo. Good morning Chairman Aderholt, and Ranking
Member Price, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Michael DePallo and I thank you for the opportunity to offer
testimony. I am the Director and General Manager of the Port
Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation, or PATH, a subsidiary of
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Today I am
testifying as Chairman of the Security Affairs Steering
Committee of the American Public Transportation Association.
Mr. Chairman, according to the Mineta Transportation
Institute since 1970 more than 2,000 separate attacks have
occurred worldwide on surface transportation, causing over
6,000 deaths and approximately 19,000 injuries. The Government
Accountability Office along with various government agencies
have reported on or testified to Congress that public
transportation in America remains vulnerable to terrorist
attacks and that al-Qaeda remains interested in targeting the
transit sector. And that more needs to be done to prevent and
prepare for such a potential attack.
While we have been very fortunate to date in not having a
direct terrorist attack carried out in our transit systems, we
have indeed foiled plots and arrested individuals who intended
to attack our systems. Let me especially note that PATH has
experienced the tremendous devastation of a terrorist attack as
a result of the horrific attacks on the World Trade Center in
1993 and 2001. For this and many other reasons I feel strongly
that the funding commitment to fortifying our systems must
match the recognized risks and threats.
There is a tremendous need for security grants to secure
and fortify our transit systems across the country. In 2010 an
APTA survey of its members found security investment needs in
excess of $6.4 billion nationwide. This stated need contrasts
with the recent trends in cuts to transit security grant
programs, including the fiscal year 2012 allocation of $87
million in transit security. I urge Congress to restore
appropriations for the Transit Security Grant Program in this
and subsequent appropriation bills.
While there is good policy represented in the fiscal year
2012 grant guidance and fiscal year 2013 National Preparedness
Grant Program, we do have some thoughts about elements of both.
Specifically we are concerned with the new 24 month grant
period for performance on all projects, a reduction from the
previous three to give year allowable expenditure period. Also,
since PATH assets are included on the top transit asset list,
the TTAL, I would welcome this risk-based funding approach, an
approach that APTA agrees with. However, speaking on behalf of
the larger industry, including thousands of assets not listed
on the TTAL, I recognize that the narrow funding approach could
preclude other important security improvements from receiving
funding consideration under such limited transit security
dollars availability.
There are also concerns with the elimination of the TSGP
from the National Preparedness Grant Program and we call for a
sufficiently funded targeted grant program for public
transportation security as envisioned in the 9/11 Commission
Act.
And finally APTA supports the approach that Congress has
consistently endorsed in legislation that allows grants to be
provided directly to the transit agencies as opposed to
requiring applications be made through the state administrative
agency.
Before closing I want to inject a personal note on behalf
of the Port Authority Executive Director Patrick Foye, who
along with myself and other Port Authority staff, are honored
to be hosting Chairman Aderholt, Ranking Member Price, and
Committee Members Lowey and Dent next week at the World Trade
Center site. We are looking forward to showing you how the Port
Authority has utilized and can continue to utilize federal
homeland security dollars to support our own investments in
security initiatives at this site of national historic
significance that continues to be one of the highest risk
targets in our nation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on these critical
security issues and I welcome any questions you may have. Thank
you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.170

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. DePallo. The fiscal year 2013
grant proposal from the department builds on the reforms that
this committee implemented back in fiscal year 2012. I would
like to hear from each of you briefly to address the proposed
fiscal year 2012 guidance, and the Department's fiscal year
2013 budget proposal.
Mr. Caynon. We made some recommendations in the written
testimony that is submitted and I did as well in the oral. The
needs assessment is also included in the written testimony and
it talks about some of the benefits that we have seen as a
result of FIRE and SAFER. The amounts that we are requesting
that we increase to are relative to the effect that we have
seen of the grants over the last several years. And can you
hear me? Okay. I cannot hear myself over the mike. I am not
sure how specific you want me to go on the answer, there.
Mr. Aderholt. Just briefly. Just summarize. Like I say,
include things that would be helpful as well.
Mr. Caynon. Okay. And it is included in the written
testimony. There is a lot of evidence there that points to,
very specifically to the effect, to the positive effect of FIRE
and SAFER. And so it is important I think that we keep making
progress. When you look at the needs assessment one of the
things that it absolutely points out is that there are still
staffing shortages across the fire service. And the effect of
FIRE and SAFER to improve on that shortage is something I think
we should build on.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Captain Holmes.
Captain Holmes. And I will be very brief. I think that, you
know, because the system of, you know, fundamentally working
through the grant system has been so difficult that there is a
lot of unobligated funding and grant funding. And people seem
to perceive that as a difficulty with the ports and really not
take a hard look at a system that has become, as I said, very
cumbersome and has this huge sort of pile on effect,
particularly with requirements, both State and Federal, and
requirements from, you know, historical State people, and
historical Federal people. And it is just, in our world it has
made it very, very difficult to execute money. So as a result I
think there is money that appears like it is not needed because
it has not been executed. But I think realistically the grant
funding, port security grant funding is still needed. And my
principal recommendation would be to restore the funding to the
levels. It has been dramatically cut, about 75 percent, over
the period of the last three of four fiscal years.
And in addition to that really take a look at the grant
system and try to fix that, and then you will be able to sort
of execute all the funding. Because as we go and try to do our
day to day business, and we are a very large port with a very
big staff, it is extremely difficult for us to deal with the
grant process. And I cannot even imagine how a smaller port can
deal with the grant funding process. There is not a week that
goes by at the Port of Los Angeles where somebody does not just
say, ``This is so difficult, why do we just not ask for money
anymore?''
So I think fundamentally you have got to work with DHS and
fix the system because it is very repetitive. And if you are a
port like we are which is also associated with a city, the City
of Los Angeles, we have Federal requirements, procurement,
environmental, historical. We have State requirements,
procurement, environmental, historical. We have city
requirements that we have to deal with. And it is just, you are
making it so difficult to execute that I think that has got to
be fixed. And when you fix that people will be spending the
money as it is given to you, and you will not have this lag
where there is all this, seems like there is this big pot of
money left over that people do not need. It is not that they do
not need it. It is that it is just very difficult to use it.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Ashley.
Mr. Ashley. Sure. The question going between 2012 and 2013,
I think it is very commendable what Congress did this year in
the fiscal year 2012 budget, giving $974 million worth of
discretion to the Department to allocate the funding based upon
which programs met the best national need. And I think that is
commendable and I think the Department went about that in a
very professional and organized way.
The 2013 proposal, as I mentioned in my brief oral
statement, like I said, has some concerns to it if it is not,
if Congress does not act to reauthorize. Because it creates a
patchwork program, of which between now and October 1, assuming
we have an October 1 appropriation, is unrealistic to meet. So
either reauthorize the program after five years, or deal with
the programs, as 2012 did, under the current construct of law.
I think that the President's budget as proposed could still be
implemented using the implementing recommendations in the 9/11
Act. Unless Congress would like to open up the reauthorization
issue.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Mr. Mullen.
Mr. Mullen. First 2012, we think the layout is a good
transition from where we have been towards a new system,
because the flexibility is improved. Running port and transit
grants through the state we believe is a good move to help
improve accountability and draw down issue. And in our proposal
they are still absolutely included. We just recommend that they
require to operate within the overall preparedness system. And
I think we are beginning to move in that direction so that we
can help them, and they can help us, and we can understand each
other's issues.
I will just say in case we do not get, we run out of time,
very few problems occur that occur within the boundaries of a
port authority. The locals are involved either way. Our economy
is involved either way. We are very interested in working
closely with those organizations, port and transit, to make
certain that we are attending to their needs in this new
system. And I do not believe that we will shrink from trying to
assist them in every way, and be very sensitive and respectful
of their concerns. And I think it gives them an opportunity to
collaborate with us, too. It is not just us getting into them.
For 2013, there are many similarities between the NEMA
proposal that we developed at the end of last year with the
President's grant structure. There are some concerns, though.
The definition of regionalization I think needs some work. I
think we need to talk about, the peer review process appears to
be little more than an additional bureaucratic layer. I do not
believe if we move to a project based system that we need to
have Federal review of every project when the locals and the
States are collaborating closely on devising and deciding what
would be the best use of limited funds.
So there are issues about urban area that I think still
need to be addressed. We have tried to address that in our
paper. And in fact we have addressed most of the issues that
have come in our paper so, which is I think in your request for
a brief response I will stop there.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you so much. Mr. DePallo.
Mr. DePallo. Thank you. I agree with Captain Holmes, in the
idea of separating the funding for ports and for security, the
security grant. By combining the programs there is no guarantee
that any money at all will go to, you know, transit security
grants.
As far as the 2012, the Transit Security Grant Program,
there is only $87 million in that program. That is down from
the previous year of 2011, where there was $200 million. And
that is down from previous years. So the amount of funding
needs to increase.
In 2013 the reduction of the time to finish performance on
projects goes from three to five to two years. Congressman
Price mentioned tunnel hardening, a project that you would not
be able to do. I think what will happen now, essentially what
will happen is that you will be eliminating any major capital
projects at all. It will all be just for operating expenses.
And finally we believe that going through the States for
funding we believe just adds another step to the process and it
is not necessary. Most transit systems are already prepared to
be able to accept grants directly and there is no need to go
through the States and just add additional administration to
the program.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all of
you for some very useful testimony which we will consider as we
proceed to mark up this bill. Let me just ask a couple of
specific questions. First to you, Mr. Caynon. As you are well
aware, for the last few years, in light of the severe economic
downturn, Congress has included language in the appropriations
bill that permits grant funds to be used to retain fire
fighters, to avoid layoffs, as well as to hire new fire
fighters as is the usual requirement under the SAFER program.
Has this made a different in Houston? Has it made a difference
in other situations that you would like us to look at? And do
you think this waiver is necessary again in 2013?
Mr. Caynon. Well it has made a difference, less so in
Houston as opposed to other municipalities. The waivers, I know
there is some concern about temporary waivers that seem to be
permanent because we are coming back and saying, you know, we
need those waivers again. I think first we have to look at it
in the light of why those waivers were initially put in place
and what they are there for. Initially, you know, when this
happened it was 2002 and nobody realized the economic situation
that we would be in over the last few years. Nobody could
predict the Great Recession. And there were safeguards that
were put in place in these grants that would protect the
process of supplementing and not supplanting municipalities'
responsibility to staff their departments.
So to go forward, yes, we need to keep the waivers in
place. Because the bills, the way they are written right now,
would require, I will give you some specific examples so you
will know, or a specific example. Initially under the
safeguards that were in place a municipality was required if
they hired a fire fighter under SAFER to keep that fire
fighter, to provide funding for at least five years into the
future. The department would not be able to reduce their budget
any at all. I cannot think of one fire department, including
Houston, that has not had to reduce their budget after the
recession. And I think any municipality that is looking at
applying for a grant where they are required to have future
funding for an employee for, you know, for up to five years
would really have to give that a hard look about whether or not
that is a grant they could apply for and make that kind of
commitment.
So unless there is some reform, and I know there is at
least one bill to reform this legislation, unless there is some
reform we have to keep the waivers in place so that SAFER is a
workable alternative to bring fire fighters back to work and
keep some folks on the job.
Mr. Price. A workable alternative, that is, under
conditions of economic pressure and duress.
Mr. Caynon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Price. Let me turn to Mr. Holmes and Mr. DePallo. You
have both in your testimony referred to the shortened time
frame that is proposed by the department for awarding funds, or
for getting funds out the door. And you both have suggested
that this might eliminate certain kinds of larger scale
projects, certain kinds of capital projects. I mentioned to
Administrator Fugate a few moments ago tunnel hardening as a
possible example. I wonder if you would elaborate based on your
experience on the kinds of projects you have asked for and have
anticipated going forward? What would be the effect of that
kind of shortened time frame? And I guess this particularly
applies to the rail and transit side, what are you going to
have to make up in some way for this funding to pay for what
you need to do?
Mr. DePallo. Yes, you mentioned tunnel hardening and we
currently have a tunnel hardening project. And a project like
that requires a great deal of advance planning. Engineering,
design, procurement of the equipment and materials necessary,
and then implementation of a project. For example, in a tunnel
that operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week, it is
impossible to do that in two years. Most capital projects, and
that is a very complicated one, even less complicated projects
still require a great deal of planning, engineering, and
design. That is compounded by the fact that if the monies are
not released on time the clock starts ticking later. So it just
complicates the issue. So in effect, I believe, in my opinion,
that by reducing the time period to two years you are going to
be eliminating any significant capital projects at all.
Captain Holmes. I would echo that, and I think it is very
similar in the port environment. In my comments when I said you
move from people seeking solutions to people buying stuff, that
is what happens. They decide we are going to buy this because
it is fast. We can do this fast.
Our projects are very similar. We have a multimillion
dollar camera system we built and we had to get an extension on
that system. It was $27 million, 300 cameras. We are doing
directional drilling to lay fiber optic cable. And in the new
world order we are looking at things like IT and cybersecurity.
And those are solutions. They are systems. And they have to be
designed. And sometimes these systems take a year or more to
design. And then you have the contracting process and you have
to go through all the steps.
With this moving from three years to two years I would have
to say that you are, I would have to agree. You are probably
pretty much eliminating any sophisticated project. And what you
are going to go back to is people getting the money and saying,
``What can I buy quickly? Let me buy ten cards. Let me buy two
boats.'' And you are not going to move forward in this process.
You are going to backslide in this process significantly.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. First of all, let me welcome all the
panelists because I think each of you play a critical role in
protecting our national security. But I do want to specifically
thank Mr. Holmes for being here, flying across the country to
testify. Because as I mentioned earlier, the ports play such an
important role in our national economy.
Understanding the difficult budgetary decisions that Mr.
Fugate has to make, the fact remains that a terror attack on
the Port of L.A./Long Beach complex would have a devastating
impact on our national economy. You heard Mr. Fugate's
comments. I believe that you were here during his testimony.
Could you comment on his response regarding the proposed grant
program and his hope that everybody can work together to
properly prioritize the needs? And then also if time allows can
you also provide us with some suggestions on how you think that
the port security grant requirements and guidance could be
improved and simplified? If you could offer us some suggestions
how to do it?
Captain Holmes. Well let me start by saying, you know,
certainly Mr. Fugate is well recognized and has done a great
job at FEMA. I think the first point I would make is there is a
difference between coordination and control. You know, it is
easy to sound like we do not work with the states but we work
very closely with the State of California doing risk
assessments and identifying port needs. What we would not be so
keen on is allowing them to have control of the funding. There
is a big difference between coordinating with the states and
controlling, letting them control your funding. I mean, as you
know the Port is fundamentally a business. We coordinate with a
lot of people but we do not let everybody handle our money. I
think that is not a good decision.
The second thing that I would say is I am not sure what
kind of time constraints that would add to a system that, as
you heard from myself and my colleague down at the table,
already is a cumbersome and time sensitive system. By adding
another step in the process I am not sure that I could identify
what the value added is.
With respect to his comments that all the grants should be
together, I cannot speak for all the grants. But I can speak,
as you well know, ports historically in this country as a
maritime nation are largely Federal controlled. Our biggest
partner is the U.S. Coast Guard. And I think one of the things
that has been done well in this system is the Coast Guard
system of having the Area Maritime Security Committees review
grant proposals and try to determine where the vulnerabilities
are and where the needs are.
So if you are looking at the relationship between a city
and a State, and a port and a State, they are very, very
different. Ports are very Federally focused. Port facilities
are Federally regulated facilities. And so I think there is a
very good reason why the port funding should be separate from
the other funding.
You know, with respect to suggestions I think as I said
first of all the funding has been woefully decreased. It is
authorized at $400 million and this year it has been
recommended at $97.5 million. That is a 75 percent decrease
over a few years. I think the second thing is, as I also said
in my testimony, is, and just said it needs to be separate. You
know, port funding was separated from the other funding because
it, prior to 9/11 there were very little requirements for
security at ports and we had to start from zero and work our
way up. So it was very important to separate the ports and
focus on the ports. By bundling them together I think a
statement is being made that ports are not as important
anymore, with which I do not agree. Because 93 percent of all
the cargo coming into the country comes in by water.
The last thing I would say is, you know, we go back and
forth about cost shares. And again, I think it is important for
the port or the organization to have skin in the game. But
people still seem to not appreciate the fact that if any, if
the gentleman down at this end of the table, or the fire
department gets equipment, we have to maintain this forever. So
we more than meet our requirement to pony up the skin in the
game. Particularly with IT projects. If we do a, our camera
system maintenance is $1 million a year. So I have significant
skin in the game. So I am not sure what a 25 percent cost share
proves. I think that there should be a uniform cost share
waiver. Because some years there is a cost share and some years
there is not. I think there should not be a cost share.
But I think one of the most important things we can do
immediately is there needs to be a joint DHS port user group to
take a look at this system and see ways where we perhaps can
accept a State environmental or historic preservation clearance
as good for the Federal Government. Because we keep, we keep
repeating these things on several levels. I think we have to be
willing to say if as Mr. Fugate says we have go to trust the
States, let us trust the States. And if the States do an
environmental clearance and a historical clearance, that should
be good for the Federal Government as well. But the current
system it is not. It is repetitive and it is this pile on thing
that is really making it difficult for us to execute grants.
I hope that answered all your questions. I did not mean to
ramble.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. It does. Does anybody else want to
comment, if I have the time? On any of those comments?
Mr. DePallo. I can say I agree as well. I mean, the
difference between, you know, ports and transit, the needs are
very much different and it needs to be separated. You know, we
carry, at PATH for example we carry over 250,000 passengers a
day. We are a wide open system. And there is a tremendous
threat and risk associated. But it is a different type of risk.
And we need to be able to compare projects accurately and be
able to prioritize them, and to do so across different modes or
different industries makes it that much more complex and
difficult.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Thank you.
Captain Holmes. And if I may say one last thing? This idea
of lumping grants together presumes that there is some
overarching methodology that exists that I can determine
whether a suicide bomber at the Mall of America, or at one of
my colleague's transit facilities, is more or less risky than
something happening in the port. And up to this point I do not
think that overarching methodology exists.
So if you are trying to put everything together and divvy
it up you have the presumption that there is some methodology
you are going to use to do that. And I am not sure that right
now that exists.
Ms. Roybal-Allard. Yes?
Mr. Mullen. I did want to comment. The key point is
visibility of what is being spent and what is being committed.
And I think we get that through the development of the THIRA,
which is clearly going to be released in the next couple of
weeks. And then we evolve towards a common planning process. It
would be very desirable for every part of the community, ports,
transit, and all the others, to plan and do that together and
participate together. Then we get an idea. Because the dollars
are not going up, they are going down. And as dollars go down
we all have to decide what is the best way to say that? I will
understand Mr. Holmes' issues a lot better when as part of the
THIRA we can look at what his risks are and what his threats
are and make some intelligent judgments about how can we
support those things.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Roybal-Allard. Mr.
Mullen, let me address a question to you. NEMA has been very
outspoken about the needs to show the impact of investment into
grant programs, particularly in tight fiscal times such as
today. Of these, EMPG is one of the few grant programs that has
significant cost share. So, it is not just Federal funds that
are invested, but also State and local funds. How does NEMA
measure performance? And, what lessons learned can you share
with the rest of the stakeholder community?
Mr. Mullen. One of the better measures is what the Federal
Government does not have to do because of the capabilities that
exist in local and State Government about EMPG. I was just
looking at the report that we submitted to the Committee just
the other, just yesterday, I believe. There was something like
98 or 99 presidential disasters. There were another 250 State
events that did not rise to a level of a disaster, largely
because of the ability of the States to control, manage, and
prepare in advance, and coordinate a response. There were
thousands of other events that the local governments manage
that require very little or no intervention by the State
because their professional staff at the local level are
equipped, skilled, and talented enough to address the problem
and keep it from getting out of proportion.
So in addition to the fact that when we are allocated $350
million that immediately is a minimum of $700 million that is
with our match requirement, and the additional monies that are,
we, since most jurisdictions overmatch at the local level, I
would say that the way we have measured this is we have tried
to report to you very clearly how EMPG is actually saving money
by allowing the response to occur at the lowest possible level
as needed. So when there is a big event, like some of the
things that have just happened, that is the kind of time when
the federal assistance can be valuable. But as Mr. Fugate even
acknowledged, even that assistance is more oriented towards
recovery because of the skill sets of the people that have been
developed on the ground using this combination of dollars that
have been provided.
Mr. Aderholt. We have a lot of questions we could ask each
of you but of course our time is running out. But one thing
that we have, one of the challenges that we face, especially in
the tightening budgets, is to make sure that taxpayer funds are
used wisely. And this creates the need to measure the
effectiveness of every grant fund. Mr. Caynon, let me ask you
about this. How would this be accomplished with the funds that
we grant to the fire departments?
Mr. Caynon. Well I mentioned it earlier, and everyone has
got a copy of the needs assessment that the prior
Administration did for us. One of the major shortfalls in our
profession is staffing. We have seen, like I said, some
progress in staffing because of SAFER. And we are asking
obviously to do what we need to to continue that progress. I
guess that is the most immediate measurable way that we can
look at the success of these grants, is the effect that we have
seen on staffing so far.
It is difficult I think for folks to get their arms around
what it means to have appropriate staffing. Because I think,
because it is a profession that is so specialized. You know, we
get the question all the time about why do you need four people
when there are other municipalities that have three, or respond
with less? The best way I guess I can, the best quick example I
can give you of that is, you know, we can go to the airport and
get on a plane, and there only needs to be one person flying
it. But you would not get on a, you know, you would not go down
to an airline if they said, ``Well, we are short staffed today.
And usually we only need one pilot. So you will be fine.''
Right?
And so in the grants we are talking about here I think the
most measurable valuation of success is what we have seen in
improvement in staffing since we had SAFER in place. And that
is a quantifiable example that I think we can look at, and we
have seen progress there, and we would like to see that
progress continue.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. One thing I do want to ask about
the fusion centers--could you tell the Subcommittee about what
the fusion centers provide for the Federal Government that is
not provided normally by the State and the local public safety?
Mr. Ashley. Sure. What is really provided is this national
network. And having this network, as I mentioned in my oral
statement, that where Alabama can pick up the phone, talk to
North Carolina. It is also the notion of before fusion centers
were in place there was no mechanism to communicate critical
national security information down to our State and local
decision makes. It did not exist, at the classified or
unclassified level. That mechanism is now in place. And put
that local and State kind of flavor on the information for the
official that makes it relevant to them.
The other is is the pushing of information from the State
and local officials back up to the national intelligence
community. And that partnership with DHSINA that allows that
information to get to the national intelligence community to be
able to prevent acts of terrorism. This committee commissioned
a report a number of years ago with the Research Triangle
Institute. And basically that report stated that in 80 percent
of the cases of any terrorist threat since 9/11, either actual
or thwarted, that the initial piece of information that came
from that was either derived from the public or a State and/or
local law enforcement official.
Now if you look at where the Department is going with the
if you see something, say something campaign, with the
nationwide suspicious activity reporting, and the support and
requirement for investment justifications in fusion centers, we
see that as moving in the right direction. And that investing
in those areas that provide those capabilities that were not
there prior to 9/11, that are critical for making sure that we
do not have an event in the port or transit system. That is the
key. We cannot afford for the event to happen in the first
place.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Mr. Ashley, let me just follow up with you
immediately about the kind of funding that the fusion centers
require. Most of this funding, I understand, is from the state
grants. What is your federal grant funding total overall? And
do you see this proposal for grant consolidation as in any way
putting your funding at risk?
Mr. Ashley. No I am probably one of the few people at the
table, and I believe Mr. Mullen and myself, basically I do not
think that puts our funding at risk. I think the department has
made it clear, the Secretary has made it clear, that fusion
centers and the national network are a priority. So we view
that, we do not view that as a problem.
Let me give you an example of where we are about finding
out about how much money actually goes, and I am going to use
fiscal year 2011 as an example. I gave you a couple of
anecdotal evidence from North Carolina and Alabama.
We have information back from 43 of the fusion centers at
this point, of the 77 now recognized fusion centers. In fiscal
year 2011 the total budgets of 43 of those centers was
approximately $110 million. Of that $74 million was State and/
or local funding. Which totals about 67 percent--33 percent of
that was from Federal investment, either through the State
Homeland Security Grant Program or the UASI program. I mean,
that is pretty specific. I asked earlier with staff to keep the
record open. We would actually like to submit State by State,
urban area by urban area the funding, both the total budget of
the centers as well as what categories of funding, where it is
coming from for the Committee's----
Mr. Price. Well let me ask you another question----
Mr. Aderholt. We will keep the record open.
Mr. Price. Let me ask you another question related to this
consolidation proposal. It has to do with UASI. I think you
were fairly outspoken last year about the undesirability of
limiting the number of UASI eligible cities during our debate,
especially on H.R. 1. Now given our current fiscal environment,
I mean, this money is hard to come by these days and knowing
the original intent of the UASI program, do you still believe
that UASI should not be targeted to the very highest risk urban
areas?
Mr. Ashley. From the National Fusion Center Association, we
do not take an opinion on whether funding ought to go towards
UASI or State. We basically, we have urban area centers and we
have State centers. And you know, I think it gets down to what
can we afford at that point. We believe in eligibility for the
urban areas. However, given fiscal constraints it is logical to
figure that we are going to have to reduce funding. And I think
the department has moved in a way to try to look at sustained
capabilities where we have built capabilities. And too we
cannot afford to continue to build new capabilities. Let us
focus on what we have. So I think we still hold by the fact of
having urban areas still eligible, even in a reduced fiscal
environment.
Mr. Price. I will close with you, Mr. Mullen. I want to
return to the question that the Chairman raised, the very last
question the Chairman raised with Administrator Fugate. It has
to do with the major change, or maybe it is a major change, I
do not know. EMPG guidance that is included in the budget has
expanded use of the dollars, or the potentially expanded use of
the dollars permitting EMPG's grant funds to be subgranted to
nongovernment emergency management stakeholder entities, such
as nonprofits, public and private universities, hospitals,
faith based entities. It is not mandated, but the possibility
is opened up. How do you regard this change? Do you think it is
likely to garner significant interest? As you well know, a lot
of the people in the emergency management community have raised
concerns about this. I have asked a lot of questions about it.
How do you assess this proposal? What kind of position does
your organization, if any, take on it?
Mr. Mullen. We have not taken a position on that specific
guidance at this time. But a couple of things need to be
considered. One is that with the funding levels remaining
static I think the needs that are currently being funded are
going to be prioritized at the local and state level for EMPG,
which might not leave as much room as one would hope for those
programs. But some states actually do fund those programs as
part of their overall effort. So in a sense it may not make
that much difference in the short term. But we are going to
look at that and we will be happy to get back to you with a
more thorough position on that. But we have not had a chance to
meet and review and take a specific position. But some states
already provide that and some do not.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to all of you.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Roybal-Allard, you do not have any
further questions? Okay. Well thank you all for being here, for
your presence here this morning and this afternoon. And I know
we went a little long but we have talked about some very
important issues here today. So, we appreciate each of you for
taking your time to come here and testify before the Committee.
We look forward to getting your written testimony for the
record. And so with nothing else, the meeting is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.319

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.320

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.321

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.322

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.323

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.324

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.325

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.326

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.327

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.328

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.329

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.330

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.332

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.335

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.338

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.339

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.340

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.341

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.342

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.343

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.344

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.345

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.346

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.347

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.348

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.349

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.350

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.352

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.353

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.354

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.355

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.356

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.357

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.358

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.359

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.360

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.361

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.362

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.363

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.364

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.365

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.366

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.367

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.368

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.369

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.370

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.371

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.372

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.373

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.374

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.375

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.376

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.377

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.378

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.379

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.380

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.381

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4438A.382

W I T N E S S E S

----------
Page
Ashley, Ross.....................................................   177
Beers, Rand......................................................     1
Caynon, Jeff.....................................................   177
DePallo, Michael.................................................   177
Fugate, Craig....................................................   177
Holmes, J.M......................................................   177
Mullen, Jim......................................................   177
Papp, Admiral R. J., Jr..........................................   119

I N D E X

----------

National Protection and Programs Directorate 3/1/2012

Page
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS):
Hiring Inspectors............................................    45
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division..................    26
Personnel Surety.............................................    34
Program Challenges...........................................    42
Tiering Issues...............................................    31
Cybersecurity:
Continuous Monitoring Program................................27, 38
Deploying Einstein 2 and 3...................................    45
DHS Collaboration............................................    30
Private Sector Collaboration.................................    36
Greg Schaffer's Departure and State of Cybersecurity.............    47
Opening Remarks: Chairman Aderholt...............................     1
Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price............................     7
Opening Statement: Under Secretary Beers.........................    10
Questions for the Record.........................................    49
U.S. COAST GUARD (USCG)..........................................   119
Aircraft, 21 C-27J:
Business Care Analysis...................................   157
Transfer from Air Force..................................   154
Air Station Closures, Impact of..............................   155
Aviation Safety Assessment Action Plan.......................   149
Budget Challenges, Meeting...................................   139
Capital Investment Plan, Submission of.......................   137
Chemical Facilities: Overlapping Regulations.................   145
Drug Interdiction............................................   141
Fleet Interoperation with Navy...............................   148
Mission Need Statement, Update of............................   146
National Security Cutters (NSCs):
FY 2013 Budget...........................................   153
Production.............................................138, 153
Options if Not Funded....................................   138
Offshore Patrol Cutters                                         138
Projected Operation Date.................................   153
Capability...............................................   157
Opening Remarks: Chairman Aderholt...........................   119
Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price........................   126
Opening Statement: Commandant Papp...........................   130
Personnel Cuts...............................................   157
Polar Icebreakers:
Addressing Needs with Small Fleet........................   150
Funding Increases........................................   156
FY 2013 Budget...........................................   153
Plan for Operational Additions...........................   140
Transitional Worker Identity Credentials:
Readers..................................................   145
Use at Chemical Facilities...............................   144
Questions for the Record.........................................   161

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA).......................   177
Catastrophic Planning: Los Angeles Shelters..................   223
Centers of Excellence........................................   215
Debris Removal:
Alabama..................................................   220
Cost.....................................................   201
Disaster Relief Fund.........................................   200
Emergency Management Preparedness Grants.....................   225
Fire Fighter Grants..........................................   230
Flood Map Modernization......................................   222
Grant Fund Allocations.....................................221, 233
Major Disaster Declarations..................................   207
National Preparedness System.................................   217
Nuclear Power Plant Accidents: Cleanup/Evacuation............   209
Nuclear Regulatory Commission................................   211
Opening Remarks: Chairman Aderholt.........................177, 226
Opening Remarks: Ranking Member Price......................182, 226
Opening Statement: Administrator Fugate......................   186
Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program..............................   211
Questions for the Record.....................................   284
Texas Air National Guard's Move: Impact on Gulf Coast
Disaster Response..........................................   224
Urban Search and Rescue......................................   232
Urban Security Area and State Homeland Security Grants.......   202
Working with State and Local Governments, Others.............   213
Witnesses:
Opening Statement: Jeffrey Caynon........................   226
Opening Statement: Captain John Holmes...................   235
Opening Statement: W. Ross Ashley III....................   243
Opening Statement: Jim Mullen............................   255
Open Statement: Michael DePallo..........................   265

